S/PV.6793

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6793rd meeting

Wednesday, 27 June 2012, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Osorio
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2012/462)

12-39088 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1239088*

S/PV.6793

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2012/462)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Latvia, New Zealand
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Stephen Evans,
Assistant Secretary-General for Operations of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/462, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Important
developments have taken place in and affecting
Afghanistan since the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubiš, briefed the Security
Council in March (see S/PV.6735).

2

Significant
progress
was
made
during
two international conferences in Kabul and in
Chicago — with a third to take place next month in
Tokyo — that begin to define and shape the future of
Afghanistan as it makes its way towards self-reliance.
The Kabul ministerial conference that took place
on 14 June was an opportunity for Afghanistan to
demonstrate leadership on a process that is critical to
its future stability — building regional cooperation and
trust. Afghan-led, regionally owned and internationally
supported, the Istanbul process has made impressive
strides since its launch in November 2011, a little over
seven months ago.
In Kabul, Heart of Asia nations endorsed seven
confidence-building measures, developed through a
consultative regional process, which address common
threats and obstacles to regional stability, economic
development and humanitarian response. More such
measures are expected as the process continues. I am
pleased that they have sought out the participation of
relevant United Nations agencies, which of course will
provide technical support to each initiative.
This
process
is
an
important
new
addition — particularly important because of its
Afghan leadership — to the many bilateral, trilateral
and multilateral forums already in place, including
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, and
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
It should be seen as contributing to our shared goal of
building a cooperative, stable and prosperous region.
In terms of regional initiatives of the United
Nations system, I appreciate the role played by United
Nations agencies in addressing entrenched challenges
that clearly go beyond the ability of any one country
in the region to address. First, I would like to note
the work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Let us recall that more
than 3 million Afghan refugees are registered in
Pakistan and Iran. That obviously has a huge impact on
not just Afghanistan but also those two host countries.
I also welcome, and urge the Council to support, the
Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees, which was
launched in Geneva in May by Afghanistan, Pakistan
and Iran, with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
members of the United Nations family, with a view
to addressing the return and reintegration of Afghan
refugees in a comprehensive and sustainable manner.

12-39088

S/PV.6793

The production and trafficking of narcotics from
Afghanistan undermines the stability of the region and
affects the whole world. I am pleased that Executive
Director Yuri Fedotov, of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, is here today to brief us on the
latest developments related to counter-narcotics and
cross-border crime.
(spoke in English)
The meeting on Afghanistan that took place on
21 May as part of the NATO Summit in Chicago went a
long way towards defining the shape of, and the long-term
support to, the Afghan National Security Forces. We
saw important guarantees, both financial and technical,
as well as a reconfirmation of NATO commitments to
previously agreed timelines for transition. Providing
that level of clarity and commitment on continued
support to the security sector helps to dampen growing
anxiety, both within Afghanistan as well as among its
international partners, as to the post-2014 situation.
It also reinforces the message from the international
community that transition will not translate into an
abandonment of Afghanistan.
As the Afghan National Security Forces gradually
assume responsibility for the security of the country,
we shall continue to advocate for the strengthening
of their oversight and accountability mechanisms,
particularly within police and local police structures.
I wish to emphasize again that all parties — in
particular Afghan security forces, given their increased
responsibilities — must continue to prioritize the
protection of civilians.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/462) on
Afghanistan notes, the past three months saw a dramatic
decline in the number of security incidents over
2011. However, unfortunately, it was also marked by
large-scale incidents and an increase in the use of tactics
targeting civilians, particularly the indiscriminate use
of improvised explosive devices and the targeted killing
of civilians by anti-Government elements. Let us not
forget that it is those forces that are responsible for up
to 80 per cent of civilian casualties.
As Special Representative Kubiš highlighted in
March, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has documented that 2011
marked the fifth consecutive year of increasing civilian
casualties, albeit with fewer incidents. That is simply
not acceptable. We must therefore continue to urge all
parties to the conflict to increase their efforts to protect

civilians and call for individuals responsible to be held
accountable.
On that note, I wish to make special mention of
the 12 June decision by the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), following the tragic civilian
deaths resulting from an air strike in Logar province
six days earlier, to increase restrictions on the use of
aerial munitions against civilian dwellings. Although,
as I have said, the number of incidents attributed to
pro-Government forces continues to decline, and is a
small portion of the total — and those forces, notably
ISAF, continue to vigorously adopt measures to
reduce civilian casualties — UNAMA has repeatedly
expressed concern that aerial operations have resulted
in more civilian deaths and injuries than any other
tactic used by pro-Government forces. Therefore,
let me again say that that decision by ISAF is a very
welcome development.
Security alone, however, will not bring lasting
stability and peace to Afghanistan. Just as we have seen
progress in defining long-term support to the security
side, it is equally important to see the same level of
commitment to the social-economic development
sector. We therefore very much look forward to the
upcoming Tokyo conference as an important step in that
direction. The Secretary-General will head the United
Nations delegation, which will include the UNAMA
Special Representative and myself.
We have noted concerns from all sides that the
fine words and commitments expressed during the
many conferences on Afghanistan over the past decade
be lived up to. To that end, I welcome the ongoing
development of a framework and a mechanism that will
track progress on such commitments and hold both the
Afghan Government and donors accountable for their
implementation. The mutual accountability mechanism,
which should report through the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, is expected to be agreed upon in
Tokyo and will provide a solid foundation upon which
to build long-term development support.
However, we must ensure that expectations
surrounding what Afghanistan can do over a short time
frame — given capacity and resource limitations and
given the fragility of its nascent institutions — are
realistic and do not prove self-defeating. We must keep
in mind our overall objective, namely, to see a stable,
self-reliant Afghanistan with effective institutions
delivering essential services, justice and opportunities

12-390883

S/PV.6793

to its people. We will reach that goal only if we continue
to invest in Afghanistan’s maturing institutions and in
the priorities Afghans themselves set.
I welcome Afghan leadership on the processes that
most affect the country and its people, starting with the
prioritization of development objectives and the Heart
of Asia process, which I mentioned earlier, but also
including reconciliation initiatives and the preparation
of upcoming elections.
The appointment of Salahuddin Rabbani to lead the
High Peace Council signals the continued engagement,
commitment and continuity on the part of the Afghan
Government. The United Nations continues to stand
ready to support the Council’s efforts and looks forward
to seeing an Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process gain momentum.
The upcoming 2014 elections will be a watershed
moment, with significant impact on the consolidation
of the progress made to date and on long-term
stability. They should be held in full accord with the
Constitution, to ensure a smooth political transition and
to demonstrate Afghanistan’s growing self-reliance and
sovereignty. We welcome President Karzai’s statement
in Chicago in May that elections must be marked by
integrity and must be free from internal or external
interventions. By the way, we are already seeing a rise
in political activity and debate ahead of the 2014 polls.
We also welcome the constructive consultation
process on the electoral law, which the Independent
Election Commission recently completed, as well as the
decision to begin work on the voter registry, both of
which are encouraging signs of an essential ingredient
for a sound process — that is to say, inclusiveness.
In addition to the ongoing United Nations
Development Programme’s second phase of its
Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow
project, which is providing electoral technical support,
Special Representative Kubiš has been consulting with
the Government and relevant institutions to determine
how best the United Nations can assist the electoral
process. There are still two years to go before elections,
and it is critical that such Government decisions proceed
apace.
As our report clearly shows, humanitarian issues
continue to be a cause for concern. The spring floods
this year have been particularly severe, following the
very harsh 2011-2012 winter, and, of course, continuing

4

conflict exacerbates already serious displacement
issues. On her recent visit, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator highlighted the extensive humanitarian
needs, the uncertainties of the future and — I must
say — the lagging support for this year’s consolidated
appeal. While we must aim over the longer term to link
humanitarian assistance with development initiatives,
we cannot neglect the urgent immediate needs right
now on the ground.
Finally, allow me to turn to developments that
more directly affect the future of the UNAMA Mission
itself. Circumstances around the world — financial
crises in major economies and competing demands
for international attention — have combined to
impact United Nations peace operations and have led
to shrinking budgets. That will also affect UNAMA.
Expectations that the Mission will be able to do more
as the transition proceeds would not be realistic in the
face of this greater fiscal austerity.
UNAMA and other special political missions must
meet targets set by the General Assembly over two-year
cycles. Of course, it is ultimately for United Nations
budgetary bodies to determine budgets and resource
requirements, but the budget we will put forward for
UNAMA for 2013 will reflect the overall need for cuts
that have been requested by Member States.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
a strategic decision has been made to reshape the
footprint of UNAMA in the provinces, in line with
recommendations from the comprehensive review
undertaken last year at the request of the Security
Council, with changes related to transition and with
the latest Security Council mandate. That decision will
certainly help to reduce costs.
If the Mission is to address the significant reduction
of its budget, UNAMA will also need to review all
aspects of its substantive and support structures and to
prioritize its programming activities. Such an exercise
would necessarily have an impact on the delivery of the
mandate, the extent of which is yet to be determined and
will soon be reported to the United Nations budgetary
bodies and to the Council.
(spoke in French)
Informal discussions on the post-2014 international
framework, including the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan, must take into consideration those
budgetary and programmatic constraints, along with

12-39088

S/PV.6793

needs of the transition and the situation on the ground.
Such discussions must also be defined by an appropriate
consultative process, first and foremost with the Afghan
Government, so that the Council can make an informed
decision.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to address the Security Council. I am pleased to
have the opportunity to brief the Council on the latest
activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) designed to interrupt the flow of
drugs and crime in the region.
The recent report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security (S/2012/462)
specifically recognizes the threat of drugs and crime.
Indeed, Afghanistan produces around 90 per cent of the
world’s opiates, and the southern part of the country is
the world’s largest opium-producing region.
Total global opium production amounted to around
7,000 tons in 2011. In Afghanistan, opium production
increased from 3,600 tons in 2010 to 5,800 tons in
2011. The country’s poppy-free provinces may also be
falling for the second year running, down from 18 to
15. UNODC estimates that trafficking in opiates is a
$68-billion business for the criminals. These drugs are
responsible for the deaths of tens of thousands of people
throughout the world every year, but Afghanistan also
suffers from the highest rates of opiate prevalence in
the world, as well as HIV/AIDS. Drug trafficking also
undermines stability in the region, fuels organized
crime and corruption, increases drug consumption and
spreads HIV/AIDS.
As we move towards 2014, we cannot allow a vacuum
to form that would further encourage the production
of opium. That view was affirmed by my own recent
visit to Afghanistan and Tajikistan. When I met with
President Karzai, I stressed the need for the Afghan
Government, at every level, to express its commitment
to addressing the drug problem as a national priority.
The President agreed to that. My visit to opium poppy
fields in Badakhshan province showed that eradication
efforts must be more vigorously supported by alternative
development programmes.

Afghan
counter-narcotics
authorities
are
demonstrating their own commitment to combating
poppy cultivation, but much more needs to be done. As
of 19 June, a total of 11,000 hectares of poppy fields had
been eradicated. That figure represents a 173 per cent
increase compared to 2011. However it represents less
than 10 per cent of total poppy cultivation area. Food
zones, such as in Helmand province, are contributing to
the decline in poppy cultivation in some areas, but more
funds are needed to support such projects. Landowners
are now being targeted by a new law that criminalizes
the use of their land for poppy cultivation. We now
look forward to meaningful implementation of that law.
There are also signs that a plant disease may blight this
year’s crop, as it did in 2010. But plant disease offers
no solution to the problem of Afghan’s opiates, and
stockpiles may well exist. Therefore, we cannot afford
to take our foot off the accelerator.
At the political level, we are building momentum
through the Paris Pact initiative, while developing
integrated regional programmes. UNODC’s $117-million
country programme for Afghanistan was launched in
May. The programme is closely linked to the Regional
Programme for Afghanistan and Neighbouring
Countries. Together, those programmes form part
of UNODC’s overall strategy to provide a coherent
field response to drug trafficking, as well as closer
cooperation among regional and international actors.
Strengthened border controls are also an essential
element of the strategy. Both programmes are connected
to such bodies as the Triangular Initiative, the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
and Operation TARCET, which targets the precursor
chemicals necessary to produce opium and heroin.
There are also new initiatives that are linked
to the Regional Programme. The Criminal Assets
Southern Hub initiative will target criminal profits by
offering advice to national authorities. The Southern
Trafficking Operational Plan will couple alternative
livelihoods, while also maximizing law enforcement
and interdiction efforts. The Maritime Regional
Security Initiative will address the movement of
trafficking into the sea, in particular between Iran and
Pakistan. In May, we started the Regional Programme
for South-Eastern Europe, which complements those
activities by concentrating on Afghan heroin flowing
through Central and West Asia and then on through the
Balkans.

12-390885

S/PV.6793

UNODC is also helping to create international and
inter-agency partnerships. One example is the United
Nations task force on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, established by the Secretary-General
in 2011. In Dushanbe on 1 June, I co-chaired the first
regional meeting of the task force in Central Asia.
Today’s thematic debate is timely. We stand
midway between another key set of milestones in the
international community’s journey to support and assist
Afghanistan. There are many challenges in Afghanistan,
but I would encourage Member States to do everything
possible to communicate the message that illicit drugs
and crime are capable of undermining attempts to
promote economic and social development in the
country. Our work is in the interests of Afghanistan and
the victims of illicit drugs, but it is also in the common
interests of the international community.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
We commend your able leadership of the Council this
month. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on Afghanistan (S/2012/462) and welcome the
presence and insights of Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and Executive Director Fedotov.
A month ago, at the NATO Summit in Chicago,
Afghanistan’s friends and partners came together to
express their unanimous support for the end of war
and the beginning of a new phase in our enduring
partnership, which was first envisioned in Lisbon
in 2010. Our partnership will continue into the
transformation decade, during which time Afghanistan
will take full charge of its security, governance and
development.
Just weeks ago, we inked the Enduring Strategic
Partnership Agreement with the United States of
America as the guiding framework of our bilateral
cooperation for the long haul, solidifying mutual
commitments, including on strengthened Afghan
sovereignty, stability and prosperity in the years to
come. Although the specifics of the partnership will
continue to be crystallized, the agreement has been
endorsed by both houses of the Afghan parliament,

6

clearly manifesting the overwhelming support from all
corners of the country.
As part of the new phase of international
engagement in support of Afghanistan, we have also
established strategic partnerships with Italy, France,
the United Kingdom, Germany and, most recently,
Australia. Furthermore, discussions are under way to
conclude similar agreements with Turkey, Norway and
the European Union. In our own region, we signed a
strategic partnership with India, a country with which
we have shared historic and traditional ties. Earlier this
month, Afghanistan took an important step forward
towards establishing a strategic and cooperative
partnership with our other great neighbour, China.
The launch of the Istanbul process, in November
2011, was a milestone in the realization of a new
regional order by which Afghanistan and other
Heart-of-Asia countries joined hands for a common
goal and future, namely, peace, stability and prosperity.
The Heart of Asia ministerial conference held in Kabul
less than two weeks ago advanced the objectives of the
Istanbul process. As part of the conference outcome,
we reaffirmed our solid commitment to implement a
wide range of confidence-building measures. I take this
opportunity to convey our gratitude to all friends and
partners for their participation and support.
Afghanistan also obtained observer status to
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization at its recent
conference in Beijing. That was an important move.
With all of those steps, Afghanistan is restoring its
historic role as a land bridge and its potential to become
a catalyst for peace and stability in the entire region.
We look forward to next month’s Tokyo ministerial
conference, where we aim to effectively address the
areas of Afghanistan’s economic sustainability and
development, the fiscal gap, as well as to finalize a
mutual accountability agreement between Afghanistan
and the international community. In Tokyo, Afghanistan
will present a comprehensive action plan on self-reliance
and our national priority programmes. The conference
will not be another pledging event, but an important
venue for a solid commitment of the international
community to the transition and transformation decade.
Our thanks go to the friendly Government of Japan for
its generosity in hosting the event.
The transition to Afghan ownership and leadership
is our number one strategic priority. In that regard, I
am pleased to note that we are making steady progress.

12-39088

S/PV.6793

The third tranche of the security transition has
officially commenced and includes some of the most
conflict-prone provinces with the highest levels of
insecurity. Needless to say, we are on track to complete
the third phase before the end of the year, by which
75 per cent of the country’s population will come under
the responsibility of Afghan security forces.
As we strive to complete the security transition by
2013, the need for sustained support for the training and
equipping of our national security forces is inevitable.
The undertakings towards such support of NATO and
other allies at the Chicago Summit will be particularly
important.
Another core priority on the way forward will
be a strong new focus on establishing a cleaner and
more competent Government, through strengthening
governance, fighting corruption and enforcing the rule
of law. The reform agenda is at the centre of our efforts.
At the same time, we are diligently addressing all
influences that may pose a threat to national interests
and to law and order. Such measures will enhance the
full trust and confidence of all Afghans for the future.
A far more challenging task will be the
implementation of the socio-economic component
of the transition, which is vital to our State-building
efforts. Central to that goal will be underscoring
support for the Afghan national priority programmes,
which emphasize — in addition to security and
governance — agricultural development, human
resources, infrastructure and the private sector, all of
which are vital for our economic growth.
Our vision is of an Afghanistan that is a self-reliant
State, standing on its own feet. Afghanistan will not
remain an aid economy; we are working to significantly
reduce aid dependency by the end of the transformation
decade.
Advancing the peace process towards a successful
outcome is a core element of our strategy to bring
lasting peace to our people and nation. Pursued on the
basis of national consensus, we are convinced that our
reconciliation efforts remain the surest path to ending
the conflict and ensuring a durable peace. Let there be
no doubt, our Afghan-led peace process will not ensue
at the expense of the hard-won democratic gains of
the past decade, including human rights, the rights of
women in particular.

In order to achieve a successful outcome to
our reconciliation efforts, I wish to underscore the
importance of resolute support from our immediate
neighbours and other partners in the region and
beyond. In that connection, I take this opportunity to
express our gratitude for the support provided by the
Council within the framework of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011).
The upcoming 2014 elections will be another
important step towards Afghanistan’s political maturity
and the consolidation of democracy in our country. We
are taking a number of measures, including electoral
reforms, to ensure a smooth political transition
consistent with our Constitution.
As we proceed through transition and into the
transformation decade, international engagement will
remain crucial. In that regard, we also look forward
to advancing our close cooperation with the United
Nations towards peace and stability in Afghanistan.
One of the greatest impediments to both development
and security in Afghanistan is the illicit drug problem.
Despite our challenges, Afghanistan is sparing no
effort to rid our society of the menace of illicit drugs.
Over the past five years, we have significantly reduced
poppy cultivation. However, as the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Fedotov, said, there are a number of varying factors
over which we have little or no control, including the
impact the increase or decrease of poppy cultivation
from one year to another.
This year alone, the eradication figures show an
important increase — a three-fold increase — since the
previous year. We are tracking down and bringing to
justice an increased number of individuals involved in
drug trafficking. As we know, drug trafficking is not an
Afghan-only issue. A long-term solution is not possible
without cooperation and coordination in addressing
the dominant factors behind the drug problem, such
as preventing the flow of chemical precursors into
Afghanistan and providing Afghan farmers with
alternative livelihoods.
As we continue our joint journey towards a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan, building on the gains
of the past, Afghanistan’s enemies are still very much
intent on derailing our progress and preventing our
success. That is evident in the continued brutal acts
of violence and terror by the Taliban and those behind

12-390887

S/PV.6793

them, the latest of which was the massacre at Spozhmai
Hotel, just outside Kabul, last weekend. It is a continued
psychological war, a war of perception, a psychodrama.

Germany will continue to support that process as an
observer, offering our specific expertise in the areas
of regional infrastructure and chambers of commerce.

However, no such shameful acts of terror will deter
the will of the Afghan people from their ultimate goal of
securing peace and prosperity. Afghans have come too
far and endured far too many sacrifices to give up now.
With such brutal acts, the Taliban are not threatening
the existence of the State, they are just disrupting
people’s peaceful lives. Let us remain as committed as
ever before to complete the journey we began a decade
ago.

While strengthening ties with the region,
Afghanistan has also consolidated its partnerships at the
global level though a number of cooperation agreements,
including with my own country. The message is clear:
Afghanistan is not going to be abandoned in 2014. The
international community stands by its commitments.

The Afghan people and Government express their
gratitude to the international community for their
resolute support for Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council. I
would like to request that Council members limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing, as
well as Executive Director Fedotov for highlighting the
pivotal role of counter-narcotics efforts for the stability
and prosperity of Afghanistan and the entire region.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this debate on behalf of the European
Union.
“Cautious optimism” is the term used in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/462) to sum up
his overall assessment of the current situation in
Afghanistan. We fully subscribe to that assessment.
Significant progress has been made since the
International Conference on Afghanistan held in Bonn
last December. Whilethe transition is progressing, with
75 per cent of Afghans already living in areas under the
Afghan security lead, the transformation decade, which
we agreed upon in Bonn, is taking shape.
In the political field, the recent Heart of Asia
ministerial conference held in Kabul was a strong
demonstration of Afghan ownership and regional
cooperation based on trust, confidence and shared
values. Afghanistan is no longer perceived as a mere
source of instability but is assuming its role at the
heart of a regional process, which is now embarking
on a set of concrete confidence-building measures. As
expressed by the German Foreign Minister in Kabul,

8

In the area of security, that message was underscored
at the NATO Summit held in Chicago in May, where
partners committed to sustain and support Afghan
security forces beyond 2014. However, against the
backdrop of the military drawdown and its economic
implications, sustaining the gains I just described will
remain a major challenge.
Commitments in the security field need to
be accompanied by a framework of long-term
governance and development cooperation that leads
to an economically self-sustained Afghanistan. The
upcoming Tokyo conference will provide us with
an opportunity to take bold steps in that regard. We
commend the excellent work by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
supporting the preparatory process in Kabul.
Mutual accountability will be key in Tokyo. While
we stand ready to extend our cooperation beyond
2014, we expect clear commitments from the Afghan
Government towards better governance, anti-corruption
and human rights, as well as safeguarding the democratic
achievements beyond 2014. President Karzai’s recent
speech in the Afghan Parliament contains strong
messages in this regard that will need to be followed
up within the Afghan Government and Administration.
For the very same reason, we fully subscribe
to Mr. Fedotov’s analysis that without progress in
governance, development and law enforcement, progress
in our counter-narcotics efforts also will be limited. We
therefore support the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) comprehensive approach, which
complements poppy-eradication programmes with
targeted investments in law enforcement, criminal
justice and livelihoods. We have been continuously
funding UNODC’s activities in those areas and will
continue to do so.
When discussing Afghanistan’s future beyond
2014, we cannot but underline the key role that the

12-39088

S/PV.6793

United Nations will need to play, based on its unique
legitimacy and experience. When it extended UNAMA’s
mandate in March (see S/PV.6738), the Council
expressed its full support for the United Nations good
offices in supporting Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation, building Afghan institutions and
supporting the Afghan electoral process, ensuring
coherence among donors, and supporting the regional
process. In that context, we commend UNAMA’s
efforts to search for even more efficient ways to operate
while ensuring that it maintains sufficient geographical
coverage and is able to perform its role as mandated by
the Council. The renewed deployment of international
staff to UNAMA’s Kunduz office and the significant
security improvements at the office in Mazar-e-Sharif
are welcome developments in that regard.
Our cautious optimism is grounded in the
international community’s ability to maintain a
long-term partnership with Afghanistan. The United
Nations will need to play a pivotal role in that regard.
Let me assure the Council that Germany remains
committed to a strong UNAMA that is able to live up to
the high expectations placed upon it.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): As always, today’s debate
carries with it a very interesting sense of timing and
history and, of course, of the important, essential
aspects of the United Nations and its contribution — as
well as that of the rest of the world — in Afghanistan.
We are as ever grateful to Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his lucid statement, and many thanks are also due to
Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous for the broad
coverage of his excellent and wide-ranging briefing on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The eye-opener from Mr. Yuri Fedotov
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) should be recognized before the malaise he
describes wins regional support.
We must take cognizance of Mr. Ladsous’s
statement concerning the challenges of the mandate
UNAMA must implement. The accountants wielding
knives must be controlled, and the Mission must have
resources adequate to the achievement of its goals. We
must therefore ensure that any substantial reduction in
the UNAMA budget will not affect the core objectives
of the United Nations in Afghanistan. I cannot
overemphasize this issue, which is the core of the
matter at the moment. As Afghan institutions come of
age, UNAMA too should continue to adapt to emerging
trends and realities.

The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2012/462)
and those preceding it provide useful updates on
the situation in Afghanistan. As was said earlier,
the Secretary-General has struck a note of cautious
optimism, specifically concerning the areas of security
transition, human development and the growth of
Afghan institutions. We agree with him wholeheartedly.
Nonetheless, while demonstrating confidence in
Afghan transition efforts, the Secretary-General has
rightly urged the donor community to refrain from
unrealistic demands that ignore constraints on capacity.
We believe that long-term engagement on the part of the
international community is essential to Afghanistan’s
stability and economic development. In that context,
deliberations at the forthcoming Tokyo conference
will be important. We commend the Government of
Japan for hosting the conference and look forward to its
successful outcome.
The Secretary-General also reports progress in
transitioning security responsibilities to the Afghan
National Security Forces. Pakistan greatly values that
progress, which it sees as a guarantee of sustained
stability in Afghanistan, as evidenced — which the
Council will be pleased to know — by my President’s
announcement at the NATO Summit in Chicago of
Pakistan’s financial contribution to the Afghan National
Security Forces.
Besides helping to build the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces, Pakistan has sought closer
engagement with Afghanistan and its international
partners on all security-related issues. Our leading
participation in the seven confidence-building measures
on 14 June in Istanbul manifests our commitment. We
have done so by maintaining a robust presence of our
forces along the international border. Our deployment
of troops and paramilitaries in the border region far
exceeds the number of international troops in the
whole of Afghanistan, and has come at a considerable
economic, political and human cost. Our ongoing
intelligence and military cooperation with Afghanistan
and our international counterparts is progressing
smoothly, and recently the improvements in military
cooperation have for once been acknowledged by all
players.
Pakistan’s narrative on Afghan security issues
is untainted by polemics. Provocations perpetrated
through actions on the ground and through rhetoric
have not undermined our restraint. A recent example
was the 24 June attack on a Pakistani border post in

12-390889

S/PV.6793

which 17 security personnel lost their lives. The matter
is being taken up with Afghanistan at the highest level
for a bilateral matter.
The latest attack took place where there is
apparently a sizeable Afghan National Security Forces
and international presence. It is a grave incident that
unfortunately is not unprecedented. But our response to
such attacks is always to go through official channels.
Unlike others, we neither play the blame game nor
conduct diplomacy through media. Such restraint,
however, should not be taken for granted. Preventing
a recurrence of such incidents is absolutely imperative,
and safe havens for such people in Afghanistan must be
eliminated.
The Secretary-General’s report enumerates many
challenges to the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process. He has characterized progress on reconciliation
as slow and uneven. The long-term solution to the
challenges in Afghanistan lies in a sustainable
reconciliation process. The policy must be transparent,
not a covert one that panders to the vagaries of domestic
politics. The sustainability of that process can be
ensured only if all stakeholders not only believe in it
themselves but also share the goal of reconciliation. The
process must not be complicated by inexplicable caveats
and conditions. The idea of coerced reconciliation flies
in the face of the obvious lessons of Afghan history:
that Afghan leadership, ownership of and willing
participation in all such matters is absolutely essential.
For our part, we are and will remain committed to
an Afghan-led and -owned reconciliation process. So
far, unfortunately, we see no panacea for delivering
peace in Afghanistan, and the current handling of the
war there may perhaps be placing any such expectations
outside the realm of possibility for the moment.
Despite the best efforts of the world community
and the United Nations, Pakistan is still host — and,
unfortunately, hostage — to the largest single population
of Afghan refugees. In doing so — despite the lack
of acknowledgment or funding and an abundance of
unjustified, unfair hyperbole — we remain a major
contributor, easing the humanitarian burden on
Afghanistan at significant economic, social and security
costs to the already overburdened people of Pakistan.
We therefore attach great importance to the outcome
of the international conference held in Geneva last
month. The solution strategy agreed on at the conference
should be underpinned by a strong commitment of

10

sustained support from the international community.
We must look beyond scapegoating and look forward
to those commitments coming to fruition. Meanwhile,
Pakistan is hurting. I would suggest stepping up to the
plate and bearing what must be borne.
To return to Mr. Fedotov: the policy of treating
any production of narcotics with kid gloves must be
abandoned. A policy has been in place that aims to
avoid antagonizing farmers and that has meant that
military and police forces would no longer participate
in the eradication of poppy fields. This was stated in a
recent article in the Washington Post, and, of course,
dilated upon pretty seriously by the adviser Mr. Vali
Nasr in his book The Rise of Islamic Capitalism: Why
the New Muslim Middle Class is the Key to Defeating
Extremism.
However, we welcome the Afghanistan country
programme for 2012-14 launched by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime last month. The
programme’s judicious implementation should be
finely honed to help address the narcotics problem, as
highlighted in the Afghan Opium Survey of December
2011 and UNODC’s Opium Risk Assessment of April
2012. We are rightly warned by the UNAMA report that
the financial impact of the departure of the international
forces might enhance the attraction towards narcotics.
The warning calls for the world to acknowledge that
and to do something about it now by initiating effective
prevention measures.
Even though my friend Ambassador Tanin did not
mention Pakistan in his statement — many others have
not done so either, and I do not know whether to thank
him — Pakistan remains steadfast.
I will conclude by reiterating our commitment to
a peaceful and stable Afghanistan. It is to our own
benefit. We have vital stakes in that, as stated by
Pakistan’s Foreign Minister during the recently held
Heart of Asia ministerial conference on the theme “For
Pakistan, Kabul is the most important capital of the
world.”
Meanwhile, it would be inappropriate for me
not to welcome the recent policy statement of the
International Security Assistance Force on reducing
civilian casualties caused by air strikes. I pray that that
also applies to other parties.
Our Afghan brethren in Pakistan have suffered for
far too long. We hope and pray for an early end to such

12-39088

S/PV.6793

a plight so that our two peoples can embark on a joint
quest for progress and development, integrated with the
rest of a rising Asia and the world.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/462) and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and Mr. Fedotov for their briefings this morning. I also
welcome Ambassador Tanin’s contribution to today’s
debate.
In the past six months, the international community
has made significant progress on the commitments made
at the December 2011 Bonn Conference. Efforts are now
focused on reinforcing our enduring commitment to
Afghanistan. That means not only ensuring the security
of Afghanistan and its people, but also sustaining the
political and economic progress, including through
the support of neighbouring countries. I will focus my
statement today on the progress being made in those
three areas.
First, on the security transition, I welcome the
success of the NATO Chicago Summit in May, which
saw the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
contributing countries demonstrate our long-term
commitment to Afghanistan, in particular by agreeing
the NATO strategic plan for Afghanistan, and make
incredible contributions towards sustaining the Afghan
National Security Forces after 2014. That sent a clear
message to the Afghan people that we will not abandon
them, and to the insurgency that it cannot wait us out.
The protection of the Afghan civilian population
remains at the core of ISAF’s military strategy. ISAF
forces have worked extremely hard to minimize the level
of civilian casualties and have introduced new rules to
govern the use of force. As the Secretary-General’s report
highlights, we have had considerable success in that.
That is in stark contrast, of course, to the insurgency,
which continues to target civilians indiscriminately.
Secondly, on the political and economic progress,
the United Kingdom looks forward to the July Tokyo
Development Conference on Afghanistan, hosted
by the Government of Japan. It is absolutely vital to
Afghanistan’s future stability that we send a strong
signal of our enduring commitment through the
transformation decade 2015 to 2025. Therefore, we,
the international community, should look to provide
concrete aid pledges for at least the period 2015 to 2017.
The United Kingdom has already done so. We call on
others in the international community to follow suit.

Alongside such undertakings, the United Kingdom
strongly supports all efforts to ensure that Tokyo offers
an opportunity for the participation of Afghan civil
society, including women. The United Kingdom works
closely with the Government of Afghanistan, local and
international non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations and international partners to
improve the status of women in Afghanistan so that
they can play a full role in a future peaceful Afghan
State.
Of course, the Government of Afghanistan must
also deliver on the commitments that it has made to
the Afghan people and to the international community,
in particular by continuing with key economic and
governance reforms and by working towards greater
self-reliance. The centrepiece of the Tokyo conference
will be a mutual accountability framework, setting
out Afghan and international commitments for the
post-2014 period. That work will complement the
commitments made on security at the Chicago Summit
and will move us another step closer to a sustainable
future for Afghanistan.
Thirdly, among all the challenges and opportunities
facing Afghanistan today, the relationship between
Afghanistan and its neighbours is vital, as other
speakers have highlighted this morning. At the Heart of
Asia ministerial conference in Kabul earlier this month,
Afghanistan’s neighbours expressed their mutual
interest in Afghanistan’s long-term stability. The
United Kingdom welcomes the assistance provided by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the supporting role of United Nations
agencies in the Istanbul process. I would also like to
take this opportunity to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
readiness to contribute to confidence-building
measures, where requested by the region.
The United Kingdom supports a strong UNAMA
presence as we move through the transition period,
and beyond. UNAMA plays an essential role in
coordinating international efforts and in providing the
Afghan Government with support in order to deliver
on its own commitments. We welcome UNAMA’s view
that the inevitable financial constraints are a valuable
opportunity to ensure that its future operations are
closely focused on the core mandate and that the
relationship between UNAMA and the United Nations
country team is regularly reviewed.

12-3908811

S/PV.6793

In conclusion, the international community has
made real progress against the commitments made at
Bonn in December 2011, but there is still work to be done
to secure the future of Afghanistan and its people. The
United Kingdom remains resolute in our determination
to work with the Government of Afghanistan and all
international partners in that crucial endeavour.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling today’s
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also
like in particular to thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2012/462), and are appreciative of the
briefings by Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous
and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Executive Director Yuri Fedotov.
India shares a privileged, historical and
civilizational relationship with Afghanistan. During
the past decade, our relationship has been renewed and
consolidated by our contribution to the rebuilding and
reconstruction of Afghanistan. India has pledged up to
$2 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
We remain unwavering in our commitment to assisting
the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour to build a
peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous nation.
With the first meeting of the India-Afghanistan
Partnership Council in New Delhi in May 2012,
the process of implementing the India-Afghanistan
comprehensive strategic partnership agreement has
been set in motion. That process will further intensify
our broad-based development assistance to Afghanistan
in a wide range of sectors that have been identified by
the Government of Afghanistan as priority areas for
reconstruction and development. We will continue our
engagement in reconstruction and rehabilitation projects
in alignment with the Afghan National Development
Strategy.
We are fully cognizant that the economic viability
of Afghanistan depends on its fuller integration into its
neighbourhood so that it can regain its historical role
as a land bridge between South Asia, Central Asia, the
Middle East and Eurasia.
We fully support the work undertaken in favour of
regional confidence-building as a critical component of
international efforts to support Afghanistan as it takes
forward the task of national reconciliation even as it
assumes full responsibility for its own security.

12

India fully supports an inclusive and transparent
Afghan-led
and
Afghan-owned
process
of
reconciliation, as opposed to an internationally led
process, accompanied by an inclusive political process
and intra-Afghan dialogue, the renunciation of violence,
the cutting of ties to terrorist groups, abiding by the
Afghan Constitution and its protections for human
rights, including the rights of women.
At the Kabul ministerial meeting of the Istanbul
process, India expressed its willingness to take the
lead in the implementation of two confidence-building
measures (CBMs): the Chambers of Commerce CBM
and the Commercial Opportunities CBM. Further,
India will be hosting the Delhi Investment Summit
on Afghanistan in New Delhi tomorrow, 28 June. The
objective of the Summit is to attract foreign investment
in Afghanistan in the light of new opportunities opening
up in various sectors in that country. The Summit will
include presentations by the Government of Afghanistan
and others on the investment climate and opportunities
in Afghanistan, and panel discussions on cross-cutting
issues and sector specific themes. Potential regional and
international investors, including Indian companies,
will participate in the event.
We see the Delhi Investment Summit as a critical
link between the Istanbul process and the Tokyo
conference to be held on 8 July. The Summit will
also be helpful in countering the current narrative of
anxiety about withdrawal, reversing it with a narrative
of opportunity and hope. We are holding the Summit
fully cognizant that the aforementioned CBMs require
an atmosphere of security in the country and in the
region. Amid the ongoing transition, the security gains
achieved in Afghanistan during the past decade are
still tenuous and fragile; security concerns remain
paramount.
The principal problem in Afghanistan remains the
existence of terrorism with ideological, financial and
logistical support coming from beyond the country’s
borders. We need concerted action to isolate and root
out the syndicate of terrorism that includes elements
of the Al-Qaida, Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba and other
terrorist and extremist groups. We also need to create
an enabling environment in which the Afghan people
can live in peace and security and decide their future
themselves, without outside interference, coercion or
intimidation.

12-39088

S/PV.6793

Moving forward, we need sustained international
commitment in order to strengthen the Afghan
Government’s capacity for governance, security
and economic development. Enhanced development
assistance and foreign investment in Afghanistan and
the building of regional linkages are critical to ensuring
an irreversible transition in the country.
The Secretary-General’s latest report rightly
observes that the serious challenges confronting
Afghanistan
“must not … be underplayed, with the military
drawdown and an expected reduction in
development assistance giving rise to uncertainty
about the sustainability of such gains” (S/2012/462,
para. 60).
We support the good work being done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The
international community as a whole must continue to
work with renewed vigour and unity of purpose towards
strengthening the efforts of the Afghan Government to
seek solutions that are inclusive and led by the Afghan
people themselves.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/462).
We also thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous for his briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his helpful contribution.
We would also like to congratulate Mr. Jan Kubiš on
the excellent work he has done leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
although he is not able to be with us at today’s meeting.
We meet today at a time when we find ourselves at
a special crossroads of national sovereignty and mutual
responsibility and accountability between Afghanistan
and the international community. Security transition
is under way, and important international and regional
conferences have been held, such as those in Kabul
and Chicago, not to mention one of the most important
ahead of us, to be held in July in Tokyo.
The Secretary-General observes in his report that
there is scope for measured optimism with regard to the
situation in Afghanistan. However, our optimism hinges
on the extent to which the international community
upholds its commitments, Afghanistan fully assumes
its sovereign responsibilities, and the United Nations
consolidates its presence on the ground. According to
our assessment of the reporting period and that to come,

the challenges are immense. I would like to comment
on four areas.
First, we fully support the process of Afghan
reconciliation led by the Afghans themselves. We
welcome the fact that a Chair for the High Peace
Council has finally been appointed, particularly since
it is Salahuddin Rabbani. We are encouraged that the
process will be newly invigorated since, in the absence
of a consolidated reconciliation effort and in the light
of the exit of NATO security forces by 2014, it is likely
that ongoing crises will continue to become more
complicated. The report confirms that the presence of
the United Nations will be indispensable beyond 2014.
We trust that we will prepare ourselves in a timely
manner for the new phase. Likewise, we fully support
the good offices of UNAMA.
Secondly, we note that the transition is proceeding
normally and we are satisfied that the recent NATO
Summit ratified its commitments and recognized the
need for its continued participation, including beyond
2014. Likewise, we take note of the announcement by
President Karzai of the beginning of the third phase
of transfer of security responsibilities to the Afghan
forces. However, we would highlight that the transition
cannot and must not be limited to security. The sources
of insecurity are not limited to physical security, but
also include food security, guarantees for human
development, human rights and respect for the rule of
law.
Thirdly, two days ago we held in this Chamber an
open debate on the protection of civilians, which gave
us much food for thought (see S/PV.6790). Guatemala
remains concerned about the protection of civilians
in Afghanistan. Although we note the recent fall in
the number of victims, we remain concerned about
the calibre of attacks, such as the assassination of
a member of the High Peace Council and attacks on
schools and people who work in the education system
in Afghanistan. We condemn all indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, including NATO air raids. Likewise,
we find the situation faced by women and children
in Afghanistan to be deplorable. We call for tangible
measures to be taken in order to protect and guarantee
their rights.
Fourthly, I should like to underscore the need for
international cooperation, without which the progress
that has been made to date could be reversed. That
progress must be sustained, and we must be prepared for

12-3908813

S/PV.6793

a long-term commitment in that respect. We are certain
that the Tokyo Conference will be the appropriate
forum for consolidating the advances made, with the
United Nations leading the process.
In that respect, we take note of the fact that
the Mission will be re-evaluating its activities and
optimizing its resources in order to focus its efforts on
the discharge of its basic mandate. We hope that that
exercise will guarantee the availability of the resources
necessary to ensure that the Mission’s mandate is not
adversely affected. Also important are coherence and
coordination between humanitarian actors and those
involved in development efforts within the framework
of UNAMA.
Finally, we reiterate that Guatemala supports
Afghanistan’s aspirations to move forward along the
path towards democracy, prosperity and stability. The
international community shares that vision and should
make that clear in the form of political will. The current
situation is testimony to the need to continue to make
progress in electoral reform in accordance with the
Constitution, strengthen regional ties and implement
confidence-building measures, as well the need for a
strong commitment on the part of Afghanistan to good
governance, the combat against corruption and drug
trafficking, the strengthening of human rights and the
consolidation of the rule of law.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing today
detailing the important work that the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
performs every day under very difficult conditions,
and Executive Director Fedotov for his briefing on
this important issue. I also thank Ambassador Tanin
for joining today’s discussion. As always, we value
his participation and his close cooperation with the
Security Council.
In the last few months, the international community
has underscored its support for strengthening Afghan
leadership and Afghan sovereignty while reinforcing
its commitment to Afghanistan well beyond 2014. As
President Obama has said, the message to the Afghan
people is clear: “As you stand up, you will not stand
alone”.
This morning I will focus my remarks on recent
and upcoming events that have reinforced this message.
On 2 May, Afghanistan and the United States signed
a strategic partnership agreement. It is one of several

14

bilateral agreements that Afghanistan has concluded
that demonstrates how the international community
continues to come together to support Afghanistan as
it prepares for the transition in 2014. The agreement
provides a long-term framework for relations between
Afghanistan and the United States after a responsible
drawdown of United States forces. It reaffirms the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Afghanistan. I want to be clear that the
United States does not seek any permanent American
military bases.
The post-2014 United States presence will
be shaped in close consultation with the Afghan
Government and will support Afghanistan’s social
and economic development, security, institutions
and regional cooperation. The agreement enshrines a
range of mutual commitments, including on combating
terrorism and strengthening democratic institutions.
The United States welcomes the strong Afghan
commitment
to
strengthening
accountability,
transparency and oversight and to protecting the human
rights of all Afghans — men and women. Afghanistan
and the United States have taken steps together to show
that Afghanistan’s progress will be irreversible and that
our commitment is real and enduring.
The strategic partnership is just one piece of a
larger international effort to work with the Afghans for
a successful transition. At the NATO summit held in
Chicago in May, world leaders reaffirmed the Lisbon
framework for transition in Afghanistan and further
outlined the support that the alliance and individual
nations will provide to the Afghan military and police
after 2014. As the Afghans assume full responsibility
for security by the end of 2014, the enemies of the
Afghan people should know that there will be steadfast
and capable Afghan forces standing against them, with
strong NATO support.
President Karzai’s recent announcement of the third
of five tranches of areas to transition to Afghan security
lead is an important step forward. As transition begins
in those areas, nearly 75 per cent of the population
of Afghanistan will be living in provinces, districts
and villages where Afghan forces are beginning to
lead. That would not be possible without the growing
strength of the Afghan National Security Forces, which
remain essential to our shared goal of an Afghanistan
that can secure and govern itself.

12-39088

S/PV.6793

The transition is on track. Afghans are increasingly
standing up for their own security and future, and
NATO remains united in its support for the Lisbon
timetable and an enduring commitment to Afghanistan.
The region is also supporting Afghanistan through
its transition. We applaud the recent Heart of Asia
ministerial Conference in Kabul, which endorsed a
process of continuous dialogue and confidence-building
measures that will contribute to achieving regional
peace and stability, and we welcome the positive role
that UNAMA played in helping to ensure that the
Conference was a success.
Security improvements will also contribute to the
sustainable reintegration of returning Afghans and
enable economic opportunity. We are encouraged by
the success of the International Conference on Afghan
refugees organized in May by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and urge the
United Nations to continue to focus attention on the
needs of high-return communities to ensure voluntary
and sustainable reintegration.
The March Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held in Dushanbe,
accelerated Afghanistan’s growing connections with its
South and Central Asian neighbours. We also applaud
the private-sector conference being hosted in New
Delhi this week to promote investment in Afghanistan’s
people and industries.
We look forward to the Tokyo Conference next
week, which is an important opportunity for the Afghan
Government to clearly commit to improving governance
and intensifying the fight against corruption. Those
reforms are vital. Afghanistan cannot rely on donor
financing indefinitely. Sustainable development
requires private investment and improved regional
connectivity. As Afghanistan makes progress on
governance and anti-corruption, the United States and
the international community will take concrete steps
of our own to help, as we promised at Bonn. Despite
serious fiscal challenges of our own, our continued
investment in Afghanistan is essential, and it should
come from both Governments and the private sector.
The coming months will be a dynamic time for
Afghanistan. The Afghan people, the international
community, the United Nations and UNAMA have
been unfaltering in their commitment to Afghanistan.
I want to underscore the enduring importance of the
work of the United Nations and UNAMA, from its good

offices to promote regional cooperation and co-chairing
of the Joint Coordination Monitoring Board, to its
humanitarian assistance and support for refugees and
internally displaced persons. The United Nations has
remained steadfastly committed to the Afghan people,
and we are grateful. The Afghan Government and
people, the region and the international community have
demonstrated their resolve and long-term commitment
to a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan. The
United States will work with all of them every step of
the way.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor and organizing this debate. I would
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous and Executive Director YurI Fedotov
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence of
Ambassador Tanin and his statement. They have all
given us a broad and accurate depiction of the current
situation in Afghanistan and described the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
I would like to focus now on three points that
Portugal deems of outstanding importance.
First, I would like to mention capacity-building
within the Afghan National Security Forces now that
the third tranche of the transition is under way and that
the Chicago Summit has determined that the NATO-led
combat mission in Afghanistan will cease in 2014.
Professional, capable and sustainable security forces
are absolutely indispensable if a free, independent and
democratic Afghanistan is to provide essential services
and goods to its population and to continue to play its
role in the region and in the world.
Portugal entirely supports the efforts to focus on
the training of security forces, particularly the police,
and to ensure that they are more professional and better
equipped, both in materiel and in capacity to deliver.
As such, I believe that the following sentence in the
Secretary-General’s report clearly illustrates a crucial
capacity for the security forces to have in the very
specific Afghan framework:
“The United Nations continues to advocate for
attention to accountability mechanisms within the
Afghan security forces, ensuring the protection
of civilians and children amid conflict, as well as
the specific needs of women and girls as a central
component of transition and post-transition security
frameworks.” (S/2012/462, para. 12)

12-3908815

S/PV.6793

In this regard, measures taken recently to prioritize
community-based policing, strengthen crime detection
and prevention, safeguard human rights and combat
violence against women and children cannot but be
commended and encouraged. We find it particularly
noteworthy that the national police plan sets a truly
ambitious goal of inducting 5,000 women into the
police by 2014. Women agents are essential elements for
addressing serious cases of crimes against women and
girls, and have shown all over the world that their action
has a tangible impact in the fight against gender-based
violence and the promotion and protection of the human
rights of women.
Secondly, I would like to mention the issue of
human rights in Afghanistan. The challenges caused by
the security situation in the country are of the utmost
seriousness and defy the time constraints of a Security
Council debate. Suffice it to say this time that Portugal is
encouraged by the declining trend in civilian casualties,
and we hope that it may be maintained over time. We
continue to witness the most blatant disrespect for
civilians by the insurgents, to whom more than 80 per
cent of all casualties can safely be attributed. Reaction
by the authorities of Afghanistan is imperative, not only
as an element of the ongoing struggle for peace in the
country, but also as a matter of addressing the essential
needs of the population.
As regards the human rights of women, we hear of
efforts to achieve the adherence of the Government of
Afghanistan to the principles of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. The development of
an action plan to implement the resolution appears to
us to be a very relevant instrument for strengthening
the promotion and protection of human rights and the
rule of law, and is in line, furthermore, with the mutual
commitments assumed at the Bonn Conference. The
Afghan Government and security forces may count on
Portugal’s full support and available expertise for that
task.
Finally, I would say a few brief words on the
multilateral efforts undertaken by both Afghanistan
and its friends and partners throughout the world.
“Geography is destiny” has become a catchphrase,
sometimes all too easily misused. Afghanistan
consistently shows that it can find friends and partners
that are at a great distance but are clearly and seriously
committed to a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.
The path chosen by Afghanistan — the path of
international partnership and productive interaction

16

with its neighbours — provides an opportunity for the
development of its resources. It shows, at the same time,
how truly regional and international the problems that
afflict Afghanistan are. These include issues such as
counter-narcotics, energy and transportation networks,
which require international cooperation at its highest
level.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s support
for the work of UNAMA. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has played and
will continue to play an essential role in strengthening
Afghan institutions towards peace, democracy and
the promotion and protection of human rights, and in
supporting Afghanistan’s full assumption of leadership
and ownership in the security, governance and
development areas.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Hervé Ladsous for his briefing, Mr. Yuri Fedotov for
his statement on the drug situation, and our colleague
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for sharing with the Council his national
vision with regard to the country’s situation.
In his report (S/2012/426), the Secretary-General
expresses his views on the evolution of the transition
towards Afghan responsibility and leadership in the
area of security, including the fact that 75 per cent of
the Afghan population is now located in areas where
national forces have taken control.
We welcome the fact that no significant deterioration
in public order has taken place and that there has been
no marked change in security trends in the transition
areas. There are positive signs, but there remain certain
areas of vulnerability that must be overcome — hence
the Secretary-General’s use of the term “cautious
optimism” (S/2012/426, para. 60).
The capacity and professionalism of the Afghan
security and police forces must continue to be
enhanced, including through the institutionalization of
mechanisms for accountability and fighting impunity
while strengthening measures to protect civilians,
ensure respect for human rights, and secure the
command and control structure. The contribution of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan will continue to
be essential to that end.
In this respect, I would like to highlight the
declaration issued by the Heads of State and Government

12-39088

S/PV.6793

of ISAF troop-contributing countries during the
Chicago Summit. In that declaration, they reiterated
their commitment to the security of Afghanistan beyond
2014 and announced that the NATO force will thereafter
cease to be a combat force and will be converted into a
new training, advice and assistance mission.
We must not minimize the potential impact of
the reduction of military personnel and development
on the economic situation in terms of job losses and
even increases in humanitarian needs. Therefore, a
national political consensus must be prioritized and
international cooperation and support in the long term
must be guaranteed. We stress the need to maintain a
broad and balanced approach during the transition that
would take into account not only the security situation,
but also socio-economic development, governance and
the rule of law.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Special Representative must
continue to guide international cooperation and
assistance activities and stress the empowerment and
strengthening of the role of Afghan institutions so
that they are able to shoulder their responsibilities
in priority areas, facilitating the political process
towards peace and reconciliation, security, governance,
economic development and regional cooperation. The
United Nations must continue to play a central role in
the coordination of international efforts with national
authorities in order to ensure their consistency with
the priorities identified by Afghanistan and to avoid
duplication of efforts.
Violence continues to be one of the main factors
affecting the Afghan population.
The progress in the political and reconciliation
process has been affected by numerous security
incidents, including the 48 reported last week, which
resulted in many civilian victims. It is important that
all parties show clearly that they are committed to the
process of dialogue and reconciliation being pursued
by the Afghan Government. We are confident that
the difficulties can be overcome and that the Taliban
will commit themselves to renouncing violence and
terrorism and will accept the Constitution.
Violence is also affecting the humanitarian
situation, and therefore pressure must be brought to
bear on all parties to the conflict to ensure that they
respect humanitarian principles and allow humanitarian
assistance to reach those that need it most. That should

be an essential principle of participation in the process
of reconciliation.
With regard to the global drug problem as it affects
Afghanistan and the region, we listened with interest
to what Mr. Fedotov said with regard to the increase
in financial and technical cooperation between the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Government of Afghanistan, with the primary goal of
strengthening the capacity of national authorities. Those
efforts should go hand-in-hand with the strengthening
of alternative development programmes that provide
viable and sustainable options to those who abandon
the growing and production of illicit drugs.
We would also stress the regional joint initiatives
that have been undertaken and the constructive
and ongoing cooperation of various regional and
extraregional actors in such strategies for applying
the principle of shared responsibility. Colombia once
again expresses its readiness to work bilaterally with
Afghanistan in order to address that and other aspects
of organized crime.
We have high hopes for the Tokyo conference that
will be held on 8 July. There the international community
should renew its commitment to work towards a stable,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. It should
also pass on the message that the country will not be
abandoned in terms of its social and development needs
after the stage of transition and that that partnership will
be maintained during the decade of its transformation.
Although the donors must avoid making unrealistic
demands and acknowledge the limits of the institutional
capacity, there must be mutual commitments that will
enable us to regularly analyse long-term commitments,
including the adoption of measures to fight crime and
corruption.
The Kabul process and the national priority
programmes should continue to be the policies that
govern the commitments and responsibilities of the
process within the framework of the principles of
Afghan ownership and leadership and with respect for
the sovereignty and unity of the country.
Consensus for deepening and expanding the
relationship between Afghanistan and the international
community should contribute to consolidating the State
and its ability to exercise its primary responsibilities
and respond to the needs of the population. There
continue to be numerous challenges to stability and that
is why a sustainable transition requires a State structure

12-3908817

S/PV.6793

that can guarantee governability and economic stability
at the local and national levels. That will include the
creation of jobs and economic opportunities, as well
as the provision of and access to justice. Those are
fundamental elements in order to guarantee a successful
transition in Afghanistan.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, for introducing the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2012/462).
We also thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
for his briefing. We welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan in this debate
and thank him for sharing the views of his delegation.
In assessing the situation in Afghanistan over the
past three months, it is clear that while some progress
has been made, particularly towards strengthening
Afghan leadership and ownership, there have been
setbacks that undermine the progress achieved. We wish
to reiterate that political dialogue and reconciliation are
critical for ensuring sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
Clearly, there can be no military solution to the conflict
there. We therefore welcome the Afghan Government’s
persistent initiatives to engage with the armed
opposition and the continued calls by President Karzai
for the armed opposition to lay down their arms. In that
regard, we welcome the appointment of Salahuddin
Rabbani as Chair of the High Peace Council and his
stated objective of improving the inclusiveness of the
Council.
We were optimistic at attempts to foster peace and
reconciliation by the engagement of all parties. It is
pivotal for the long-term stability of Afghanistan that
all political role-players overcome their differences
and commit to national reconciliation and a political
solution.
We welcome the legal and legislative framework
that is currently being put in place to ensure fair,
transparent and inclusive presidential elections in
2014. While those processes are commendable, those
efforts should not detract attention away from crucial
contemporary challenges.
My delegation is concerned about the incidents of
violence directed against women and the challenges
that women continue to face in the economic, social and
cultural spheres.

18

In spite of the decrease in security incidents
and civilian casualties during the reporting period,
there has been a rise of targeted killings of civilians,
including children, and an ongoing campaign of
violence directed at schools and educators. Those
acts should be condemned. Civilian casualties
resulting from International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) air-strikes, as well as anti-Government use of
improvised explosive devices, remain a concern. We
wish to underline that all the armed elements operating
in Afghanistan have the responsibility for ensuring
that unarmed civilians are protected. A failure by both
State and non-State actors to uphold that responsibility
should not go unpunished. The Secretary-General, in his
ninth report on the protection of civilians (S/2012/376),
underlined the importance of accountability. In that
regard, we are reminded that in its presidential statement
on justice and the rule of law (S/PRST/2012/1), adopted
on 19 January, the Security Council reiterated its call
to all parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
to take all required steps to protect civilians.
We are concerned by recent developments that again
witnessed increased tensions between members of the
local communities and the ISAF. We call on the ISAF to
undertake efforts to mitigate the loss of civilian life and
ensure respect for the cultural and religious heritage of
the population.
Ensuring the long-term protection of civilians
requires building national institutions in the area of
the rule of law, justice and security sector reform. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that the surge target
strength of the Afghan National Police and the Afghan
National Army is ahead of their 2012 targets. We note
the timeline for the international military drawdown
and the commitment for a post-ISAF mission to conduct
training and development of the Afghan security
services, announced at the NATO Chicago Summit.
Security in Afghanistan at a national level should
continue to be reinforced by efforts at a regional level
to consolidate peace, stability and development. We
therefore welcome the political dialogue and cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours during the
reporting period. There has been significant bilateral
contact between Afghanistan and the countries of the
region, which has resulted in strengthened economic,
political, security and socio-cultural links. Those
initiatives were bolstered by the recently held Heart of
Asia ministerial conference in Kabul. The upcoming

12-39088

S/PV.6793

Delhi conference, which will focus on investment, is
also a welcome initiative.
There can be no doubt that there is an inextricable
link between development and security in Afghanistan.
The socio-economic and humanitarian challenges
confronted by Afghanistan are significant. It is therefore
important that, despite the financial situation facing
the international community, we should continue our
support to the Government and people of Afghanistan,
in line with the commitments of the Bonn Conference
in the area of direct financial support, and towards the
country’s long-term economic growth. The upcoming
Tokyo conference will therefore be important in
consolidating global support for Afghanistan’s
development and long-term economic sustainability, and
also in ensuring that the gains registered over the past
10 years are not reversed. We note that Afghanistan will
present a comprehensive action plan on self-reliance on
their national priority programmes at that meeting. That
is commendable and it affirms the Afghan ownership of
its own development.
In conclusion, we wish to stress that national
ownership and leadership is crucial to achieving
political, security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. For its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country’s
move from conflict to stability and prosperity.
South Africa stresses that given the magnitude of
these challenges, a comprehensive strategy incorporating
security, humanitarian efforts, good governance and
socio-economic development is required. In this regard,
we wish to underscore the central role of UNAMA
in supporting the Government of Afghanistan and
coordinating international assistance to the country.
The continued role played by bilateral and multilateral
partners remains indispensable.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan and the vital role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in supporting the Afghan national
authorities. I also thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for his briefing on the impact of drug trafficking
and organized crime on the stability and development
of that country.

The national perspective outlined by Ambassador
Tanin was of very useful to us, and I thank him for his
statement.
Despite the major challenges that persist, the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/462) notes
positive and encouraging developments in the security
transition, human development and the building of
institutional frameworks in Afghanistan. At the political
level, the appointment of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani as
Chair of the High Peace Council, the approval of the
Afghan Government by Parliament, the confirmation
of Mr. Abdul Malek Kamawi to the Supreme Court,
and efforts to strengthen the electoral framework are
all significant and welcome developments.
At the regional level, we note the ongoing dynamic
of cooperation and mutual confidence-building
that was launched at the Istanbul conference and
bolstered by such specific actions as the strategic
partnership agreement between India and Afghanistan;
the framework agreement between Turkmenistan,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and India on the transport of gas;
the establishment of two working groups responsible
for facilitating peace efforts; and, of course, agreed
confidence-building measures. We welcome efforts to
strengthen border security and the fight against drug
trafficking, organized crime and illegal migration.
These developments allow us to hope for a stable,
reconciled and democratic Afghanistan enjoying the
support of the international community.
Despite significant improvements in the security
situation thanks to the launching of the third
transition phase, ongoing targeted assassinations, the
use of improvised explosive devices, and attacks on
educational institutions by armed groups are a source
of concern. In particular, given the trend — stressed
earlier by Mr. Ladsous — of a fall in the number of
incidents and a rise in the number of victims, we hope
that an increase in the ranks of the national and local
police, including by adding women, will help to reduce
the number of innocent victims and lower the number
of internally displaced persons and refugees.
The humanitarian situation, which is a direct
consequence of the security situation, requires our
full attention as it affects an extremely vulnerable
and impoverished population. We regret the constant
rise in the number of displaced persons. The situation
requires the international community and humanitarian
actors working in that country — to whom we pay

12-3908819

S/PV.6793

tribute — to deploy sustained efforts to continue to
mitigate the suffering of the Afghan people.

Geneva in May, will help us to identify the measures
and actions necessary to help Afghan refugees.

Next month will see the holding of the Tokyo
conference on Afghanistan. That meeting gives rise
to great hope, not just for the Afghan people, but for
the entire region. It will offer the opportunity to the
international community as a whole to reaffirm its
multidimensional commitment to bringing peace,
stability and development to Afghanistan in order
to prepare it to stand on its own two feet. We must
ensure that the conference meets the expectations and
requirements of the situation, as well as the aspirations
of the Afghan people.

Despite the acts that I have referred to, which
inspire bitterness and disapproval, we note a glimmer
of hope, in particular in the peace process that has
been launched among political actors. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of President Hamid Karzai
to pursue the peace process. Although that process is
currently experiencing difficulties due to diverging
positions among the parties involved, we retain the
hope that they will return to the negotiating table as
soon as possible.

Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous
and Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their briefings, which have
the Security Council a good overview of the situation.
I also wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement.
On 20 March, the Council held a debate (see
S/PV.6735) highlighting the remaining challenges in
Afghanistan. Three months later, we are compelled to
note that these challenges continue to monopolize our
attention as we attempt to help that country to escape
violence, insecurity and instability. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/462) shows that, generally
speaking, the situation in Afghanistan remains
precarious due to ongoing violence.
The bloody attacks that have taken place do not spare
civilians or the defence and security forces. Political
and religious leaders, too, continue to pay the price for
these intimidation campaigns. The assassination on
13 May of a member of the High Peace Council speaks
volumes about that climate of terror. Togo condemns
such killings and all violence committed against women
and children by anti-Government forces, who do not
hesitate to also attack schools.
We deplore the aerial attacks undertaken by the
coalition forces, which sometimes also claim civilian
victims. These acts of violence naturally exacerbate
the situation of asylum-seekers, refugees, returnees
and internally displaced persons. The humanitarian
operations launched to assist these people face
restrictions or, in some cases, are simply suspended,
whereas — as pointed out by Ms. Valerie Amos on
17 May — these populations require urgent humanitarian
aid and assistance. My country firmly hopes that the
new Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees, set out in

20

Togo therefore encourages them to pursue dialogue
in order to restore peace and security to the country.
We note the announcement made by the Afghan
President that he will not stand as a candidate in the
next presidential election. We urge him to adopt all
measures necessary to a free and transparent election.
In that respect, we welcome the positive role played by
the Afghan Parliament in adopting relevant laws. We
further welcome the support provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies, particularly the
United Nations Development Programme through
its technical assistance to the Independent Electoral
Commission.
The signing of a strategic partnership between
the Presidents of Afghanistan and the United States
on 1 May, the partnership agreements with Germany
and Australia and the announcement that a partnership
had been agreed with China add to our hopes in an
already favourable regional context. Political dialogue
and cooperation with the countries of the region are
undergoing visible changes following the holding of
various meeting, such as the Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan, the fifth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan and the sixth trilateral
meeting between Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United
States. We welcome the ongoing efforts being made
by Afghanistan’s friends, alongside international
organizations, to bring peace to the country.
Now that international forces have announced their
final withdrawal for the end of 2014, we must call on
Afghan authorities, the country’s friends, States of
the region and development and financial institutions
to step up their cooperation in order to overcome
the numerous obstacles that continue to hamper
Afghanistan’s development.

12-39088

S/PV.6793

We have great hopes for the conference to be held
in Tokyo on 8 July, which we believe will produce
significant commitments with regard to financing the
projects that will be presented at the meeting.
We once again reiterate our support to UNAMA
and all of the United Nations agencies and programmes
that, under very difficult conditions, continue to work to
help bring peace, security and stability to Afghanistan.
Mr.
Mehdiyev
(Azerbaijan):
I
thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Executive
Director Fedotov for their briefings today. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/462) on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security. I would also like
to thank our colleague Ambassador Tanin for his
statement.
The adoption of resolution 2041 (2012) by the
Security Council in March and the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan mandate were a clear indication of the
United Nations long-term commitment to the security,
stability and prosperity of Afghanistan. The commitment
of the international community to that goal was further
solidified by the outcomes of series of international
events, among which of particular significance was the
Chicago summit of the Government of Afghanistan and
the contributing nations of the International Security
Assistance Force. The declaration on Afghanistan
adopted at the summit marked an important milestone,
reconfirming the continuation of close and robust
international partnership with Afghanistan beyond the
end of the transition period.
The Government of Afghanistan continues to make
great progress towards the stabilization and development
of the country. It is of paramount importance to keep
the steady pace of progress attained so far, which
requires an equal level of continued determination
from both Afghanistan and its international partners.
The conclusion of landmark strategic partnership
agreements between Afghanistan and its bilateral
partners will further reinforce individual commitments
towards a stable, secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
We welcome the positive developments in the
political realm in Afghanistan. The appointment of a
new head of the High Peace Council will undoubtedly
reinvigorate the work of that important body and
will further contribute to taking forward a broad and
inclusive peace process at the central and local levels. An

inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process,
in accordance with the Constitution of Afghanistan
and with the support of the international community,
is an essential element of overall stabilization and an
absolute prerequisite for achieving durable peace in the
country.
Although the overall security situation in the
country remains precarious — with continued armed
clashes, assassinations and suicide attacks by insurgents,
which pose a serious threat to the overall peace and
stabilization effort in Afghanistan — we nevertheless
observe a decrease in a number of security incidents
during the reporting period. Meanwhile, we also take
positive note of the general progress and tranquillity
in the areas undergoing the process of transition to full
Afghan security responsibility.
Afghanistan’s enhanced political dialogue and
cooperation with its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a broad spectrum of issues
based on a common vision and mutual confidence is
an imperative for the peaceful and stable future of the
country and the region. We welcome Afghanistan’s
and its regional partners’ continuous efforts and
achievements in that regard.
That being said, we stress the particular
importance of the decisions of the follow-up Heart
of Asia ministerial conference held in Kabul on
14 June — on the establishment of annual high-level
political consultations between Afghanistan and its
near and extended neighbours concerning all issues of
common interest, as well as on the implementation of
confidence-building measures covering the areas of
political and security and economic cooperation.
As the transition period continues towards the
eventual withdrawal of international military forces
and the assumption of overall security responsibility
by Afghan authorities by the end of 2014, the scope
and gravity of the security and development tasks that
the Government of Afghanistan has to deal with are
growing, and the need for the international community’s
enhanced support to the Government of Afghanistan is
becoming even more vital.
Azerbaijan has for many years actively contributed
to the international efforts in Afghanistan. My country
joined ISAF almost at its beginning and has steadily
increased its military contribution to it. We believe
that capacity-building for Afghan institutions must
remain at the heart of international assistance in order

12-3908821

S/PV.6793

to enable the Government of Afghanistan to exercise its
sovereign authority in all its functions. At present, we
are expanding our engagement in non-military spheres
by contributing to the development of capacity-building
in Afghanistan. We recently contributed €1 million to
Afghanistan’s National Army Foundation as part of
our non-military engagement, and we have pledged
additional financial support.
Azerbaijan has also decided to participate in the
confidence-building measures on counter-terrorism,
counter-narcotics, chambers of commerce, commercial
opportunities, regional infrastructure and education. In
addition, we have expressed our willingness to lead the
implementation of the confidence-building measures
on counter-narcotics and on regional infrastructure.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country’s
commitment to Afghanistan’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity, and I reassure the Council of my
Government’s determination to remain an active
contributor to collective efforts in Afghanistan.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Fedotov
for their comprehensive briefings. We look forward to
renewing the tradition of personal presentations by
the heads of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and meetings of the Security Council. We
reaffirm our support for the work of Mr. Jan Kubiš. We
are also grateful to Ambassador Tanin for his interesting
briefing.
Everything we have heard today serves to
confirm that it is impossible to tackle the problems in
Afghanistan solely with military means. We need to
formulate a strategy of sustainable development for the
country for the post-2014 period, as well as establish
measures and international community for long-term
stabilization, including in the socio-economic sphere.
We look forward to substantive discussions on national
and regional development programmes for Afghanistan
during the Tokyo conference.
Russia is willing to participate in the rebuilding of
the Salang tunnel and the nitrogen fertilizer factory and
power plant in Mazar-e-Sharif, as well to build several
hydro-power stations. Together with our Afghan
partners, we have begun to modernize the Kabul
house-building factory. One of the priority areas for
our cooperation is to revive and develop Afghanistan’s
minerals and raw materials base. We believe that good
examples of regional cooperation could include the

22

project to create a system of CASA-1000 substations.
Russia, without waiting for other potential partners to
come forward, has announced its willingness to invest
$500 million in that regard. We are also willing to help
with the building of the TAPI pipeline.
Regardless of the form national reconciliation
takes, a leading role must be played by the Afghans
themselves. Dialogue with the armed opposition
should be built upon the three well-known principles.
The insurgents must renounce violence, recognize the
Constitution and sever ties with Al-Qaida. We must not
be tempted to weaken those principles in order to achieve
dialogue. That would become counter-productive. We
must effectively support the Security Council sanctions
regime as a key counter-terrorism instrument.
We are concerned by the idea of replacing ISAF
with another military presence in Afghanistan and in
neighbouring States, as that could lead to additional
instability. Any residual military presence should not
counter the interests of Afghanistan’s neighbours and
other countries in the region. Full clarity is necessary
in the possible planning of a new NATO operation
in Afghanistan, including its mandate, strength and
mission. Such an operation should be sanctioned by the
Security Council, however, only after the ISAF mission
reports to the Security Council on the implementation
of its mandate. In that context, we view the participation
of NATO representatives at our meeting today as
NATO’s recognition of that necessity.
Yet, we are forced to note that the reports we have
received from Brussels tend to embellish the general
picture. In order to understand what is necessary and
what remains to be done in order to rectify the situation,
we need an objective analysis — 2014 is almost upon
us.
One of the most pressing problems is the
illegal production, trade and trafficking of drugs in
Afghanistan, which is a threat to international peace
and stability. According to the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), opiate production
in the country in 2011 soared by 61 per cent and the
surface area of poppy fields expanded by 7 per cent.
In that respect, a top priority — above all for the
Afghan Government but also for the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) — is to destroy the
poppy fields and infrastructure for the production of
drugs. We are not convinced by the arguments against
the practice of chemical destruction of drug crops,

12-39088

S/PV.6793

which has been tried and tested in other parts of the
world. Excessive lenience in combating the drug threat
will not help to win the hearts and minds of ordinary
Afghans, but will only win the hearts and minds of the
drug barons who exploit them.
We must make full use of the experience of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) in
intercepting drug trafficking and the related financing
sources. Our proposal to forge counter-drug interaction
between the CSTO and ISAF remains on the table. I
recently met here in New York with a senior NATO
official and was pleased to hear that NATO was open to
pragmatic cooperation with the CSTO on that specific
matter. We look forward to an official, positive response
from NATO.
A good example of collective work was the
16 February ministerial conference in Vienna of the
partners of the Paris Pact initiative on combating illicit
trafficking in Afghan opiates. It guaranteed progressive
development of the Paris-Moscow process, which is
helping to shape a broad international coalition against
the Afghan drug threat.
For our part, we are ready to continue assisting our
Afghan friends in combating illicit drug trafficking,
training personnel and equipping the counter-drug
units, on a bilateral basis as well as through the United
Nations and regional formats.
We see great potential in the implementation of
the training programme for Afghan drug police at the
all-Russian advanced training centre in Domodedovo. It
was launched as part of a UNODC regional programme
for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries based
on concerns that despite the efforts of the Afghan
authorities, supported by a sizeable foreign military
contingent, extremists continued to actively operate
throughout the country, gaining ground in regions
where security responsibilities had been handed over
to the Afghans.
In particular, we are concerned by the situation in
northern Afghanistan, where, following counter-terrorist
operations, terrorists are being flushed out, creating a
direct threat to the security of our Central Asian partners
from the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Instability in Afghanistan is significantly fuelled
by the increasingly frequent cases of desecration and
blatant war crimes committed by foreign troops, as well
as cases of erroneous air strikes that lead to numerous

civilian victims. We need to step up our efforts to
prevent such incidents.
The drawdown of foreign troops should be offset
by increasing the combat readiness of the Afghan army
and police until they are in a position to fully guarantee
their country’s security. It would be unwise to establish
an artificial timeline for a pull-out.
In such conditions, what is particularly relevant is
the regional dimension of interaction when it comes to
Afghanistan. We support the announcement on 14 June
during the Kabul conference, of a channel for regional
cooperation, including through the implementation of
confidence-building measures.
The socio-economic recovery of Afghanistan is
a top priority for us in that respect in the context of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and
the CSTO. We welcome the adoption, at the summit of
SCO heads of State and Government held in Beijing
on 6 and 7 June, of the decision to give Afghanistan
observer status in the organization, which also
provides it an opportunity to join in the work of the
regional counter-terrorism structures and the practical
implementation of the SCO counter-drugs strategy for
2011-2016.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I wish to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Mr. Yuri
Fedotov and Ambassador Tanin for their presentations.
I align myself with the statement to be made later
on by the observer of the European Union.
The NATO Summit that was just held this past
month in Chicago set a timetable for the development
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
as well as objectives for a professional, credible and
sustainable Afghan security force. It endorsed the
principle of creating a new NATO mission that will,
starting 2015, be mandated to provide training, advice
and assistance to the Afghan armed forces. I am pleased
that Mr. Evans, of the NATO International Secretariat,
will present his results to the Council today.
The regional process launched in Istanbul last
November has been boosted by the ministerial
meeting on 14 June in Kabul. At that time, France
stated its interest in participating in the development
of confidence-building measures aimed at the fight
against drugs and terrorism as well as natural disaster
mitigation. We are also ready to participate in a new
meeting on the margins of the General Assembly in

12-3908823

S/PV.6793

New York, if the Afghan authorities believe that will be
useful. Regional cooperation remains one of the keys
to Afghanistan’s future and, as a result, a priority for
us all.
We thank Mr. Kubiš for his commitment in
preparing the economic conference to be held on 8 July
in Tokyo. The adoption of five new national priority
programmes will help to advance the formulation of
Afghan priorities. We hope that the conference will
also define mutual commitments for the transformation
decade, in particular with respect to the need for the
Afghans to define a timetable and modalities for the
next national elections. We hope that an agreement can
be reached in establishing a cross-cutting anti-drug
trafficking mechanism, which is one of the main
challenges for Afghanistan, its neighbours and the
international community as a whole.
France’s actions are based on the framework defined
by NATO in Lisbon and Chicago. Surobi and Kapisa,
where our troops are deployed, form part of the second
and third tranches of the transition process, which is
now a reality for 75 per cent of the Afghans.
We will progressively scale down our military
presence. Our combat mission will conclude at the end
of the year, leaving on the front line the third brigade of
the Afghan army, which has already shown its combat
capabilities.
We will continue to help train the Afghan police
and army as part of ISAF, until 2014. In addition, our
actions will be based on the Treaty of Friendship and
Cooperation signed by the President of France and
President Karzai in Paris on 27 January. The 20122016 action plan that is part of that agreement will be
given substance by a significant increase in our civilian
engagement in the areas of health care, education,
agriculture, cultural exchange, mining resources
and infrastructure. Naturally, we are committed to
harmonizing such action with the priorities of the
Afghan Government.
In Chicago, the Secretary-General reaffirmed
that the United Nations would continue to support
the Afghan Government. The United Nations will
therefore play an important role in the context of the
transition. The United Nations sanctions regime must
continue to be used as a confidence-building measure
in intra-Afghan reconciliation, rewarding those who
have made the choice of peace and punishing those who
want to pursue the path of violence.

24

We will consider, in that respect, requests for
de-listing, listing and exemptions conveyed to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) by the Afghan Government. It is important,
however, for the Government to take ownership of that
instrument by proposing new entities for listing. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will be increasingly at the heart of the efforts of the
international community as it develops and moves
towards a civilian-supported presence.
France endorses the three poles recently identified
by the Secretariat as being at the heart of the Mission’s
work beyond 2014: political good offices; human rights,
particularly the rights of women; and consistency of
international aid. Proper cooperation with the funds
and programmes remains key in terms of electoral
reform, countering drug trafficking, supporting the
Afghan police, the reintegration of insurgents and aid to
refugees. On all these fronts, we are pleased to continue
working with the United Nations as the central actor for
the future of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and
the Executive Director of United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Fedotov, for their
briefings. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.
Thanks to the concerted efforts of the Government
and people of Afghanistan, and with the support of
the international community, recently there has been
positive progress in the situation in Afghanistan.
China supports continued adherence to the principle of
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned activities in promoting
the Kabul process so as to achieve lasting peace,
stability and development.
I wish to stress the following points. First, China
supports the reconciliation and reintegration process
led by the Afghan Government and welcomes the
appointment of the new Chair, Mr. Rabbani, to the
High Peace Council. We hope that the relevant parties
in Afghanistan will remain committed to an inclusive
political dialogue and peace process so as to achieve
national reconciliation. It is of vital importance that the
next general election in Afghanistan be held smoothly.
China welcomes the preparation carried out by the
Afghan Government in that regard.

12-39088

S/PV.6793

Secondly, China notes the recent decline in the
number of security incidents in Afghanistan and the
increased response capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces. We welcome the fact that the handover
of security responsibilities from the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to the Afghan
National Security Forces has entered the third tranche.
At the same time, we hope that, in implementing the
drawdown plans, the relevant parties will take into full
consideration the need to maintain security and stability
in Afghanistan, and that the drawdown will be carried
out in a smooth and orderly manner.
Thirdly, we have witnessed incidents recently that
have claimed heavy civilian casualties. We note that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has expressed its concern about the civilian
casualties caused by air strikes. All parties to armed
conflict should abide by international humanitarian
law and relevant international law and fulfil their
obligations to protect civilians.
Fourthly, narcotics are toxic to the reconstruction
and peace process in Afghanistan. China appreciates
the efforts of the Afghan Government in combating
illicit drugs and welcomes the continued cooperation
between UNODC and the Afghan authorities in support
of the implementation of the country’s national drug
control plan.
Fifthly, the reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan require the continued attention and
support of the international community. The potential
negative impact of the transition period on the
country’s economic and social development deserves
our keen attention. China hopes that the recent spate of
international conferences on Afghanistan will help to
encourage the international community to make good
on its commitments and to develop a long-term strategy
to support Afghanistan.
Last but not least, China commends the United
Nations for its role in facilitating the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan, and supports UNAMA’s
central coordinating role in facilitating the international
community’s assistance to the peaceful reconstruction
of Afghanistan. We hope that UNAMA will continue
to strengthen its communication, coordination and
cooperation with the Afghan authority.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Prior to giving the floor to the representatives of
non-Council members, I wish to request that they limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Executive
Director Fedotov and our close colleague, Ambassador
Tanin.
The year 2012 is proving, obviously, to be a major
milestone for Afghanistan. The Chicago Summit’s
recommitment to Afghanistan was an unmistakable
statement to the insurgency. The commitments to
resourcing the Afghan National Security Forces
(ANSF) after 2014 were significant, as was the
agreement that NATO would lead a mission to train,
advise and assist the ANSF, including Afghan special
forces. Australia itself will contribute $100 million
per year towards ANSF sustainability and provide
training to the ANSF after 2014. We will consider a
special forces contribution, with the agreement of the
Afghan Government and under the right mandate. To
underpin this long-term commitment, Afghan President
Karzai and Australian Prime Minister Gillard signed a
comprehensive long-term partnership in Chicago.
As the Secretary-General has highlighted, the
insurgency continues to threaten peace and stability,
but its momentum has been severely degraded and
security conditions remain good in areas that have
transitioned thus far. But as we know, to ensure security
gains are properly sustained, we need to redouble our
efforts to support Afghanistan’s economic growth and
development.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for next
month’s Tokyo conference to deliver a very clear
message that Afghanistan will not be abandoned in its
social and development needs. We must identify those
needs and the resources required and available to meet
them. Clear financial commitments from international
partners will be needed. To this end, Australia has
committed to increasing its own development assistance
from $165 million to $250 million per year.
As we know, the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
become even more important as the transition process
advances. Therefore, the cuts to UNAMA’s budget,
foreshadowed by the Secretary-General, will require

12-3908825

S/PV.6793

some hard, dexterous and creative reprioritization of
UNAMA’s efforts, but its core mission to support and
underpin successful, enduring transition in Afghanistan
must be preserved. We encourage UNAMA to consult
closely with international partners on arrangements for
its ongoing presence.
Successful presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2014 and 2015 are, of course, indispensable for future
stability in Afghanistan. But clarity about the future
political process is needed quickly to ensure that the
necessary planning and preparations can begin. We
welcome the assurance in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/462) that the United Nations will remain an
active partner in coordinating international assistance
in the next round of elections, and we look forward to
ongoing close cooperation among UNAMA, the Afghan
authorities and the international community, including
ourselves, in support of credible and inclusive electoral
processes.
Reconciliation and reintegration have a long way
to go, but the insurgents need to understand that there
is no alternative to them. UNAMA’s own support for
peace and reconciliation efforts remains important.
Reconciliation is obviously a complex and protracted
process, but we know that lasting stability in Afghanistan
can be achieved only through dialogue and Afghan-led
processes of reconciliation and reintegration.
We commend the Secretary-General for highlighting
the important role that women can and should play
in shaping positive outcomes. Gender issues remain
decisive for a successful Afghanistan, and we expect
that they will be central to much of the discussion at the
Tokyo conference.
In concluding, as we are all aware, Afghanistan will
become stable only if a secure external environment
is achieved. The Heart of Asia process, including the
recent Kabul ministerial conference, is foundational to
achieving this goal, and we commend the leadership of
Turkey in particular in this process.
The implementation of the confidence-building
measures from the Kabul ministerial conference will
be a significant next step. Australia has committed to
supporting the Heart of Asia countries in implementing
such measures for education and commercial
opportunities. We also thank Kazakhstan for its offer
to host the next ministerial meeting in the first half of
2013.

26

To conclude, my own Government is determined
to continue working with the Afghan Government
and people, and our other partners in the international
community, in support of a goal that, as we have all said
and know, is in everybody’s interests — a secure and
stable Afghanistan whose Government, institutions and
economy are on an irreversible path to long-term and
sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I thank Under­
Secretary-General Ladsous and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Fedotov, for their comprehensive and informative
briefings. I would also like to express my respect and
gratitude to all the men and women of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
who have demonstrated such deep commitment to this
difficult mission. And I thank Ambassador Tanin for
his statement.
We applaud the recent positive developments in
the area of security in Afghanistan, such as the launch
of the third tranche of transition, and we are pleased
with the progress of the two initial rounds, which will
bring 75 per cent of the country’s population into the
process. We are also pleased that the number of former
anti-Government personnel enrolled in the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme has grown to
4,641, according to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/462). Japan also welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani as the new Chair of the High
Peace Council.
Unfortunately, we have also witnessed several
shocking incidents over the last quarter, such as the
large-scale insurgent attack on 15 April, which affected
several Government institutions and foreign missions,
including the Japanese embassy, and the assassination
of senior High Peace Council member Mawlawi Arsala
Rahmani on 13 May. While such deplorable incidents
show that grave security challenges remain, they have
also been witness to the ability of the Afghan National
Security Forces and have strengthened our resolve to
stop the cycle of violence and ensure that such tragedies
never occur again.
With that transition process and security situation
in mind, our most predominant and demanding task is
proving to the international community that Afghanistan
will be stable and self-reliant in the future, particularly

12-39088

S/PV.6793

beyond 2015. In order to achieve this, it is incumbent on
both Afghanistan and its international partners to tackle
the related challenges of advancing both security and
sustainable development in the country. In that regard,
we view this year’s series of key high-level meetings,
in particular the NATO Summit on security held in
Chicago in May, the ministerial conference on regional
cooperation held in Kabul in June, and the Tokyo
conference on sustainable economic development, to
be held in July, as momentous factors in the shaping of
Afghanistan’s future.
The NATO Summit in Chicago, together with
the new strategic partnership agreement between
Afghanistan and the United States, made important
steps forward in terms of ensuring the constancy and
predictability of the security situation in the country.
Japan is also determined to continue its assistance to
the Afghan National Police so as to improve it both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Along with improving
its security situation, it is essential for Afghanistan to
work with its neighbours in order to achieve lasting
stability and prosperity. Japan therefore supports the
Istanbul process, launched in November, and recognizes
the outcome of the Kabul ministerial conference held
on 14 June.
Japan welcomes Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
attendance at the Tokyo conference as a sign of the
consistent commitment of the United Nations to
Afghanistan’s stability and sustainable development.
Building on the outcomes of the NATO Summit
and the Kabul ministerial conference on regional
cooperation, the Tokyo conference on Afghanistan on
8 July will focus on a sustainable development strategy
for Afghanistan, and will discuss the coordination
of international economic assistance, the Afghan
Government’s commitment to improving governance,
and a follow-up mechanism. We will aim to reaffirm
the historic partnership between the international
community and the Government of Afghanistan, from
transition to the transformation decade of 2015-2024,
based on the concept of mutual accountability.
That notion of mutual accountability is at the
very heart of our partnership. The Government seeks
long-term assistance from the international community
to enable it to become self-reliant in the future. In order
to achieve such self-reliance, the Government must
achieve a wide range of reforms in governance that will
assure the international community that its assistance
will be utilized in an appropriate and transparent way.

The necessary reforms are in a variety of fields;
they include holding free and fair elections, combating
corruption, establishing the rule of law and achieving
better public financial management. In that regard, we
would like to express our gratitude for the leading role
that UNAMA has taken in this challenging area, as
well as its efforts as a coordinator between the Afghan
Government and international donors.
Japan has also actively supported the Government
in these areas through its contributions to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other
United Nations agencies’ country programmes.
Furthermore, we recently made the decision to
contribute an additional $8.6 million to the second phase
of the UNDP technical assistance project, Enhancing
Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow, aimed at
enhancing the functions of the Independent Election
Commission regarding the presidential election of 2014,
which will be critically important to the Government’s
legitimacy.
In the same spirit, Japan is ready to continue its
assistance to Afghanistan in a responsible manner and
encourages international partners to continue to deliver
predictable financial support for the country. I would
like to reiterate once again that the concept of mutual
accountability is the key to the future prosperity of
Afghanistan, based on a firm and lasting partnership
with the international community.
With the drawdown of international troops
bringing civilian agencies increasingly to the fore,
UNAMA’s leadership and coordination of efforts to
achieve both sustainable peace and reconciliation and
economic and social development in Afghanistan will
only grow in importance. We would like to once again
express our commitment to supporting UNAMA’s
efforts, and to pledge to work closely with the mission,
the Government and other international partners for
Afghanistan’s lasting stability and development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic

12-3908827

S/PV.6793

Area; as well as Ukraine and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.
Like others, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2012/462) and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
for his important briefing. I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and Ambassador Tanin for their statements.
It is important that the international community
take a holistic view of its post-2014 engagement in
Afghanistan, given the correlation between security
and long-term development. The recent conferences
held in Chicago and Kabul have been instrumental in
that regard. They have refined and further developed
the relationship between the international community
and the Afghan Government. In the same vein, the
upcoming Tokyo conference should focus on reviewing
and renewing mutual commitments by the international
community and the Afghan Government. I will briefly
touch on the topics addressed at both conferences and
then look ahead to Tokyo.
The NATO Summit in Chicago laid out plans for
sustaining and developing the Afghan National Security
Forces. At that Summit, the European Union stressed the
importance of the Afghan National Police refocusing on
civilian policing and on supporting the rule of law. Fair
and impartial policing is essential if justice and human
rights, especially those of women and children, are to
be promoted. We therefore announce that the European
Union is happy to increase its police funding by 20 per
cent from the EU budget over the period 2011-2013, and
also that the EU plans to make an enhanced contribution
post-2014.
The recent ministerial conference in Kabul
highlighted the important role that the countries of
the region must play in supporting conflict resolution,
better security and development in Afghanistan. We
therefore welcome the agreement reached in Kabul
on confidence-building measures to further regional
cooperation.
Acknowledging that regional initiatives must be
regionally owned and led, the EU stands ready to support
such measures. The European Union has considerable
experience and knowledge on how to advance regional
cooperation.
The upcoming Tokyo conference will provide an
excellent opportunity for the Afghan Government

28

to set out its development strategy for the country.
The European Union is ready to make an enhanced
contribution to support for Afghanistan. However,
that must be in the context of the Afghan Government
fulfilling the commitments of the Kabul and Bonn
conferences, as well as those in the mutual accountability
framework, to be agreed in Tokyo.
Inter alia, that means, first of all, the peaceful transfer
of power in 2014 as a result of inclusive, credible and
transparent presidential and parliamentary elections.
Secondly, further progress on the management of public
finances — in particular the implementation of the
International Monetary Fund recommendations — is
required. Thirdly, domestic revenue collection needs
to be increased through the development of more
efficient, transparent and accountable customs and
tax systems. Fourthly, guaranteed respect for human
rights, in particular of women and children, including
the support of an independent and active civil society,
must be ensured. Fifthly, there must be reform of the
justice sector to promote the rule of law.
Without tangible progress in those five areas, it will
be difficult for donors to maintain their support to the
Government of Afghanistan. Donors also need to make
good on their commitments. The European Union will
press for a better coordination of donor support and a
better alignment between the Afghan Government and
donors on priorities. We will also actively promote a
better use of international mechanisms, all, of course, in
close coordination with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Finally, it is essential that all resources made
available be transparently and accountably managed.
With regard to the latter, we are pleased to note that
the United Nations Development Programme reacted
promptly to the alleged accusations of mismanagement
at the Law and Order Trust Fund by launching a
full investigation. We await the conclusions of that
investigation, the outcome of which will be important
as regards our envisaged financial support for the
Afghan National Police. Let me underline that that is
an issue that we take very seriously.
In conclusion, the outcomes of the conferences will
structure the international long-term engagement in
Afghanistan beyond the end of the transition through
the transformation decade, as agreed to in Bonn
last year. As we move beyond transition, the United
Nations has an essential role to play. UNAMA should

12-39088

S/PV.6793

have the resources and the political support needed to
assume that role. Its work will be of key importance in
supporting the preparations for the upcoming elections,
in monitoring the human rights and humanitarian
situation, and in making such coordination bodies as
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board work
more effectively.
The aim of our overall strategy in Afghanistan
remains clear: to support Afghanistan on its path
towards becoming a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous society.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous
for his comprehensive briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2012/462). I would also like to thank the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director
Yuri Fedotov for his briefing and Ambassador Tanin for
his insightful statement.
Afghanistan has come a long way. We have seen
with satisfaction the Afghan National Security Forces
growing stronger to assume the security responsibility
for almost 75 per cent of the population. The Afghan
National Security Forces have improved in terms of
capacity and professionalism. They have proved able
to maintain security in those areas where they have
assumed the lead. By mid-2013, they will be providing the
lead for security across the country. That will mark the
shift of the primary focus of the International Security
Assistance Force from combat operations to training,
advising and assisting. That clearly demonstrates that
Afghanistan is on its way to sustainable self-reliance
in the security sector. In Chicago, we gave the Afghan
people the clear message of commitment that we would
stand by them as they took the full lead for their security.
In our shared determination for a stable and
secure Afghanistan, we have relentlessly supported the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process. We therefore welcome the appointment of
Mr. Rabbani as Chair of the High Peace Council, and
we strongly support his emphasis on a broad-based and
inclusive peace process at the central and local levels. We
are confident that, under his able leadership, the High
Peace Council will successfully lead a comprehensive
and genuinely inclusive peace process.

There are many dimensions of our cooperation
in Afghanistan that we could discuss. Indeed, today,
many speakers touched upon various issues. However,
I would like to limit my intervention to the regional
dimension of our joint endeavours.
Since last November, Afghanistan’s immediate and
more distant regional partners have embarked upon
positive and constructive regional cooperation, with
a view to ensuring a secure, prosperous and peaceful
Afghanistan. Combined Afghan leadership and regional
ownership are key drivers of the Istanbul process. We
are indeed encouraged by our region’s commitment to
engaging in sincere and results-oriented cooperation
for a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Two weeks ago, the Kabul ministerial conference
on the Istanbul process was a clear testimony to our
collective resolution in that regard. Our region is
bound in its destiny. We will enjoy peace, security and
prosperity only if Afghanistan, which plays a crucial
role as the land bridge in the heart of Asia, enjoys peace
and stability. As such, we believe that the positive
energy mobilized through the Istanbul process will
enhance existing efforts for a stable and prosperous
region.
The Istanbul process has three main elements
that we believe are important to emphasize. The first
element is to enhance political dialogue among the
region. Recognizing that regular political consultations
at a high level is the most effective way of ensuring
continuous dialogue, the Istanbul process participants
committed themselves to meeting once a year for
political consultations at the ministerial level. Such
political momentum will be further enhanced through
regular meetings of our senior officials, as well as our
Kabul-based representatives.
The second element is to implement the
confidence-building measures. Seven such measures,
which are prioritized on common challenges such
as disasters, terrorism, illicit drugs, impediments
to trade and economic growth, and illiteracy, will
be incrementally implemented by the participant
countries. Within that framework, we are encouraged
that a meeting will be held in New Delhi tomorrow to
bring together regional and international investors in
Afghanistan. That will be an opportunity for investors
in all sectors to exchange views on Afghanistan’s
economic potential.

12-3908829

S/PV.6793

The third element is to build synergy among
regional organizations. From the very beginning of
the Istanbul process, we made clear our keen interest
in developing greater coherence and in creating a
better synergy with the existing regional cooperation
processes pertaining to Afghanistan. In that respect,
we are pleased that a significant number of those
organizations were represented at the highest level
in Kabul. We will continue to collaborate with them
within that framework.
We would also like to commend the significant and
constructive support and contribution that the United
Nations has provided to the Istanbul process. Together,
we have demonstrated our firm resolve for a successful
future in Afghanistan.
Afghans have a clear vision for their future — a
sovereign, secure and peaceful State that is economically
self-sufficient. That vision is also very much related to
Afghanistan’s crucial role and regional and historical
position in promoting connectivity and cooperation
across its wider region. As Afghanistan’s regional and
international partners, we should continue to support
Afghans in achieving their vision. To that end, Afghan
ownership and leadership will be at the centre of our
collective efforts.
Looking ahead, the upcoming Tokyo conference,
which will be graciously hosted by Japan, will be an
important opportunity for the Afghan Government to
share its development strategy beyond the transition
period. In Tokyo, the international community should
reaffirm its continued support to Afghanistan’s
sustainable economic development.
Lastly, I would like to acknowledge our strong
support for the significant role played by the United
Nations in Afghanistan. The United Nations should
continue to be a strong partner for Afghanistan in the
Afghan-led peace and transition processes. I would like
to take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jan
Kubiš and his team for their dedicated efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank Under­
Secretary-General Ladsous and Ambassadors Tanin
and Fedotov for their briefings.
Although we welcome recent developments in
Afghanistan, which give room for cautious optimism,

30

we remain mindful that it continues to face many
serious challenges. For example, while there is an
encouraging trend of fewer civilian casualties overall,
we are particularly concerned by the increasing trend
towards deliberately targeting civilians.
Like others, we applaud the outcomes of last
month’s NATO-International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) Summit in Chicago, which highlighted the clear
progress and reconfirmed the commitment of ISAF
contributors to the transition strategy and to the future
of Afghanistan. New Zealand continues to play its part.
We will provide trainers to the Afghan National Army
Officer Academy from 2013 and contribute financial
support for the Afghan National Security Forces from
2015, targeted at rule-of-law initiatives in Bamyan
province. We will also provide ongoing development
assistance to Afghanistan, focused especially on
Bamyan.
The work to train and sustain the Afghan National
Security Forces is vital. We are pleased that we will
be able to continue contributing to that endeavour
after the end of the ISAF mission. In that regard, we
especially support the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, as it highlights the importance
of a distinct civilian role for the police. We welcome the
Ministry of Interior’s national police plan, prioritizing
community-based policing, strengthening crime
detection and prevention, safeguarding human rights
and combating violence against women and children.
Recent experiences in Bamyan suggest that this work
will be vital to ensuring local populations develop
the necessary trust and respect for their police force.
We also take this opportunity to recognize the United
Nations important work in advocating for accountability
mechanisms within the Afghan security forces.
The forthcoming Tokyo conference will
provide — as many others have noted — another
opportunity for the international community to make
different kinds of commitments to Afghanistan’s
long-term sustainability. Over the past decade,
the international community has invested much in
Afghanistan. We now hope that, at Tokyo, Afghanistan
itself will be able to make its own commitments to
ensuring that the international community can continue
to invest in the country’s future.
We are pleased that Bamyan is on track to complete
transition later this year. There will nonetheless
continue to be a role for the New Zealand provincial

12-39088

S/PV.6793

reconstruction team in the months following the
transition. That role will include the final stages of
mentoring the provincial quick reaction force, securing
the substantive completion of development projects, and
supporting local authorities as they lead the province
into its post-transition future.
The New Zealand provincial reconstruction teams
will then complete its work in Bamyan and withdraw
before the end of 2013, thus modeling the full life
cycle of the transition process, while also fulfilling
our commitment to the people of Bamyan. We are,
however, keenly aware that the many serious challenges
still facing Afghanistan must not be understated or
underplayed. We therefore confirm our commitment to
continuing to work with Afghanistan, its international
partners and the United Nations in meeting these
challenges together.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Evans.
Mr. Evans: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
present a few remarks on the situation in Afghanistan
and prospects for the future from the perspective of
NATO.
The first point I wish to make is that the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) is
operating under Security Council authorization and to
fulfil United Nations purposes. NATO’s decisions in
relation to ISAF are based on that fundamental principle.
In NATO’s quarterly reports to the Security Council, the
latest of which was submitted by the NATO Secretary
General on 31 May, we set out in detail the issues of
interest to the Security Council. Our conclusions on
the security situation are consistent with those of the
United Nations. There has been a marked reduction
in the number of security incidents in the first half of
this year, compared to 2011, and the Afghan National
Security Forces have made substantial progress in
terms of numbers and quality. ISAF has integrated
into its structures and operations the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and taken measures on the protection of
children from the damaging effects of armed conflict.
Last month, on 21 May, the NATO Summit in
Chicago dedicated a full session to Afghanistan. It was
attended by all 50 contributors to the ISAF mission,
President Karzai, President Zardari and representatives
of Russia, Central Asian States and Japan. The United

Nations Secretary-General participated, as did the
European Union. The presence of States involved in
regional processes was a sign of their significance
not only to the ISAF operation but also to the broader
international effort to stabilize Afghanistan.
Allow me to sum up the key points of the Chicago
summit. First, we assessed progress on the transition
of security to Afghan responsibility. With the third
tranche of transition starting now in Afghanistan,
Afghan soldiers and police will be taking the lead for
the security of 75 per cent of the population within the
next few months. The Afghan National Security Forces
are on schedule to take full responsibility for security
by the end of 2014, and that is when we will complete
our ISAF mission.
The Summit also looked beyond the end of the ISAF
mission. At the international conference on Afghanistan
in Bonn in December 2011, the international community
recognized that Afghanistan would continue to need
strong support and help after 2014. Against that
background, at Chicago, NATO, along with our ISAF
partners, confirmed that we will see our ISAF mission
through and that we will then begin a new mission after
2014 to train, advise and assist the Afghan security
forces. The Afghan Government reaffirmed NATO’s
crucial role beyond 2014 and invited NATO to continue
its support.
Finally, Chicago provided the opportunity for NATO
allies and partners to confirm their broader support
to Afghanistan and assistance to the Afghan National
Security Forces after 2014. Chicago was not a pledging
conference, but a number of allies and partners came
forward with significant commitments of financial
support both before and at the summit. Financing the
Afghan national security forces is not a responsibility
for NATO members and ISAF contributors alone.
Nevertheless, Chicago added significant momentum to
international efforts to secure the necessary financial
support for the Afghan National Security Forces after
the ISAF mission has ended.
The Afghan Government was closely consulted in
the preparation of the Summit. President Karzai restated
in Chicago the commitment of the Afghan authorities
to face up to the challenges of good governance and
promote human rights. As noted in the Chicago joint
declaration issued with the Government of Afghanistan,
continued progress on governance and human rights

12-3908831

S/PV.6793

would encourage ISAF contributors to further provide
their support up to 2014 and beyond.
We have studied the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2012/462) and we note his concerns on civilian
casualties. I have also taken note of Under-Secretary
Ladsous’s comments on that point today. Nevertheless,
it is important to remember that 85 per cent of civilian
casualties in 2012 have been caused by anti-Government
elements. The reductions in the number attributable to
ISAF and to the Afghan National Security Forces are
well documented. We have seen a reduction of some
70 per cent from 1 February to 30 April 2012 compared
with the same period in 2011.
As the NATO Secretary General has emphasized
publicly, any civilian casualty is one too many. ISAF
efforts to reduce civilian casualties are continuous and
rigorous. We are also working very closely with the
Afghan National Security Forces to strengthen their
ability to prevent civilian casualties.
In conclusion, we have a clear strategy for
completing the transition of full security responsibility
to the Afghan National Security Forces by 31 December
2014. We are starting the process of planning our new
mission to train, advise and assist those Afghan forces
after 2014. More generally, NATO recognizes that its
contribution to the stability of Afghanistan is just part
of a much wider effort by the Afghans themselves, and
by the international community, to tackle the broad
spectrum of security, governance and development
challenges faced by Afghanistan. In that context, much
depends on the continued close cooperation between the
United Nations and NATO, and specifically between
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and ISAF. It is only by working together in the spirit
of the comprehensive approach that we can achieve
in Afghanistan the aims which are set out clearly
in Security Council resolutions and which meet the
aspirations of the Afghan people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): It has been a busy winter
and spring for Afghanistan. Today’s debate in the
Security Council comes on the heels of a series of key
high-level meetings over the past months that have
included discussions on the future of the international
community’s engagement in Afghanistan beyond the
end of the transition period. In Bonn, Camp David
and Chicago, the Government of Afghanistan and the

32

international community made significant progress
in mobilizing continued support for Afghanistan and
recognized the concept of mutual accountability.
Canada is confident that the 8 July Tokyo conference
will allow us to build on that progress, ensuring that
Afghanistan undertakes the required reforms and
has the support needed to successfully implement its
development agenda for self-reliance, prosperity and
stability during the remaining phases of the transition
period and into the transformation decade.
Canada has been and will remain a committed
partner in Afghanistan. As stated by Prime Minister
Stephen Harper at the NATO Summit, Canada will
continue its current training mission through to March
2014, with a view to ensuring that the Afghan National
Security Forces are well trained and can assume full
responsibility for their country’s national security.
To help ensure a secure future for Afghanistan
beyond 2014 and to build on the gains made thus far, the
Prime Minister also announced in Chicago that Canada
will provide $110 million per year over three years
beginning in 2015 to help sustain the Afghan National
Security Forces to provide security and stability in a
sovereign and democratic Afghanistan.
As we prepare for Tokyo, Canada acknowledges
the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in
the development of its “Supporting self-reliance in
Afghanistan” strategy. The national strategic vision
for the transformation decade focuses on the main
development challenges in Afghanistan and, as such,
provides both Afghan Government officials and donors
a common framework for supporting an Afghan-owned
development process. In developing that framework
further, Canada recommends that greater emphasis
be placed on essential services, such as health and
education, and on the particular needs associated with
the ongoing humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan.
Furthermore, we look forward to working with our
partners to ensure that the Tokyo conference becomes a
milestone in defining civilian support for Afghanistan
beyond 2014. In doing so, a clear and credible mutual
accountability framework will be required if the
continued efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community towards long-term
stability in the country are to be successful and
sustainable. Timely endorsement of well-sequenced
national priority programmes ready for implementation
with clear deliverables, concrete progress towards the

12-39088

S/PV.6793

International Monetary Fund’s programme benchmarks
and increased capacity of the Afghan Government
to absorb, manage and execute budget financing are
pivotal in that regard.
Canada remains hopeful that the Government
of Afghanistan’s concerted efforts in defining its
self-reliance strategy denote a strong commitment to
addressing the Government issues that have seriously
undermined development in the country. Reducing
corruption,
strengthening
judicial
institutions,
increasing the meaningful participation of women and
conducting elections that meet international standards
all remain as key transition indicators. It is essential that
the elections in 2014 and 2015 demonstrate improved
integrity, inclusiveness and sustainability and lead to
an orderly transfer of power that is viewed as legitimate
by the wider Afghan public. To make that a reality,
Afghanistan must undertake needed electoral reform on
the basis of a broad consensus among political parties,
civil society and other stakeholders.
The situation of Afghan women and girls also
deserves our unwavering attention. Canada believes
that the success of the transformation decade must be
judged by the extent to which women contribute to
security, stability and inclusive economic development
in Afghanistan. In that regard, it is imperative that
we build upon the principle established at this year’s
Group of Eight summit which recognized that political
stability, democratic governance and economic growth
cannot be sustained without according full and equal
opportunities to both men and women and the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
the freedom to practice religion. The advancement of
women and girls in Afghanistan and the protection and
promotion of their human rights remains a priority for
Canada. Our ongoing civilian programming aimed at
improving infant and maternal health, girls’ education
and women’s literacy and women’s increased access to
and participation in Afghan justice and electoral systems
reflect that priority. Canada will also continue to play
a key role in coordinating with Governmental and civil
society organizations, including women’s organizations
and networks, to promote greater coordination and
strengthen advocacy for sustainable change.
As the third tranche of the security transition has
recently been announced, we must remain vigilant
as to the impact of the security transition on women
and girls, and work to address the threat of sexual
and gender-specific violence. In doing so, all parties

must live up to our common commitment to take into
consideration the different experiences of women
and men in conflict and in fragile States, promote
the meaningful participation of women in peace and
security, and take special measures to protect women
and girls in armed conflict, as outlined in resolution
1325 (2000).
(spoke in French)
The recent announcement by President Karzai of
the third tranche of the transition is another indicator of
the growing capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces to assume greater responsibility in terms of the
security of their country. In recent months, the security
forces have proved by their actions that their leadership
and capacities are developing swiftly, in particular
during the attacks by insurgents in Kabul on 15 and
16 April.
National political reconciliation remains central to
lasting peace in Afghanistan. Canada remains hopeful
that progress will be made in the peace process on
the basis of broad societal reconciliation, transitional
justice and respect for the Bonn principles.
Canada remains supportive of Afghan-led efforts
to reach out to those who renounce violence, have no
links with Al-Qaida or other terrorist organizations and
respect the Afghan Constitution. Moreover, Afghan
reconciliation cannot be considered in isolation from
regional dynamics. In that respect, Canada is heartened
by the progress made in recent months towards greater
regional cooperation, notably through the Istanbul
process.
At the Kabul ministerial conference held earlier
this month, Canada welcomed the continued efforts of
the Heart of Asia countries in moving forward with a
regionally led process that features concrete, cooperative
measures aimed at addressing common security and
economic challenges. Canada stands ready to support
the implementation of the process and its related
confidence-building measures, including through
our ongoing facilitation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
cooperation process.
In moving forward with its regional and international
partners, Canada’s ultimate goal remains to sustain the
gains that have been made as a result of the sacrifices of
Canadian, Afghan and international troops, and to help
the Afghan people rebuild a viable society that is better

12-3908833

S/PV.6793

governed, more stable and more secure, and that will
never again be a safe haven for terrorists.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union and would
like to make a few remarks in its national capacity.
First of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2012/462), Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Fedotov
for their briefings, and Special Representative Ján
Kubiš and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) team for their professional and
dedicated work. The efforts of the United Nations in
coordinating and ensuring international support for
Afghanistan in the years to come will be of particular
importance.
Latvia reaffirms its long-term commitment to
supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to undertake the
remaining transition challenges entailing the assumption
of leadership responsibility by the Afghan Government.
Those challenges will continue to require a coordinated
approach between the international community and the
Afghan Government. Moreover, there should also be a
coordinated approach among the various international
players, whose efforts should be complementary. In that
regard, the conferences in Bonn and Kabul, the Chicago
Summit and the upcoming conference in Tokyo, as
well as regional meetings at different levels, are of
particular importance. In order to ensure greater United
Nations coherence in Afghanistan, Latvia welcomes
the first meeting, held in May, between the Afghan
Government and all 27 United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, and expresses its hope that this forum
for ongoing dialogue will be maintained.
Latvia believes that efficient regional cooperation
is an important factor in achieving the long-term
political and economic stability of Afghanistan.
Confidence-building between Afghanistan and all of
its direct and more distant neighbours is necessary for
the overall stability and development of the region and
should be supported by the international community. In
particular, we consider that the Central Asian countries
have an important role in contributing to the stability
and security of Afghanistan and the whole region, and
that they should be closely involved in the efforts of the
international community in that respect.

34

Transnational threats such as terrorism and drug
trafficking endanger Afghanistan’s security and the
growth of a legitimate economy, as well as regional
and international peace and security. Border security
and drug-trafficking issues require the development
of cooperation between neighbouring countries,
and Latvia encourages the countries of the region to
enhance cooperation in that regard. For its part, Latvia
is providing a continuous financial contribution to the
NATO-Russia project, implemented in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), to train counter-narcotics personnel in
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Central Asia. We also
welcome the launch of the UNODC Afghanistan
country programme for 2012-2014 in May of this year.
Latvia believes that it is important to look at the
long-term economic perspective for Afghanistan,
including enhancing its development as a transportation
and transit hub in the region. In order to contribute
to common efforts in that regard, Latvia hosted an
international workshop this May, in Riga, on the
possible transformation of the northern distribution
network into a commercial transit route. The workshop
was attended by more than 150 high-level Government
officials, foreign-policy experts and representatives of
transport and logistics companies from 30 countries,
including from Central Asia. During the workshop,
Latvia also pledged its support for training Afghan
rail and civil aviation experts, an incentive that was
welcomed by the delegation of Afghanistan.
That incentive supplements Latvia’s continuous
involvement in civil projects in Afghanistan, including
those related to the promotion of the rights, participation
and economic empowerment of women. Women play
a vital role in the peace process, as recognized in
resolution 1325 (2000), and they should also be involved
in the development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies, in order to ensure that their interests are
taken into account.
Let me once again reiterate Latvia’s commitment to
remaining an active and reliable partner in the efforts
of the international community towards a stable, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan in a stable and prosperous
region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.

12-39088

S/PV.6793

Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Since I am
the last speaker and, as it is lunchtime, I will shorten my
statement; the full statement will be circulated.
Let me start by expressing our gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, as well as
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for their
briefings today.
Afghanistan still faces some important challenges
that could derail the country’s stabilization and
development, and harm regional and international
security. Terrorism, violence, extremism and
narcotic-drug production and trafficking are among the
major threats that Afghanistan faces. But one important
issue for the region and in the area of the relationship
between Afghanistan and its neighbours is the presence
of foreign forces in the country. that presence has
provided a major security concern over the past decade
for neighbouring countries and the region as a whole.
In analysing the situation on the ground, we
believe that the long-term international engagement in
Afghanistan should not lead to a long-term presence
or permanent foreign military bases or a military and
security presence in Afghanistan. The longer foreign
forces are present, the longer disability will endure.
Of course, the Afghan authorities have assured their
neighbours that such a long- term presence will not
be a security concern for its neighbours. Nevertheless,
in our case, at least, we have experienced incidents
such as the drone transgression into our airspace, and,
obviously, security considerations are a matter that
cannot compromised on.
Another area of ongoing concern is drug production
and traffic. In his statement today, Mr. Fedotov
noted that Afghanistan produces 90 per cent of the
world’s opiates. The narcotic drugs originating from
Afghanistan affect not only neighboring countries but
also other countries far away from the region. This
menace has hindered the advancement of the affected

countries towards development and has put at risk their
social cohesion.
At the national level, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has taken sweeping measures to counter drug
trafficking. On the basis of that approach, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has mobilized 30,000 military
troops and law enforcement personnel along the joint
borders with Afghanistan and Pakistan. We have also
reinforced and re-managed the fortifications, facilities
and intelligence control systems in transit and border
checkpoints in order to prevent the entry of trafficking
caravans into the country, and annihilate them in case of
infiltration. More than 400 kilometres of embankments
along the borders, 800 kilometres of deep canals, 90
kilometres of concrete walls, 20 kilometres of barriers
and 140 kilometres of barbed wire fencing are just
some of the control and security measures taken by the
Islamic Republic of Iran along its eastern borders. That
area was visited by Mr. Fedotov during his trip to Iran
in July 2011.
In order for our fight against narcotic drugs to
be effective, there is a need to review regional and
international policies and programmes in order to
overcome shortfalls and effectively counter them in
dealing with such a global problem as narcotics. The
Islamic Republic of Iran once more emphasizes its
strong determination to combat this significant global
problem and expresses its readiness to cooperate with
others to decisively resolve such problems of global
concern.
Regarding regional cooperation and the Tokyo
conference, both of which we fully support, my full
statement will be circulated among my colleagues.
The President (spoke in Chinese): We have heard
the last speaker for this meeting. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

12-3908835
