A /67/PV.95

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

95th plenary meeting

Thursday, 22 August 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Momen
(Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Letter from the Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (A/67/957)
The Acting President: I should like to draw the
attention of the General Assembly to a letter dated
31 July 2013 from the Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, addressed to the President of the General
Assembly (A/67/957).
By that letter, the President has been informed of
the interest of the Government of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia in becoming a member of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. As delegations are aware, in accordance with
resolution 3376 (XXX), adopted on 10 November
1975, members of the Committee are appointed by the
General Assembly.
The proposal before the General Assembly is for
the Plurinational State of Bolivia to be added to the
membership of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. May I take
it that the General Assembly agrees to the enlargement
of the membership of that Committee by appointing

the Plurinational State of Bolivia as a member of the
Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
37.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution (A/67/L.76)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 74 at its 29th,
31st and 32nd plenary meetings, on 1 and 6 November
2012, respectively.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.76.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 74, draft resolution
A/67/L.76, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”. In addition to the 41 countries listed
in document A/67/L.76, which contains the text of the
draft resolution, the following countries have indicated
their wish to be included as sponsors of the resolution:
Australia, Belize, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Jordan, Mongolia,
Norway, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
That brings the total number of sponsors to 59.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-43707 (E)

*1343707*

A/67/PV.95

At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Nishida, Permanent Representative of Japan, and his
team for having coordinated the draft resolution during
the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
On 1 November 2012, the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge SangHyun Song, presented the eighth annual report of the
International Criminal Court (A/67/308) to this body.
We had a very constructive and in-depth debate (see
A/67/PV.29) then, and I would like to highlight a few
elements.
First, in order to ensure the Court’s success,
universal adherence to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court remains crucial. We are
therefore pleased to welcome Côte d’Ivoire as the latest
country to become party to the Rome Statute, which
brings the total number of States that have ratified or
acceded to the Rome Statute to 122. It is our sincere
hope that others will join in the near future.
Secondly, the International Criminal Court’s annual
report and the debate in the General Assembly also
underlined the role of the Court in our common efforts
to build an international community characterized not
only by the rule of law and respect for human rights, but
also by peace and security. Sustainable peace cannot
be achieved if the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes are not brought to justice. Peace and justice are
complementary requirements.
Thirdly, I would like to highlight the fact that,
despite the recent successful arrest of an accused,
the situation with respect to the outstanding arrest
warrants is troubling. The Court remains reliant upon
State cooperation in the enforcement of its orders and
decisions. If States do not provide the cooperation
necessary for the Court’s functioning in accordance
with their legal obligations, it will not be able to fulfil
its mandate and impunity will continue to flourish. The
cooperation of States, international organizations and
civil society is essential to the Court’s functioning, not
only in relation to the arrest and surrender of accused
persons but also with regard to the provision of evidence,
the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses
and the enforcement of sentences. We are therefore
pleased that, over the past year, the United Nations has
continued to assist the Court in its endeavours through
the implementation of the relationship agreement. We
also welcome the assistance provided so far by States

2

parties and non-States parties and call on all States to
continue to support the Court’s efforts in that regard.
Last but not least, I would like to recall that the
hallmark of the Court is its independent judicial nature.
At the same time, that judicial institution operates
within the political world, and it needs States not just
to cooperate with it but also to respect, protect and
enhance its judicial independence.
Allow me now to return to the draft resolution
itself, which serves three main objectives. First, it
provides political support for the International Criminal
Court as an organization and for its mandate, its aims
and the work it carries out. Secondly, it underlines
the importance of the relationship between the Court
and the United Nations on the basis of the relationship
agreement, as both the United Nations and the ICC
have an equally central role in enhancing the system of
international criminal justice. Lastly, the draft resolution
serves to remind States and international and regional
organizations of the importance of cooperating with the
International Criminal Court in carrying out its tasks.
Through the introduction of new paragraphs, the draft
resolution reflects the increased interaction between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court, as demonstrated in the frequent references to the
role and the work of the Court in the official records of
the United Nations.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation for
the constructive spirit that characterized the manner in
which the consultations leading to the draft resolution
were conducted. The Netherlands hopes that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus and that it
will lead to even greater support for the Court in the
fight against impunity and its attempts to hold the
perpetrators of serious crimes accountable for their
actions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/67/L.76, entitled “Report of
the International Criminal Court”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/67/L.76 was adopted (resolution
67/295).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

13-43707

A/67/PV.95

Mr. Machado (Brazil): Brazil joined the consensus
on the adoption of resolution 67/295, on the report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We have sponsored
previous resolutions on the report of the Court in order
to demonstrate our unwavering support for the idea that
the fight against impunity, in which the ICC plays a
prominent role, is a responsibility of the international
community as a whole. Our commitment to that idea
remains intact and, precisely for that reason, we believe
that the best way to support the Court is to voice our
deep concern about a particular issue of a structural
nature that goes to the core of the relationship between
the ICC and the United Nations, in particular the
General Assembly.
The Assembly, bearing in mind article 13 of
the relationship agreement between the Court and
the United Nations, has acknowledged, in the tenth
preambular paragraph of the resolution,
“the need for funding of expenses related to
investigations or prosecutions of the International
Criminal Court, including in connection with
situations referred to the Court by the Security
Council”.
However, it is worrying that the Assembly failed
to approve an operative paragraph in the resolution
that would translate the tenth preambular paragraph
into action, giving real meaning to article 13 of the
relationship agreement between the two institutions.
The acknowledgement of such a need must go further
than mere rhetoric. At a time when the Court faces
an unprecedented workload, and its own President
questions, in unambiguous terms, the sustainability
of a system under which referrals are made, “but the
costs of any investigation and trial proceedings are
met exclusively by the parties to the Rome Statute”
(S/PV.6849, p.5), it is high time that this body decided
on the conditions under which funds may be provided to
the Court, in particular in relation to Security Council
referrals. Important proposals have been made in that
regard. Brazil has put its own suggestions on the table
for discussion.
Brazil firmly believes that the involvement of
the United Nations with the ICC, including through
referrals by the Security Council, must be accompanied
by fulfilment of the responsibility of the United Nations
to provide financial support for the work of the Court.
The General Assembly has a crucial and urgent role to
play in that regard.

Mr. Tladi (South Africa): My delegation is also
pleased to join in the consensus on the adoption of
resolution 67/295, on the report of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). South Africa is and has been a
steadfast supporter of international criminal justice and
the International Criminal Court, and has in the past
sponsored this particular resolution.
As a State party to the Rome Statute, we are keenly
aware of the budget implications of investigations and
prosecutions. In that regard, we wish to point out that
the cost of investigations and prosecutions of situations
referred to the ICC by the Security Council should be
borne by the United Nations as a whole. After all, such
situations are referred to the ICC on behalf of the United
Nations as a whole, and it is inequitable that only States
parties to the Rome Statute should bear the costs.
More to the point, my delegation is concerned that
the practice of the Security Council of excluding the
possibility of United Nations financing for situations
referred to the ICC by the Council amounts to a
usurpation of the functions of the General Assembly
under Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations.
For those reasons, while we joined the consensus
on the draft resolution, we wish to express our
disappointment that, notwithstanding several proposals
and lengthy discussions, it does not address the
important issue of financing.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Sudan would like to remind the
General Assembly that the Sudan is not a State party to
the Rome Statute, which established the International
Criminal Court. We do not recognize the Court, and
therefore do not recognize its decisions. That also
applies to other countries that are not signatories to
the Rome Statute. Therefore, resolution 67/295, just
adopted, does not concern the Sudan. I would like my
delegation’s position to be reflected in the record of
today’s meeting.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
I shall now give the floor to speakers who wish
to make statements following the adoption of the
resolution.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Argentina, Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Guatemala, Hungary,

13-437073

A/67/PV.95

Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago and my own country,
Slovenia.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 67/295 by
consensus and we are pleased by the progress made
in many parts of the text. We particularly appreciate
the active and constructive engagement of non-State
parties during the consultation process.
The resolution is a cornerstone for the advancement
of international criminal law and practice, namely,
through the work of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Therefore, we consider it essential that the
resolution adequately reflect the current state of play
in the Court, its relations with the membership of the
United Nations in its entirety and the progress made by
the ICC and the challenges it faces.
The financing of the costs arising from the Court’s
activities triggered by Security Council referrals
continues to be a matter of concern for us. In this year’s
resolution and in those of previous years, the General
Assembly has noted the need for the funding of the
expenses related to investigations or prosecutions of
the ICC. While the subject of the financing of Security
Council referrals was barely touched upon in this year’s
consultation process, we would like to reiterate that
finding a solution acceptable to all States should be part
of future negotiations.
As State parties, we would like to point out that
the Rome Statute covers four crimes. We regret that
it was not possible to find wording for the resolution
to adequately refer to the Statute when it comes to
complementarity, cooperation and judicial assistance.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General’s
guidance on contacts with persons who are the
subject of arrest warrants or summonses issued by the
International Criminal Court has been recognized this
year for the first time, in paragraph 12. It is our common
understanding that the Secretary-General will continue
to report on the implementation of that guidance in his
report requested in paragraph 11.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement just made by
the Permanent Representative of Slovenia on behalf of
a group of States parties. I wish to raise some additional
considerations in my national capacity.
Costa Rica welcomes the adoption by consensus of
the resolution on the report of the International Criminal

4

Court (resolution 67/295). That is a recognition of the
fact that the Court has made an undeniable contribution
to justice, peace, combating impunity, and reconciliation
in the world, which is the international community’s
greatest achievement in that regard. We must therefore
decisively promote it until its universality is achieved.
My delegation wishes once again to recall, however,
that the primary responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting the worst crimes against humanity lies
with States themselves. Therein lies the principle of
complementarity, which is often referred to but not
always practiced.
Costa Rica reiterates its profound concern at the
repeated instances of non-cooperation with the Court.
Those are particularly serious when States parties have
refused to execute arrest warrants that are in force. But
non-State parties, in accordance with principles of the
rule of law and obligations set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations, should also cooperate with the Court,
at least for those cases referred to it by the Security
Council.
The Security Council, for its part, has an outstanding
task — that of establishing a uniform protocol that is
predictable and transparent for the referral of cases
to the Court. During the open debate convened by
Guatemala on the relationship between the Security
Council and the Court (see S/PV.6849), many States,
including my own, referred to respectful appeals to that
end. We are confident that the Council will value those
recommendations, whose aim is to build confidence in
the impartiality of the Court’s decisions.
The Security Council should not provide for any
exceptions to the jurisdiction that would violate the
principle of equality before the law and jeopardize
its credibility and that of the International Criminal
Court. The Council’s resolutions should also include
the obligation that all States Members of the United
Nations cooperate with the Court, in accordance with
Article 103 of the Charter, and the establishment of
monitoring mechanisms and the financing of referred
cases. On the latter point, we would have preferred to
have seen clearer language in the resolution that we
have just adopted.
It is precisely because of its importance that the
workload of the Court is now greater than it has ever
been. There are eight ongoing investigations, eight
preliminary investigations, 22 arrest warrants and nine
new summonses. In those circumstances, our support

13-43707

A/67/PV.95

must be stronger and more consistent that ever and it
should grow in the future.
A little more than one month ago, during the
celebration of International Criminal Justice Day, 13
Latin American States parties to the Rome Statute — the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela — circulated a communiqué that reflected
the support of our region for the Court. As a conclusion
to my statement, I wish to share some words from that
communiqué.

“We must not forget the fact that, although much
progress has been made, we still have a long
road full of challenges ahead of us. We wish
on this occasion to reiterate our conviction that
impunity for those who commit the most serious
crimes against humanity endangers the stability
of international order, and we reassert our
commitment to combating such impunity.”
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

13-437075
