S/PV.8536

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8536th meeting

Thursday, 30 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-15493 (E)
*1915493*

S/PV.8536

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: Members of the Council have
before them document S/2019/441, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by the United States
of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Russian
Federation, South Africa
The President: The draft resolution received
10 votes in favour, with five abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2471 (2019).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the Security Council’s support for
renewing the South Sudan sanctions regime, including
the arms embargo. If there is to be any chance for
lasting peace in South Sudan, we must stop the flow
of weapons used to fuel the conflict and terrorize
civilians and take action against those responsible for
undermining the peace.
We are disappointed that resolution 2471 (2019) did
not receive the support of the three African members
of the Security Council. Just three months ago, the
Council adopted resolution 2457 (2019) to silence the
guns in Africa, with strong support from the African
2/8

30/05/2019

Union. Today we regret that three of the abstentions
show an unwillingness to stop the flow of weapons
to one of the continent’s deadliest civil conflicts.
The measures renewed in the resolution are designed
to protect civilians and reduce violence in a country
that has borne witness to unspeakable atrocities. The
United States wants to support Africa’s regional and
subregional bodies to take leading roles in resolving
disputes and conflict on the continent. However,
support for that expanded role is difficult to envision
if countries in the region are unwilling to support
measures that incentivize warring parties to choose
peace over war.
Ten months ago, when the Council adopted the
sanctions regime that we renewed today, we were told
that additional sanctions would undermine the peace
process (see S/PV.8310). We were also told that the time
was not right for an arms embargo to prevent the flow
of weapons to a country that had seen an estimated
400,000 conflict-related deaths in the past five years.
Since strengthening the sanctions regime and
imposing an arms embargo, the warring parties signed
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and there has
been widespread adherence to the ceasefire. While
the United States remains concerned about delays in
implementing key provisions of the peace agreement
and ongoing violence against civilians, it cannot be
denied that some initial progress towards peace took
place immediately following the Council’s action on
sanctions 10 months ago.
There are undoubtedly many factors besides a
strengthened sanctions regime that contributed to
that turn of events. Not least, we are encouraged that
regional actors have taken more of a leadership role
to encourage and support peace in South Sudan. We
are counting on the region to maintain pressure on the
parties to implement the peace agreement and to uphold
the United Nations arms embargo to prevent the flow
of weapons into South Sudan, which would further
destabilize the country and the region.
The United States remains ready to consider
adjustments to the sanctions regime, including
strengthening it with additional measures or suspending
existing measures, in the light of progress or lack
thereof. We note that, under the existing sanctions
regime, the parties may request exemptions that would
19-15493

30/05/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

allow them to successfully Implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
In conclusion, the United States will support
measures that help to protect civilians in South Sudan
against the horrific violence that has become routine in
their daily lives. In doing so, the United States supports
the people of South Sudan and their aspirations for
freedom, peace and prosperity.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa
abstained in today’s voting on resolution 2471 (2019)
in the firm view that the sanctions imposed on South
Sudan at this time are not helpful to the current
complex political process. The region, through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
continues to assert that sanctions are not useful to the
political process.
South Africa appeals to the Council to heed and
support the efforts of IGAD and the African Union,
which have been seized of the issue of the peace
process in South Sudan. South Africa firmly believes
that sanctions should be seen as a tool to encourage
continued cooperation and progress towards a political
process and not as a punitive measure. Furthermore,
they should be used as an incentive to improve stability
and build an environment that is conducive to reaching
a political agreement in support of lasting and durable
peace. In that regard, the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan is setting a positive trajectory for the country’s
future. We have seen progress in that regard, such as a
reduction in political violence and the development of
confidence-building measures among the signatories,
even if progress in implementing the Agreement has
been slow. South Africa encourages the Government of
South Sudan and other parties to do everything in their
power to implement the Revitalized Agreement.
When a volatile political process is on the table, it
should be safeguarded and free from external pressure,
which could aggravate the situation. Nevertheless,
the process of making peace never has been or will
be an easy task, as it is a many-layered process, not a
linear one.
Lastly, like many delegations, including that of
the United States, we remain concerned about the
continuing precarious humanitarian situation in South
Sudan. We call on all the parties to redouble their
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation in the
country and protect those who are vulnerable.

S/PV. 8536

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of this meeting on the
renewal of the sanctions regime for South Sudan. My
delegation decided to abstain in the voting on resolution
2471 (2019) for the following reasons. On 12 September
2018, after several years of conflict, the warring parties
in South Sudan signed the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. That important step was made possible by
the continued engagement of various actors in South
Sudan, particularly the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), through the mediation efforts of
the Presidents of the Sudan and Uganda.
Now that several months have passed since the
signing of the Agreement, Côte d’Ivoire has noted an
improvement in the overall security situation and the
fact that the signatories have largely respected the
cessation of hostilities agreement. We also welcome
the signatories’ commitment to the comprehensive
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, to which
they have freely subscribed.
As the political process continues, Côte d’Ivoire
supports the African Union’s recommendation in
which it encourages all the parties to refrain from
any measures that could weaken the political process
and thereby jeopardize the gains achieved, however
small they may be. The fact is that the Council’s role
should not be limited to the constant imposition of
sanctions. We should also be able to assess advances
and direct our efforts to ensure dynamic progress. Our
friends and brothers in South Sudan need our united
and constructive action today more than ever, and our
encouragement in their difficult quest for peace.
We all know that the route to peace is not a long,
quiet river. The history of every people has taught us
that. We therefore consider it essential that the Security
Council, the African Union, IGAD and all the actors
involved in South Sudan give it helpful support in order
to preserve and strengthen the positive momentum we
have seen on the ground. We must therefore redouble
our efforts and show patience and common sense in
bringing the parties that are still reluctant to join the
peace and thereby help the South Sudanese parties to
fully implement the Revitalized Agreement, which is
the only way to bring lasting peace back to South Sudan.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation was not able to support
the technical resolution 2471 (2019) proposed by the

19-154933/8

S/PV.8536

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United States delegation, which extends the sanctions
regime for South Sudan in an unchanged form. We are
against the automatic extension of sanctions and urge
for basing decisions on the situation on the ground
in every such case. The situation in South Sudan is
steadily stabilizing.
We welcome the agreement on extending the
pre-transition period in South Sudan. We know that a
number of objective circumstances prevented it from
being concluded by 12 May, but a significant part of the
agreements reached in Khartoum in September 2018
have nevertheless been implemented. In that regard,
we note that the structures and mechanisms provided
for in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan have been
formulated and have begun to be operationalized. We are
pleased that there has been a significant reduction in the
level of violence and numbers of human rights violations
since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement. An
increasing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons have expressed their willingness to return to
their permanent homes. Confidence-building measures
are being implemented on the ground and opposition
politicians are returning to the capital.
We do not share the view that the progress we have
seen in the settlement in South Sudan was promoted
by the strengthening of the sanctions pressure and the
introduction of an arms embargo in July. It was not the
sanctions but the regional mediators who played a role in
it. On top of that, at a particular stage the arms embargo
prevented the region from giving flexible support to the
settlement with the help of its own security initiatives.
Lastly, taking into account the fact that today is
the last public meeting of the Council in the Chamber
for this month, I would like to thank the Indonesian
presidency for its outstanding work and to wish our
Kuwaiti colleagues every success.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Poland welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2471 (2019), renewing the
sanctions regime on South Sudan for another year. We
regret that the Council was unable to reach consensus
on it, however. We would like to thank the United
States for its efficient conduct of the negotiations on
the document.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, we
support the resolution because we believe that at this
stage it is important to maintain the sanctions regime.
4/8

30/05/2019

Although we welcome the steps taken by the South
Sudanese parties, we are still not in a position to say
that we are seeing tangible results of the peace process
in South Sudan, including the implementation of the
fundamental provisions of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan. What we can see, however, is a significant
reduction of violence across the country, especially
violence against civilians, which we believe is a direct
effect of the arms embargo.
Nevertheless, South Sudan continues to experience
a major protection crisis. The pervasive culture
of violence continues in a context of impunity.
We stress the critical importance of effectively
implementing the sanctions regime and the key role
that the neighbouring States, as well as regional and
subregional organizations, can play in that regard.
We call on all parties to demonstrate good faith and
to implement the sanctions. We believe that it is the
Council’s responsibility to continue to stem and control
the flow of arms into the territory of South Sudan, and
by doing so steadily reduce the violence and brutality
against innocent civilians. For that reason, and as we
did last year, Poland voted in favour of the resolution.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
political process towards peace in South Sudan has
made significant progress since the end of last year.
At present, with the joint support of the African Union
(AU), the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), countries of the regional and the international
community at large, the South Sudanese Government
and major political parties are demonstrating
unprecedented resolve and good will in implementing
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, as a result
of which the security situation in South Sudan has
greatly improved.
As the primary body for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should send positive messages, adjust its South
Sudanese-related measures in a timely manner, fully
support the mediation efforts of the AU, IGAD and
countries of the region and encourage the parties in
South Sudan to pursue their active engagement in
the political process in order to maintain the current
positive momentum.
Last July, the Security Council adopted resolution
2428 (2018), which imposed some measures, including
19-15493

30/05/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

an arms embargo, on South Sudan. China abstained
in the voting on that resolution. China still does not
support an arms embargo on South Sudan and therefore
abstained in the voting on resolution 2471 (2019),
which was just adopted by the Council. China hopes
that the Council will make timely adjustments to the
relevant measures in the light of the changes on the
ground in South Sudan and help the South Sudanese
parties to implement the revitalized agreement and
promote governance and security capacity-building in
South Sudan.
Last but not least, I also wish to thank the Indonesian
presidency of the Council for its excellent work during
the month of May.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Belgium welcomes the extension of the
sanctions regime, including the arms embargo, and
the extension of the mandate of the Panel of Experts
on South Sudan. The sanctions regime continues to be
part of the measures that are needed to contribute to the
stabilization of South Sudan. We appreciate the progress
made by the parties in the peace process. However,
a great deal of work remains to be done during the
extended pretransitional phase, including with respect
to security provisions and internal borders. The parties
must continue to work together to find consensusbased solutions. Prematurely lifting the arms embargo
could have negative consequences, in particular for
the protection of civilians. We do not want to have to
shoulder such a responsibility.
Lastly, we commend the work done by the Panel
of Experts, which provides the Council with valuable
input on the situation on the ground.
I would also like to join others in thanking you,
Mr. President, for the work done by the Indonesian
presidency this month.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will start where my
Belgian colleague left off and thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding very successfully over the Security
Council during the month of May. I have my batik shirt
ready for the party tonight.
Last month, Germany kept the curtains open
throughout its Council presidency last month. We see
that there has been some pushback. We hope that under
the Kuwaiti presidency, there will be pushback against
that pushback.

S/PV. 8536

Turning to the matter of this meeting, we first
welcome the extension of the sanctions regime in South
Sudan. I listened very carefully to what was said by our
African friends and by the representatives of Russia and
China with respect to the current situation, and I must
admit that I do not quite follow their logic. The security
situation has improved. In the face of such improvement,
what effect would the lifting of the sanctions and the
shipment of weapons have? As our South African friend
remarked, there is a volatile political process. In that
context, what effect would the shipment of additional
arms have? We know that the parties have failed to
adhere to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. One
month ago (S/PV.8519), I expressed my doubts that
the deadline in mid-May would be met, and it was not
met. Why then should additional arms be sent? I think
the one thing the country does not need is additional
arms. We have also seen a reduction in human rights
violations. Our Polish colleague linked that to the fact
that there are fewer arms available there.
That notwithstanding, in our view the human
rights situation remains very dire. The issue of sexual
and gender-based violence remains. I would very much
appreciate it if, during the next debate on this item, we
could have a briefing on the human rights situation.
Germany is of the view that the money saved on
weapons would be much better spent on improving the
justice system so that the perpetrators of sexual crimes
there could be brought to justice. The Ambassador of
South Africa also mentioned the dire humanitarian
situation. Why not have those who want to buy arms
spend the money on humanitarian resources instead?
The President: I thank the representative of
Germany for his reference to the curtains. There was
no pushback; it was a precautionary measure.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): As the representative of Germany
said, the situation is being brought under control.
Why make a change now, rather than waiting for it be
further consolidated?
The Dominican Republic voted in favour of
resolution 2471 (2019). We are of the view that
although it is true that there is an atmosphere of
relative calm, with a significant decrease in incidents
of violence, and although there has been progress in
terms of confidence-building and the resumption of
political dialogue, it is no less true that the process

19-154935/8

S/PV.8536

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan still faces significant challenges that will
determine the success of the Agreement in the medium
and long terms.
The setting on 3 May, in Addis Ababa, of a sixmonth period to establish a Government of National
Unity opens a new window of opportunity for the parties
to make crucial decisions and to complete two of the
fundamental tasks that have not yet been implemented:
military reform and the resolution of matters related to
internal borders. It is time to reach a definitive political
solution. We are hopeful that this period of calm will
bring the process of political negotiation back on track,
that the parties will assume their responsibilities and
break with the trend towards inaction that we have seen
over the past eight months.
The humanitarian needs and food insecurity in South
Sudan are serious; sexual and gender-based violence is
a constant threat, as are human rights violations and
the illicit exploitation of natural resources. Also of
concern is the presence of armed groups, limitations
on information on weapons, possible violations of the
assets freeze and proven breaches of the travel ban.
To improve the situation caused by the crisis,
both parties must focus on preserving the ceasefire
and working together towards the realization of a
comprehensive and sustainable peace. We in the
Council must harness the momentum gained to move
that process forward in the shortest possible time.
It is imperative that tangible progress be made to
improve the lives of the civilians of South Sudan, many
of whom continue to be internally displaced, with little
hope of returning to their places of origin. The time is
now. The situation is critical and unacceptable.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
Indonesia on its presidency, as well as you, Mr. President,
and your team for your great work.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2471 (2019), which
extends the sanctions regime against South Sudan,
a country with a civilian population that has been
tragically tried and tested by violence. France shares
the opinion expressed by the other European members
of the Security Council. The sanctions regime continues
to be an especially important tool that contributes
to stabilizing South Sudan. It is a tool to support the
6/8

30/05/2019

implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and deprive the parties to the conflict of the
means to commit violence.
The spread of weapons in the country constitutes
a genuine scourge. France calls on the South Sudanese
authorities, as well as the countries of the region, to
fully implement the arms embargo. We also recall that
individual sanctions, in order to be effectively applied,
require the mobilization and engagement of all regional
and international actors. France remains extremely
concerned about the level of human rights violations,
including the level of sexual violence. We call for an
end to all forms of violence and for ensuring that those
responsible are brought to justice.
Lastly, France would like to express its hope that
the Security Council will systematically use sanctions
to punish and bring pressure to bear on those who
commit sexual violence, especially since it is now an
independent criterion for sanctions designation.
I would like to conclude by congratulating you,
Mr. President, and your team on your successful
presidency of the Council this month.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Kuwait
voted in favour of resolution 2471 (2019), on extending
the sanctions regime as provided for in resolution
2206 (2015), although we would have liked to see its
unanimous adoption.
We call upon South Sudan to continue the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan and to expedite it. We also call upon
the signatory parties to work together so that the
pre-transitional process will be successful in leading to
the establishment of the Government of national unity.
We call as well upon non-signatory parties to sign the
Agreement as soon as possible.
It is necessary that the provisions of today’s
resolution be implemented by all States, regardless of
any differences in their positions, as the resolution is
binding under the Charter of the United Nations. We
hope to arrive at a time when we will no longer need to
extend that sanctions regime, which is a means to reach
our objective of lasting peace in South Sudan.
In conclusion, I would like to sincerely congratulate
you, Mr. President, as well as your team and friendly
19-15493

30/05/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

country, for conducting the work of the Council wisely
and with distinction during this month.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2471
(2019). As a member of the troika, we stand firm in our
support for peace in South Sudan and for the progress
made to date, especially efforts from the region led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to ensure
that the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continues to
reduce violence. There is still, however, work to do,
and we urge the parties to work together for the sake of
their people.
We in the Security Council have this morning
demonstrated to the people of South Sudan the we are
committed to bringing an end to their suffering. The
Council will not allow those who seek to undermine
peace to do so with impunity, nor will we support the
free flow of weapons into the country while that peace
remains so fragile.
We share the disappointments of others in the
Council today that some members of the Council were
not able to support the renewal of the sanctions and the
arms embargo. Peace in South Sudan remains fragile.
In the place of a complete judicial infrastructure,
sanctions offer a form of accountability, and they send
a message that heinous acts of violence will not be
tolerated by the international community. On the arms
embargo, with the peace deal only recently extended,
for the Council to allow an unhindered flow of arms into
the country right now would surely be irresponsible and
risk fuelling further violence. It would send a terrible
signal to people of South Sudan.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by extending our sincere
congratulations to you, Mr. President, for the successful
way in which have presided over the Security Council
during the month of May.
We must all agree that since last year there has
been an active effort made towards achieving peace
in South Sudan through dialogue, the political will of
the parties concerned and, above all, the intermediary
efforts of Uganda, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union and even His Holiness
Pope Francis.
Given that effort, my delegation believes that
extending the embargo and adopting further sanctions

S/PV. 8536

are not the right steps to motivate those involved to
continue their efforts towards achieving peace. That is
why we abstained in the voting. Although we support
the sanctions in some aspects, we must know when
to impose them and when not to. We need to give the
political stakeholders in South Sudan an opportunity to
continue their efforts to achieve peace through peaceful
means and dialogue.
Lastly, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council to the fact that arms embargoes are often to
the detriment of Governments, and eventually lead to
a situation in which the armed groups are better armed
and equipped than the Government forces. We have
concrete examples of that. We all know and understand
that very well because armed groups illegally import
weapons, while our focus is on controlling the
Governments. They are therefore left without weapons,
while the armed groups — the terrorists — prevail. The
situation that we are experiencing is clear, and we know
that today some armed groups are much better armed
than Governments. We therefore need to pay close
attention to that kind of situation.
The President: I shall make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
Indonesia
acknowledges
that
the
South
Sudanese parties continue to make progress in their
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, including their adherence to a permanent
ceasefire, the reconstitution of various key institutions
and ongoing confidence-building measures. Indeed,
there is still a great deal of work to be done, including
on transitional security arrangements.
My delegation calls on all South Sudanese parties
to direct their energy to ensure that all pending tasks
are completed in a timely manner, making use of the
six-month extension of the pre-transitional period.
The pride of the civilian population should be reason
enough for all South Sudanese parties to demonstrate
their ultimate resolve. We stand by our conviction that
the Revitalized Agreement is the best and only option
the South Sudanese have right now. As we have said
before in this very Chamber, there is no plan B. To
that end, Indonesia fully supports the continued and
proactive engagement of countries of the region, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations to support the
South Sudanese peace process.

19-154937/8

S/PV.8536

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

30/05/2019

My delegation has maintained a consistent view
regarding the use of sanctions. Sanctions should be used
only as a means to support a wider political strategy; they
should not be an end in themselves. Sanctions must have
a clear, transparent and measurable timetable. Their
application must be periodically evaluated, including
against the backdrop of the situation on the ground. As
a matter of principle, we see the need to always be clear
about key benchmarks that must be achieved to guide
the Council in reviewing the measures it has imposed.

My delegation hopes that the technical extension we
have just adopted will provide a space for the South
Sudanese parties to instil confidence and work together
to fulfil the commitments they have undertaken.

Indeed, the resolution could have been stronger
had it contained the proper encouragement to South
Sudanese parties to make further progress in the
peace process. Having said that, our long-standing
commitment to supporting peace and stability in
South Sudan informed our decision to vote in favour
of resolution 2471 (2019). We care for the safety and
well-being of the people of South Sudan and that
should always be the focus of attention of the Council.

I would like to extend my sincere appreciation
on behalf of the delegation of Indonesia for all of
the support and kind words that have been extended.
However, Indonesia will continue its work until our
last day, which is tomorrow. I will then be smiling
and thanking the Kuwaiti President of the Council
and our Kuwaiti brothers. We still have another day of
interesting work to be done.

8/8

I should like to close by commending the South
Sudanese Government and people for their perseverance
in their quest for peace and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

19-15493
