A /73/PV.80

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

80th plenary meeting

Thursday, 9 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arrocha Ruíz
(Panama), Vice-President took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 20 to
the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document before it today,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 20 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 73/504 B).
Agenda items 20 and 78 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/73/L.82)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.82.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): My delegation is pleased
to address the General Assembly on agenda item 20,

“Sustainable Development”, and sub-item (a) of agenda
item 78, “Oceans and the law of the sea”.
Kenya and Portugal had the great honour of
coordinating the informal consultations on draft
resolution A/73/L.82, entitled “2020 United Nations
Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development”. The Permanent
Representative of Portugal, Ambassador Francisco
Duarte Lopes, and I are therefore pleased today to
introduce the text on behalf of our two countries and
all the 90 Member States sponsoring it so far. The door
is not closed; delegations are still free to append their
support for the text.
I would like to start by expressing our deep
appreciation to all delegations for their cooperation and
constructive engagement throughout the negotiations.
This cooperation and positive spirit of engagement were
vital to ensuring an outcome that was agreeable to all.
The draft resolution before us convenes the highlevel 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development, in Lisbon,
and sets its modalities. It reaffirms the commitment
made by Portugal and Kenya to following up on the
2017 Conference, which was successfully organized by
Sweden and Fiji. More importantly, it marks a renewed
mobilization of efforts to support the implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14 — essentially

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-13592 (E)

*1913592*

A/73/PV.80

to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development.
Allow me to reiterate that the 2017 Conference
was indeed a huge success. It raised awareness of the
state of the oceans and the many challenges they face.
It encouraged tangible, significant commitments by
Member States and other stakeholders, and similarly
inspired subregional and global conferences like the
Sustainable Blue Economy Conference, in Nairobi,
to support the implementation of Goal 14. The 2017
Conference similarly stimulated new and strong
partnerships, with ocean health and sustainability at
the core of the discussions.
We, however, cannot afford to rest on our laurels. We
must continue to maintain the momentum that has been
created and carry out the immense work that remains
to be done in pursuit of our desired goals for the oceans
and seas. That is important, as the full implementation
of Goal 14 still faces a number of obstacles, some
of which will be difficult to overcome without our
combined efforts. More efforts are therefore necessary
to reverse the current cycle of decline of ocean and
marine resources.
The draft resolution also reiterates the fact that
the importance of our oceans, our seas and our
marine resources for sustainable development cannot
be overstated. They provide livelihoods for millions
of people, enable food, security and maritime trade,
regulate the climate and are an important source of
renewable energy. It is for those reasons that we cannot
afford to lose more time.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
whose universal and indivisible character we are bound
to uphold, provides us with a clear road map of what
we need to do if we want future generations to benefit
from the wealth of the oceans. We need to ensure that
we implement that road map and reaffirm our collective
commitment to conserving and sustainably using our
oceans, our seas and our marine resources. Failure is
not an option.
It is therefore imperative that the international
community continue to keep the oceans and seas high
on its agenda. In that regard, the 2020 United Nations
Oceans Conference may not meet all the challenges that
we face. However, it will accord us the opportunity to
bring about a new generation of concrete, ambitious
commitments and help us forge new, inclusive and
effective partnerships to support the implementation of
2/5

09/05/2019

Goal 14. We must take advantage of this opportunity to
get ourselves one step closer to the realization of our
commitments under the 2030 Agenda.
In conclusion, Portugal and Kenya are committed
to making the 2020 United Nations Oceans Conference
in Lisbon a transformative moment for the oceans
and for the implementation of Goal 14. We pledge
to work closely with Member States and relevant
international organizations and partners in preparing
for the Conference in June 2020, and to ensure that the
Conference delivers on the mandate given it by this
organ. We count on the support of the Assembly in this
worthy endeavour.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.82.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): This oral
statement is made in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of
draft resolution A/73/L.82, the General Assembly
would decide to convene the high-level 2020 United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development, in Lisbon, from 2 to 6 June
2020, to support the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14. The Assembly would also
decide that all costs relating to the Conference and its
preparation shall be financed through extrabudgetary
resources, and welcome the generous offer by the
Governments of Kenya and Portugal to co-host and
assume the costs of the Conference.
Under the terms of paragraph 30, the Assembly
would request the Secretary-General to provide
appropriate support from all relevant parts of the
Secretariat, and in cooperation with other relevant
parts of the United Nations system, to the work of the
Conference and to facilitate inter-agency cooperation
to that end, as well as to ensure the efficient use of
resources, so that the objectives of the Conference can
be achieved.
Pursuant to the requests contained in paragraphs 2,
3 and 30, it is understood that the Governments of Kenya
and Portugal would be responsible for the co-hosting
of the high-level 2020 United Nations Conference to
19-13592

09/05/2019

Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development,
and would assume all the costs associated with the
Conference and its preparation, including all costs
relating to the official documentation of the Conference
issued before, during and after the Conference.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.82 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.82, entitled
“The 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/73/L.82: Algeria, the Central African
Republic, the Comoros, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, Guinea, Honduras, Nigeria, Sri
Lanka, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.82?
Draft resolution A/73/L.82 was adopted (resolution
73/292).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Mr. Lawrence (United States of America): In
joining consensus on resolution 73/292, the United
States reaffirms the statements and clarifications made
at the adoption of resolution 71/312, on 6 July 2017, on
the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call
for action” (see A/71/PV.90), as well as my country’s
explanations of position on relevant outcomes, including
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda.

A/73/PV.80

The United States supports the spirit of the 2030
Agenda as a framework for development, and we will
continue to be a global leader in sustainable development
through our policies, partnerships, innovations and
calls to action. We recognize the call for shared
responsibility, including national responsibility, in the
2030 Agenda and emphasize that all countries have a
role to play in achieving its vision. However, the 2030
Agenda also recognizes that each country must work
towards implementation in accordance with its own
national policies and priorities.
We take this opportunity to make important points
of clarification with regard to the reaffirmation of the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Specifically, we note
that much of the trade-related language in the Addis
Ababa outcome document has been overtaken by events
since July 2015. It is therefore immaterial, and our
reaffirmation of the outcome document has no standing
for ongoing work and negotiations that involve trade.
The United States remains committed to working
with all stakeholders within and outside the United
Nations system to protect our oceans and promote
development through its sustainable use. Through
our collective commitment to the conservation and
sustainable management of the ocean, we can ensure
security and economic prosperity.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of the
consideration of agenda item 20 and of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 78.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 25 at its 75th plenary
meeting, on 15 April 2019. To enable the Assembly to
take action on the draft decision before it today, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 25. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 25?
It was so decided (decision 73/504 B).

19-135923/5

A/73/PV.80

Agenda item 25 (continued)
Operational activities for development
(b) South-South cooperation for development
Draft decision (A/73/L.83)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda to introduce draft decision
A/73/L.83.
Mr. Odida (Uganda): I have the honour to
introduce draft decision A/73/L.83, entitled “Twentieth
session of the High-level Committee on South-South
Cooperation”, for adoption by the General Assembly. I
do this on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Bureau of the Highlevel Committee on South-South Cooperation. The
High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation
attaches great importance to its regular sessions, as they
provide Member States and other relevant stakeholders
with the platform to share knowledge, experience
and best practices on South-South and triangular
cooperation on a voluntary basis in the attainment of
sustainable development and the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The draft decision contains actions to postpone
the twentieth session of the High-level Committee,
previously scheduled for June 2019, to allow enough
time to prepare for the session, while taking into
consideration the Buenos Aires outcome document,
which calls upon the Committee to continue to engage
with Member States in inclusive and transparent
consultations during regular sessions for further
enhancing South-South and triangular cooperation. It is
our belief that postponing the session would enable the
High-level Committee to fully implement the outcome
document. We hope that the General Assembly will
adopt draft decision A/73/L.83 by consensus, as it has
done in previous sessions on issues related to SouthSouth cooperation.
Finally, we wish to express our appreciation
to all delegations, through their respective Bureau
representatives, for their constructive engagement
during the informal consultations on the draft decision.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft decision A/73/L.83, entitled “Twentieth
session of the High-level Committee on South-South
Cooperation”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to adopt the draft decision?
4/5

09/05/2019

Draft decision A/73/L.83 was adopted (decision
73/553).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 117 at its 71st plenary
meeting, on 25 March 2019. In order for the Assembly
to consider the report of the Fifth Committee, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 117. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 117 and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 73/504 B).
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/483/Add.3)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now resume its consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 117 entitled “Appointment of members
of the Committee on Contributions” in order to
consider the report of the Fifth Committee contained
in document A/73/483/Add.3, concerning a vacancy in
the membership of the Committee on Contributions as
a result of the resignation of Ms. Yoon Seongmee of the
Republic of Korea.
In paragraph 4 of its report, the Fifth Committee
recommends that the General Assembly appoint
Mr. Na Sang-deok of the Republic of Korea as a
member of the Committee on Contributions for a term
of office beginning on 9 May 2019 and ending on
31 December 2020.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Na Sang-deok of the Republic of Korea
19-13592

09/05/2019

as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a
term of office beginning on 9 May 2019 and ending on
31 December 2020?
It was so decided (decision 73/405 B).

A/73/PV.80

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

19-135925/5
