A/70/354–S/2015/677

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
1 September 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Items 37 and 38 of the provisional agenda*

Security Council
Seventieth year

The situation in the Middle East
Question of Palestine

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution
69/23. It contains replies received from the parties concerned to the notes verbales sent
by the Secretary-General pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 24 of the
resolution. The report also contains the observations of the Secretary-General on the
current state of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and on international efforts to move the
peace process forward with a view to achieving a peaceful settlement. The report
covers the period from September 2014 through August 2015.

* A/70/150.

15-14704 (E)

110915

*1514704*

A/70/354
S/2015/677

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
69/23.
2.
On 1 July 2015, pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 24 of the
above-mentioned resolution, I addressed the following letter to the President of the
Security Council:
“I have the honour to refer to resolution 69/23, which th e General
Assembly adopted on 25 November 2014, at its sixty-ninth session, under the
agenda item ‘Question of Palestine’.
“Paragraph 24 of the resolution requests the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultat ion with the
Security Council, towards the attainment of a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine and the promotion of peace in the region and to submit to
the General Assembly at its seventieth session a report on these efforts and on
developments on this matter.
“In order to fulfil my reporting responsibilities under this resolution, I
should be grateful if you would kindly convey to me the views of the Security
Council by 31 July 2015.
“Recalling the Secretariat’s obligation to observe the page limit of its
reports, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 52/214, I would like to
encourage the Security Council to limit its submission to 1,500 words.”
3.

As at 1 September, no response had been received to that request.

4.
In a note verbale dated 14 May 2015 to the parties concerned, I sought the
positions of the Governments of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as the State of Palestine, regarding any steps taken by them to
implement the relevant provisions of the resolution. As at 31 August 2015, replies
had been received from Israel and the State of Palestine.
5.
The note verbale dated 27 July 2015 from the Permanent Observer Mission of
the State of Palestine to the United Nations reads as follows:
“The resolution ‘Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine’
constitutes a longstanding contribution by the General Assembly towards
justly, comprehensively and peacefully resolving the question of Palestine
based on international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. The
resolution continues to receive overwhelming support, reaffirming the global
consensus calling for Israel’s complete withdrawal from the Palestinian
territory occupied since June 1967, including East Jerusalem; achievement of
the two-State solution of an independent, sovereign, contiguous State of
Palestine, living side by side with Israel in peace and security within
recognized borders based on the pre-1967 borders; and a just solution for the
Palestine refugees based on resolution 194 (III).
“This consensus reflects the long-held position of the Palestinian people
and leadership, since formal acceptance of the two -State solution in the 1988
Declaration of Independence of the State of Palestine. This significant
compromise to establish the State of Palestine on only 22 per cent of our

2/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

historic homeland for the sake of restoring our rights, achieving our self determination and freedom and ending the conflict is among the boldest
confirmations of Palestine’s commitment to peace. Remarkably, this
commitment has prevailed, despite the historic injustice inflicted on the
Palestinian people since the adoption of partition resolution 181 (II) in 1947
and the tragedy of Al-Nakba of 1948, from which our people continue to suffer
to this day, particularly the Palestine refugees.
“Here, we underscore the gravity of the plight of the Palestine refugees,
who constitute the largest, most protracted refugee problem in the world
(5.3 million people) and are enduring immense hardships, which intens ified
this past year, despite the humanitarian assistance and protection continuously
provided to them by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) since it began operations 65 years ago.
This is due to the impact of Israel’s illegal practices in Occupied Palestine,
including, inter alia, the military aggressions and humanitarian crisis inflicted
on the Gaza Strip, the latest in July-August 2014; the inhumane blockade of
Gaza since 2007; and settlement activities and forced displacement of
Palestinians, including refugees and particularly Bedouins, in the West Bank.
The refugees’ situation has also degenerated due to regional instability,
foremost the Syrian conflict, which has inflicted death, destruction and
displacement on Palestine refugees, along with Syrian civilians suffering so
gravely, and also affected Palestine refugee communities in Lebanon and
Jordan, where many refugees have fled. It has also been affected by UNRWA’s
unprecedented financial shortfalls, which if unmet threaten the Agency’s vital
services, including schooling for 500,000 children, and its stabilizing role at
this precarious time.
“The urgency of achieving a peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in all aspects and of
intensifying efforts towards that end is reaffirmed from the outset of the
operational paragraphs of resolution 69/23. As reflected in the support for
resolution 69/23, the grave impact of this conflict and unsustainabil ity of the
situation and, inversely, the manifold benefits peace would bring for the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples, the Middle East region and the international
community as a whole are facts widely recognized and propelling the
collective calls and efforts for peace. However, 2014-2015 witnessed a
deepening of the political impasse with a breakdown of American -led peace
talks in April 2014 due to Israel’s suspension of negotiations, followed by its
criminal war against Gaza, exacerbating the fragile situation and casting
further doubt on its intentions and commitment to peace and the two -State
solution.
“The year also witnessed continued failure of the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to uphold its obligations to
redress the crisis, salvage the two-State solution and contribute to attainment
of peace. This was most notably reflected in the failure of the Security Council
to adopt the draft resolution (S/2014/916) presented for a vote on 30 December
2014 by Jordan, which called, inter alia, for achievement of a peaceful
solution that brings an end to the Israeli occupation since 1967 and fulfils the
vision of two States within a timeframe of no later than 12 months from the
resolution’s adoption. As of this note’s writing, the Council has failed to heed

15-14704

3/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

the calls to uphold its responsibilities vis-à-vis the search for a peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and efforts in this regard continue to
be obstructed or delayed, including the initiative led by France to reaffirm the
parameters for peace, based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, and establish a timeframe to
end the Israeli occupation as well as international monitoring and support for
implementation of a peace agreement.
“Nevertheless, we continue calling on the Council to uphold its Charter
mandate and adopt a resolution aimed at breaking the political impasse and
accelerating realization of peace and security and continue cooperating with
all efforts for this objective. The provisions of resolution 69/23 are fully
respected by the Palestinian Government, which actively strives to implement
the resolution and the other relevant Security Council and Ge neral Assembly
resolutions in its actions, bilaterally, multilaterally or internally. This is
pursued despite the enormous challenges arising from Israel’s 48 -year military
occupation. We also recognize the necessity of Palestinian unity in this regard
and continue efforts to achieve reconciliation and empower the national
consensus Government to fulfil its duties, despite the cynical Israeli attempts
to thwart unity and entrench the divide.
“Indeed, the State of Palestine has always respected its legal o bligations
and commitments in accordance with United Nations resolutions. We maintain
that respect of the law is the key to resolving the conflict and this has been
clearly reaffirmed by Palestine’s recent accessions to the core international
humanitarian law and human rights law treaties without reservations, as well
as to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and its
exercise of its rights as well as upholding of obligations in this regard. These
accessions — broadly welcomed by the international community — also
underscore Palestine’s intention to use all peaceful, political, legal and
non-violent tools to achieve the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to self-determination.
“Only international law can ensure that negotiations to resolve the final
status issues — Jerusalem, Palestine refugees, settlements, borders, security,
prisoners and water — actually result in a just, sustainable peace. The passage
of decades has certified that neither justice nor peace can be achieved by
military might and illegal actions and that a people can never be coerced to
forgo their rights, regardless of the suffering and indignities forced upon them.
Unfortunately, however, the impunity that Israel, the occupying Power, has for
too long been permitted, never being held accountable for its violations and
war crimes, is prolonging the conflict, undermining peace efforts and
obstructing achievement of a peaceful settlement to the detriment of our
people, the Middle East region and the global community.
“In the past year, Israel has persisted with its illegal policies and
practices, provocations and incitement, which it never ceased from the onset of
the occupation nearly a half century ago through all stages of the peace
process — from the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference to the last incarnation of
negotiations held under the auspices of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry with the support of the other Quartet members of the European Union,
the Russian Federation and the United Nations, the League of Arab States

4/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

Ministerial Committee, and concerned States from around the world — and
thereafter.
“Israel’s violations include, inter alia, continuation of its illegal
settlement campaign in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, involving land confiscation, construction of settlements, the
annexation wall, Israeli-only by-pass roads and other related infrastructure and
the transfer of more Israeli settlers, as well as its military campaign against the
Palestinian people, including the 2014 war on Gaza and daily military raids in
the West Bank, causing death and injury to Palestinian civilians; destruction of
Palestinian homes and property; forced displacement of Palestinians,
particularly Bedouin families; exploitation of natural resources, including
water; daily arrest raids, resulting in imprisonment and administrative
detention of over 6,000 Palestinians, who are enduring inhumane conditions,
abuse and torture at the hands of the occupier; policies aiding and abetting
settler terror and violence against Palestinian civilians and destruction of
property, including agricultural lands and Muslim and Christian holy sites; the
illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip in collective punishment of the
1.8 million Palestinians there and strangulation of the economy and
innumerable other measures of collective punishment against the Palestinian
people, all in breach of international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and the 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, and in violation of provisions of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
“In this regard, we must recall the grave impact of the Israeli military
aggression against the Gaza Strip, where the occupying forces slaughtered and
injured thousands of Palestinian children, women and men, caused wanton
destruction, and terrorized and traumatized the entire population. The
disastrous impact of this Israeli onslaught on the defenseless Pal estinian
civilian population in Gaza has been corroborated by several United Nations
reports, including of the Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry and
the Secretary-General’s Board of Inquiry and in the Secretary-General’s report
on children and armed conflict, in which Israel was wrongly omitted from the
list of grave violators of children’s rights. In fact, the Commission of Inquiry
found that Israel persisted with its onslaught even after early knowledge of the
high casualty figures, indicating a deliberate decision on the part of Israeli
officials to inflict such harm, a fact also confirmed by the testimonies of
Israeli soldiers, who were instructed to kill anyone they encountered in Gaza.
“By the time of the 26 August 2014 ceasefire, the Isra eli occupying
forces had killed 2,251 Palestinians, the majority civilians, including
551 children and 299 women, and injured over 11,000 Palestinians, including
3,540 women and 3,436 children, with injuries so severe due to the lethal
weaponry and wide-impact explosives used that 10 per cent of the injured will
suffer life-long disabilities. A total of 142 families suffered the killing of three
or more family members in Israeli attacks and 89 entire families were killed.
Eleven UNRWA staff were also killed, along with twenty-three health workers.
Civilian casualties continue to be caused by thousands of unexploded Israeli
ordnance remaining in Gaza.

15-14704

5/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

“The physical destruction caused by the Israeli occupying forces
included destruction and severe damage caused to thousands of homes,
schools, businesses, hospitals, United Nations facilities, and civilian
infrastructure. At the conflict’s height, over 500,000 people were displaced,
the majority sheltering in 90 UNRWA schools, where they sought protection
under the United Nations flag, yet where 42 people were killed, including
16 children, in Israeli strikes on the schools. In total, 12,620 homes were
totally destroyed by the occupying forces, 6,455 were severely damaged
beyond habitation and over 80,000 were damaged. A year later, not a single
destroyed home has been rebuilt due to Israel’s blockade and restrictions, with
less than 1 per cent of needed construction materials entering Gaza and donor
funding for reconstruction insufficient despite generous pledge s made at the
Cairo Conference. Over 110,000 people remain homeless, the majority
Palestine refugees, forced to shelter with host families, in temporary housing
or in the ruins of their homes.
“More than 100 United Nations facilities were damaged, 75 hos pitals and
clinics were damaged and 543 schools were damaged or destroyed, the highest
recorded number in the world in 2014. Gaza’s sole power plant was targeted
by Israeli strikes, causing persisting blackouts of 12 to 16 hours a day. Sixtythree water facilities were damaged and twenty-three were destroyed,
worsening the water crisis in an area where 90 per cent of water is unfit for
human consumption. In total, 33,000 meters of water and waste networks and
27 per cent of pumping stations were damaged. In addition, 500 economic and
industrial facilities, constituting 60 per cent of Gaza’s production capacity,
were destroyed, affecting more than 35,000 jobs, deepening poverty, in
addition to livelihoods lost due to the blockade and 2008 -2009 Israeli
aggression. Unemployment in Gaza now stands above 43 per cent, with youth
unemployment at an alarming 60 per cent. Food insecurity is rampant, with
80 per cent of the population aid-dependent.
“Compounding the human insecurity and despair caused by this Israeli
aggression is the humanitarian crisis arising from Israel’s illegal eight -year
blockade of Gaza. This humanitarian crisis has negatively impacted every
single aspect of life, with short- and long-term socioeconomic implications
that are depriving and disfiguring Palestinian society. As recognized globally,
this unjust situation is unsustainable and volatile, requiring immediate remedy
to avert further deterioration and explosion of another cycle of violence.
“One year on, the human and physical wounds remain unhealed in Gaza
and hopes are fading for any relief from this appalling injustice and restoration
of the rights and dignity of our people. This deplorable situation, coupled with
relentless Israeli settlement activities throughout the rest of Occupied
Palestine, repression of Palestinian civilians and incitement by Israeli
government, military and religious leaders and extremist settlers, particularly
regarding Occupied East Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, has
severely aggravated conditions on the ground, entrenched the political impasse
and pushed us farther away from our goal of peace. Clearly, the moment that
Israel launched its 2014 offensive, and considering the illegal actions
perpetrated since and the declarations by Israeli le aders — including the
provocative, anti-two-State remarks by the Prime Minister during the 2015
elections — it aimed to destroy the prospects for peace, intensify its

6/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

oppression of the Palestinian people and strip them of hope for an end to this
cruel occupation and realization of their inalienable rights.
“It is not coincidental that the Israeli aggression was launched against a
backdrop of heightened pressure on Israel in the peace process; international
acceptance of the Palestinian national consensus Government; unanimous
condemnation of settlement activities and the Gaza blockade; and rising calls
for boycott, divestment and sanctions against Israel. It is an obvious repeat of
past crises created by Israel to divert attention and evade efforts to adva nce a
peaceful solution to the conflict, by only paying lip -service to peace while it
actively sabotages the two-State solution with total disrespect for international
law and contempt for the international community.
“That is why — despite the global calls for a just solution based on two
States on the pre-1967 borders, the historic compromise made by the
Palestinian leadership over a quarter century ago, over two decades of
negotiations and the passage of more than 48 years since the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967) — the political impasse continues and peace remains
elusive. This is why resolution 69/23 remains unimplemented. It is the direct
outcome of Israel’s illegal, combative behavior by which it continues to deny
Palestinian rights and perpetuate its illegal occupation and of its rejection of
peace, bad faith and obstruction of all attempts to revive negotiations based on
clear parameters rooted in the Security Council’s resolutions.
“Aiming to prevent further destabilization, stem the human suffering and
salvage the prospects for peace, Palestine has repeatedly drawn international
attention to this grave situation and called for action in line with international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the permanent responsibility
towards the question of Palestine until it is resolved justly in all aspects. The
Palestinian leadership remains insistent that a just peace is the only remedy for
the conflict and the violence, deprivation and instability it engenders, and
firmly rejects the claims that “now is not the right time” for a solution. That
time is actually long overdue. As we witness the instability in Palestine and
throughout the region, we do not have the luxury to continue delaying peace.
Moreover, the Palestinian people can no longer delay realization of their
human rights, nor accept rationales asking them to endure more violations,
suffering and indignities, while the occupying Power is placated and appeased,
not even being held accountable for its most egregious crimes.
“Regrettably, our appeals and efforts have been to no avail and the
Security Council remains paralyzed and the international community unable to
effectively confront Israeli impunity. This makes it more imperative for the
General Assembly to act boldly to address this tragic conflict, which has been
on the agenda of the Organization since its inception, yet shamefully remains
unresolved. Here, in conjunction with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
we stress the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative and its promise for
opening doors to a new era of peace, stability, cooperation and collective
action for our common goals and problems. The international community must
call on Israel to reciprocate this historic initiative.
“Palestine seeks peace and coexistence with Israel, but this must be
based on freedom and justice. This requires a complete end to the Israeli
occupation and the colonial, racist policies that have fueled it for five decades.

15-14704

7/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

Respect for international law and human rights, not military might and
violence, must be the core of this peace. Interim solutions or other palliatives
to ‘ease’ or manage the situation will not suffice. The root causes and
underlying issues of the conflict must be addressed in accordance with
international law.
“The plight of the Palestinian people — from Occupied Palestine to our
refugee camps in the region, especially in Syria — is an existential crisis
urgently demanding a just solution. We appeal to the General Assembly to
uphold the legal, political and moral responsibilities in this regard and
likewise extend this appeal to the entire United Nations system and Member
States to uphold their responsibilities. We also recall relevant declarations by
the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention,
most recently on 17 December 2014, and the obligations in this regard.
“The Security Council in specific is duty-bound to address this conflict,
which continues to threaten international peace and security, and must act
towards bringing a definitive end to the occupation and conflict and
establishing a just and lasting peace. Pending that achievement, action must be
taken to ensure protection to the Palestinian people under Israel’s occupation,
an obligation that the occupying Power has abdicated as it willfully and
wantonly causes harm to the population and is the direct source of their
insecurity, suffering and vulnerability.
“The foundations for peace must be firmly set before this opportunity is
lost to us and the two-State solution is relegated to the archives of history. The
political will must be found to compel Israel to cease all of its illegal policies
and measures in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and comply with its legal obligations. Moreover, there must be accountability
for Israeli crimes against the Palestinian people. Peace and accountability are
not mutually exclusive; both can and must be pursued, for impunity will
always obstruct peace and peace cannot exist without justice.
“We also underscore the universal view that failure to achieve a just
solution to the conflict and continued denial of Palestinian rights, including
Palestine’s rightful place among the community of nations, have severely
undermined international law and the international system, including the
credibility of the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole.
However, despite the failures and setbacks, the Palestinian people still look to
the United Nations, with the democratic General Assembly at the forefront, to
act with conscience to establish peace and fulfill the covenant made over
67 years ago to the Palestinian people in regard to their inalienable rights,
foremost to self-determination. On its part, the Palestinian Government
remains ready to make peace, based on the longstanding parameters, and will
continue cooperating with all international efforts, based on its conviction in
the rule of law and resolve to achieve a just solution that will achieve the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the Palestine
refugees, and achieve Palestinian-Israeli peace, security and coexistence.
“We are at a crossroads that will determine whether the solution of two
States living side by side in peace and security on the basis of the pre -1967
borders will become reality or meet its demise. For genuine progress to be

8/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

made, the crisis on the ground and root causes of this conflict must be
seriously redressed. Respect for resolution 69/23 and all relevant resolutions
would certainly enhance peace prospects. If, however, Israel remains
intransigent, peace efforts will continue failing and we will have to face the
end of the two-State solution and the onset of new collective efforts —
political, legal and popular — for alternative solutions to end the injustice and
realize the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
“We express appreciation for the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and the United Nations system as a whole in support of a peaceful solution and
of Palestinian humanitarian and developmental needs. We also recognize the
important role of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People in raising international awareness and support for
Palestinian rights and a just solution. We also reiterate gratitude for the
principled support of all concerned States and civil society worldwide, and
urge that no effort be spared to achieve long-overdue freedom, justice and
dignity for the Palestinian people and lasting peace and security for our
region.”
6.
The note verbale dated 13 August 2015 from the Permanent Mission of Israel
to the United Nations reads as follows:
“As shown in the meeting records, Israel voted against this resolution, as
it has done on similar resolutions adopted in the past by the General Assembly.
Resolution 69/23 joins the numerous one-sided resolutions passed annually,
and automatically, by the General Assembly which only serve to undermine
the credibility of the United Nations as an impartial agent for the advancement
of peace.
“The State of Israel continuously strives to attain a peaceful settlement of
the conflict with the Palestinians and to promote peace in the region. Time and
time again Israel has demonstrated to the international community its
commitment to finding a long-lasting solution to the conflict. Resolution 69/23
overlooks the steps Israel has taken, and continues to take, to end the conflict.
“At the same time, resolution 69/23 fails to examine the situation
objectively, disregarding the role played by the Palestinians in making it more
difficult to attain a peaceful resolution to the conflict, in particular the role of
Hamas.
“In August 2005, Israel dismantled its settlements and military presence
and disengaged from the Gaza Strip. Rather than using this opportunity for
development, Hamas took advantage of Israel’s absence to launch terror
attacks from Gaza against Israeli citizens. Terror activities escalated further
after Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in 2006. Despite Israel’s
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip in 2005, Hamas has continued to target Israeli
civilians with thousands of rockets. Hamas’ unprovoked attacks are not the
consequence of efforts to seek redress of legitimate grievances, as some claim.
Rather they are a consequence of Hamas’ guiding ideology.
“Hamas is a virulently anti-Semitic organization, whose very charter
calls on Muslims to kill Jews. Hamas is not dedicated to improving the plight

15-14704

9/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

of the people of Gaza. Instead, its goal is nothing less than the destruction of
Israel, no matter the cost to the Palestinian population.
“Last summer, the State of Israel faced constant attack as Hamas
launched more than 4,500 rockets at civilian populations in Israeli towns and
communities. Israel’s south has been the target of bombardment for 15 years,
its children constantly subject to indiscriminate attacks from Gaza. Operation
‘Protective Edge’ was launched as a last resort to reinstate safety and security
to its citizens, litres following the abduction and murder by Hamas of three
Israeli teenagers and the barrage of rockets targeting the Israeli population that
followed.
“During the operation, Israel kept the crossing into Gaza open despite the
constant rocket attacks, including those targeting the crossings themselves.
Over the course of those days (8 July-27 August) 5,779 trucks of goods,
4.58 million litres of diesel fuel for the Gaza power station, 1.73 million litres
of diesel fuel for UNRWA, 9.8 million litres of diesel fuel and 4.26 million
litres of gasoline for transportation needs entered Gaza from Israel.
Throughout the entire conflict, the Erez crossing remained open for medical
purposes.
“Despite the relentless and acute threats to its security, Israel is actively
working to support reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip. Israel has
intensified its cooperation with the international community and with the
Palestinian Authority to facilitate sustainable infrastructural and economic
development in Gaza, in order to meet both the short-term and long-term
needs of the civilian population.
“The following are a few of the extensive measures undertaken by Israel
to facilitate reconstruction in Gaza.
“The border crossings between Israel and Gaza have been upgraded to
allow up to 800 truckloads of building materials and other goods to enter the
Gaza Strip on a daily basis. Every single day, approximately 550 truckloads of
goods, carrying everything from foodstuffs to vehicles, pass into Gaza from
Israel. Israel has also allocated approximately $10 million to further expand
the capacity of the crossings to over 1,000 trucks a day.
“It is important to note that for the past five years, all types of foodstuffs,
as well as all consumer and other goods, have been allowed to enter Gaza from
Israel. The only prohibited items are weapons and a short list of dual -use items
that can be exploited for use in terrorism.
“Israel has facilitated the passage of over 1.2 million tons of materials
into Gaza since the end of last summer’s conflict with Hamas. Of these
materials, over 260,000 tons were sent for the reconstruction mechanis m, over
281,000 tons for international community projects and nearly 650,000 tons for
reconstructing roads.
“Israel is facilitating construction projects in Gaza, including housing
(sometimes the construction of entire neighborhoods) as well as schools,
clinics and infrastructure projects. Such projects may be initiated and funded
by international organizations, foreign States, the Palestinian Authority, or
private entities. Recent progress in these projects includes laying the

10/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

cornerstone for the third stage of a neighborhood in Rafah with 220 housing
units, as well as for the al-Zafer Tower project in Gaza City.
“There are currently 367 ongoing construction projects initiated by
international organizations, in various stages of implementation. As of June 17,
approximately 63 per cent of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism (GRM)
projects have been completed or are in the implementation stage (with work
being carried out or approved yet awaiting the start of work). Ninety -four per
cent of the international projects outside GRM have been completed or are in
the implementation stage.
“More than 14,000 people enter Israel from the Gaza Strip every single
month. This monthly figure includes many thousands of Gazan businessmen,
pilgrims to the Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem, medical care patients and their
escorts on their way to receive urgent medical treatment in Israel and
non-urgent medical treatment in the West Bank, and many more.
“Israel has doubled the number of entry permits from Gaza for members
of the business sector.
“Israel has also facilitated the entry of reconstruction personnel into
Gaza, issuing more than 1,000 permits since summer 2014 for travel from the
West Bank. Likewise, Israel has also facilitated the entry of engineers and
other relevant professionals into Gaza for international community projects.
“Above and beyond the reconstruction efforts, Israel has also undertaken
measures to strengthen the economy of Gaza and improve the lives of its
residents.
“Since October 2014, Israel has facilitated the export of nearly 6 million
tons of industrial goods (mainly textiles and furniture) and agricultural
produce (including fish) from Gaza, via Israel, and marketed to the West Bank,
to Israel and abroad.
“Israel has doubled the amount of water it supplies to Gaza from
5 million to 10 million cubic meters of water annually (2.6 billion United
States gallons). This is in addition to the 125 MW of electricity that Israel
supplies to the Gaza Strip.
“Other economy boosting measures include: setting the fishing zone off
Gaza’s coastline for Palestinian boats at 10 km (6 miles); the establishment of
a Coca-Cola factory, with the requested equipment, in the Karni Industrial
Estate; and the import of engines and second-hand vehicles into the Gaza
Strip.
“Israel has undertaken these measures, and many more, despite the major
security risks they pose. In the past, Hamas (an internationally recognized
terror organization) has diverted massive amounts of aid and imported goods
for use in its terrorist infrastructure. For instance, building materials worth
tens of millions of dollars were diverted by Hamas for the construction of their
cross-border tunnels, which were used to attack Israel during the summer 2014
conflict. Hamas continues to pursue its efforts to rearm, expand its rocket
arsenal and construct the infrastructure it plans to use in its next attack on
Israel.

15-14704

11/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

“Despite Israel’s best efforts, some reconstruction is being hindered by
forces beyond its control. Delays in reconstruction predominantly stem from
the actions of Hamas, which controls Gaza, and the conflict between this
terrorist organization and the Palestinian Authority. For example, Hamas
refuses to allow the Palestinian Authority to take security and civilian
responsibility for the Palestinian side of Gaza’s border crossings with Israel
and Egypt. Furthermore, Hamas continues to misappropriate construction
materials for use in terrorist infrastructures. For its part, the Palestinian
Authority wants to weaken the Hamas regime and this goal appears to be
influencing the pace and extent of its reconstruction activities.
“The Palestinian Authority is not only obstructing the reconstruction of
the physical infrastructure in Gaza, it has failed to construct a credible
political infrastructure. The path to a peaceful settlement requires good
governance and leadership responsive to the will of the people. Yet, the
president of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, is in his eleventh year
of a five-year term.
“The aforementioned steps taken by the State of Israel attest to its
commitment to a peaceful resolution to the conflict. However, this
commitment has not been reciprocated. On the one hand, Hamas has, time and
time again, chosen to invest in terror, not peace. On the other hand, the
Palestinian Authority is avoiding its responsibility for the people it claims to
represent, and fails to lay the foundations for good governance.
“The State of Israel reiterates its willingness for an agreement in accord
with the principles of the two-State solution and acknowledges the important
role played by the Quartet in this matter. Israel calls on the Palestinian
Authority to reaffirm its adherence to the achievement of a permanent and
comprehensive resolution of the conflict, by engaging in confidence building
measures and bilateral agreements in lieu of unilateral declarative actions in
various multinational forums.”

II. Observations
7.
International efforts to promote the peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine focused on the possibility of creating a framework for the parties’ return to
meaningful negotiations. Apart from a meeting between the Israeli and Palestinian
chief negotiators in Amman in late July 2015, there were no direct peace process related talks between the two leaderships.
8.
During most of the reporting period, which immediately followed the
devastating war in Gaza, the situation on the ground was characterized by relatively
low levels of violence, a gradual easing of movement restrictions and a slowdown in
settlement activity in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. However, there were
periods of heightened tension and violence in October and November 2014 and July
2015. The situation in Gaza remained volatile, owing mainly to worsening
socioeconomic conditions, delays in reconstruction, deterioration in internal
security, continued movement restrictions and the deepening political divide
between the Palestinian authorities in Gaza and the West Bank.

12/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

9.
On 30 December, a draft Security Council resolution seeking to reac h a final
status agreement and an end to the occupation by the end of 2017 failed to pass.
10. The following day, President Abbas signed instruments of accession to
18 international treaties, including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. On 2 January, I accepted the submission of 16 instruments of accession after
having ascertained that the instruments received were in due and proper form.
11. On 3 January, in retaliation, Israel, contrary to its obligations under the Paris
Protocol of the Oslo Accords, commenced the withholding of tax revenues collected
on behalf of the Palestinian Authority for the month of December. An agreement
was reached on 27 March between the Palestinian Authority and the Government of
Israel under which Israel transferred more than $470 million in withheld revenues.
12. On 17 March, general elections were held in Israel. I was deeply concerned by
many of the hard-line statements made in the final days of campaigning. I urged the
incoming Government of Israel to act on Prime Minister Netanyahu’s
reaffirmations, after his re-election, of his commitment to the two-State solution.
The Middle East Quartet met at the principals level on 8 February in Munich. The
Quartet prioritized the urgent resumption of negotiations an d a strengthening of its
engagement to prepare for a revival of the peace process, including through regular
and direct outreach to the Arab States and the promotion of the Arab Peace
Initiative. It also called for the acceleration of reconstruction in Gaz a. In July,
Quartet envoys, as part of an active outreach effort, engaged constructively with
Egypt, Jordan and the League of Arab States.
13. Last summer’s conflict in Gaza — the firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel
and the subsequent Israel Defence Forces’ so-called “Operation Protective Edge” —
led to levels of death and destruction unprecedented in this conflict. I deeply regret
the loss of civilian life during the escalation. The intensity and destructiveness of
the conflict substantially exacerbated the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
including the observed deterioration of food security, physical and mental health,
access to basic services and economic livelihoods.
14. In the aftermath of the hostilities, efforts were made to strengthen the ce asefire
brokered by Egypt on 26 August 2014. Addressing dire conditions of the civilian
population in the Gaza Strip remained my priority during the reporting period. To
facilitate reconstruction efforts, the United Nations brokered an agreement between
Israel and the Palestinian Government of national consensus establishing procedures
to enable “dual-use” materials to enter Gaza and their use to be monitored. The
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism was designed as a temporary measure to enable
the entry of critical construction materials at scale and for a wide range of
stakeholders in the immediate post-conflict period. The ultimate objective of the
United Nations in Gaza continues to be the lifting of all closures within the
framework of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) and in a manner which
relieves the suffering of the people of Gaza and addresses the legitimate security
concerns of Israel.
15. I travelled to Cairo on 12 October for the International Conference on
Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, hosted by Egypt and supported by Norway. The
event garnered $5.4 billion in pledges from some 50 countries, with $3.5 billion
intended to support Gaza. As at 14 April, the World Bank reported that only 27.5 per
cent of those pledges had been disbursed. I again urge donors to fulfil the pledges

15-14704

13/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

they made in Cairo last October. From the outset of the conflict in Gaza, I called on
all combatants to respect the sanctity of United Nations premises. However, a
number of incidents occurred during the hostilities in which United Nations
personnel, premises and operations were affected. In response, I established an
internal board of inquiry to review and investigate 10 of those incidents. On
27 April, I released a comprehensive summary of the Board’s report. The Board
found that the seven incidents in which United Nations premises were hit were
attributable to Israel.
16. The Board also reviewed three incidents involving weapons found in UNRWA
schools. In two instances, the Board found that Palestinian armed groups might h ave
used UNRWA school premises to launch attacks. The Board also made a number of
recommendations, including on ways of further improving coordination between the
United Nations and the Government of Israel to better ensure the safety and security
of United Nations personnel and premises. I am actively pursuing these
recommendations.
17. I fully supported the United Nations Independent Commission of Inquiry on
the 2014 Gaza Conflict, led by Justice Mary McGowan Davis, pursuant to Human
Rights Council resolution S-21/1, and its broad investigation into all alleged human
rights and international humanitarian law violations that took place before, during
and after the military operations in Gaza between 13 June and 26 August 2014. It is
my hope that the report of the Commission will pave the way for justice for all of
the victims of last year’s fighting.
18. Alarmingly, unemployment in Gaza reached 43 per cent at the end of 2014.
The conditions in an already devastated Gaza will only worsen, and the risks of
violence and radicalization increase, if the underlying causes of previous conflicts
are not soon addressed.
19. The security implications of the persistent pressures on Gazan society continue
to be felt. Worryingly, reports are increasing of extremist elemen ts seeking to gain a
greater foothold in Gaza in an attempt to ride on the local wave of discontent.
20. Under the leadership of President Abbas, the Palestinian Government of
national consensus — which is fully committed to the principles of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) — must be empowered and enabled to assume its
rightful responsibilities in Gaza, including in particular at the crossings with Israel
and Egypt. Palestinian unity and civil service integration must be addressed as a
priority. The United Nations stands ready to support the President and the
Government of Palestine and all factions in their efforts to reunite the West Bank
and Gaza, in line with the intra-Palestinian unity agreement of 23 April 2014.
21. I also welcomed Egypt’s decision — following consultations with President
Abbas — to open the Rafah crossing for an extended period in June. A regular and
predictable schedule for the opening of Rafah is needed for the movement of
people, especially for humanitarian cases, as the security situation allows.
22. Since the establishment of the temporary Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism,
approximately 90,000 households in Gaza have accessed construction material for
partially damaged housing. In this regard, on 22 June, the Palestinian M inistry of
Public Works and Housing launched the “Residential Stream”, which is intended to
provide simplified access to construction material for the rebuilding of the
approximately 18,000 completely or severely destroyed homes, as well as for the

14/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

construction of completely new housing to help offset the pre -war housing deficit of
approximately 70,000 units. Some 1,700 beneficiaries have already been cleared
and around 600 have purchased the required construction materials. These are
positive steps on the long road to meeting Gaza’s reconstruction needs. I would like
to acknowledge and encourage a continuation of Israel’s constructive cooperation
with the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism.
23. There have been a number of other significant achievements since the end of
hostilities in August 2014. Notably, the last internally displaced persons left the
United Nations collective centres in Gaza on 17 June 2015. Nevertheless, the
overall reconstruction of Gaza remains slow, with considerable financing gaps. On
12 February, the United Nations, in partnership with the Government of Palestine,
launched the Strategic Response Plan for 2015, which aims to address the
humanitarian needs of 1.6 million Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank. The Plan
requests $705 million, 75 per cent of which is for Gaza.
24. The reporting period witnessed one attempt to break the Gaza maritime
blockade. The Israeli navy intercepted the Marianne, a vessel which was part of the
“Gaza Freedom Flotilla”, on 29 June in international waters. I r eiterate my calls on
the Government of Israel to lift all closures, with due consideration of Israel’s
legitimate security concerns.
25. The Government of Israel has taken several positive steps in that direction,
including lifting the eight-year ban on exports from Gaza to Israel and the West
Bank, increasing quotas and expanding criteria for the exit of Palestinians from
Gaza through the Erez crossing and increasing the capacity of the Kerem Shalom
crossing. As a result, we have seen a significant rise in the number of people and
goods passing through the crossings. I encourage the Government of Israel to pursue
this policy further.
26. I remain worried about the state of human rights and freedoms in Gaza. Of
particular concern are the reports of arbitrary detention being carried out by
Palestinian security forces and the reports of ill-treatment in detention centres in
Gaza. I call on the de facto authorities in Gaza to refrain from carrying out further
executions. I also urge the Palestinian Authority to fulfil its responsibilities, with
full respect for international human rights laws.
27. In July, the Government of Israel revealed that two of its citizens had entered
the Gaza Strip independently, in two separate incidents, since September 2014. I
reiterate my call to all relevant Palestinian actors in Gaza to provide information as
to the possible whereabouts and conditions of the missing Israelis and to take
prompt action to facilitate their safe return to their families.
28. On 30 July, the Palestinian Authority announced a partial reshuffle of the
current Government, appointing five new ministers. Hamas rejected the reshuffle,
arguing that it was not in line with previous agreements.
29. Violence in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continued. The causes
included Israeli security operations, violence by Jewish extremists, protests and
attacks against Israelis by Palestinians and religious tensions associated with the
Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount. The Israel Defense Forces conducted 4,236 search
and arrest operations, resulting in 5,638 Palestinians being arrested. In the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, a total of 27 Palestinian civilians were killed and
2,755 Palestinians injured. Seven Israeli civilians and one of the Israel Defense

15-14704

15/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

Forces personnel were killed and 112 Israeli civilians and 60 Israeli security forces
personnel were injured. The Palestinian Authority continued arrests of suspected
Hamas affiliates in the West Bank.
30. Shortly after the beginning of the reporting period, the Govern ment of Israel
appeared to put on hold settlement planning and tendering in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. The so-called planning freeze was violated in July by the
Government’s decision to advance construction and “legalization” of hundreds of
units. Settlement activity in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, is illegal under international law.
31. Settler violence has decreased since 2014. As the result of attacks by settlers
2 Palestinians were killed and 86 Palestinians, including 22 children, were injured
during the reporting period. Four Israeli settlers were killed and 96 Israeli settlers
were injured by Palestinians. The most egregious example of settler violence during
the reporting period took place on 31 July, when Ali Dawabsha, a Palestinian
toddler, was murdered and the members of his family severely injured during an
attack on their home in the West Bank. Ali’s father, Sa’ad Dawabsha, died from his
wounds on 8 August. I condemned this despicable act of terror, as did the Security
Council and the leadership of Israel. The incident led to violent demonstrations,
resulting in clashes between Palestinians in the West Bank and the Israel Defense
Forces, as well as attacks on Israeli civilians by Palestinians. In addition, rockets
were fired at Israel from Gaza and subsequent Israeli airstrikes were conducted. As I
have stated numerous times, the indiscriminate firing of rockets against Israeli
civilian targets by Hamas and other militant groups in Gaza is a violation of
international law.
32. The demolitions and evictions that took place in Area C of the West Bank are
of deep concern and were condemned by the international community. Palestinians
require access to a fair planning and zoning regime if they are not to resort t o the
building of unauthorized structures that lead to unjustified demolitions. During the
reporting period, 441 structures were demolished, causing the displacement of some
632 Palestinians, including 344 children. I reiterate my concern about the fate of
7,000 Palestinian Bedouins and herders in the occupied West Bank, who may be at
risk of forcible transfer as Israel advances its plan to relocate these communities in
three sites in Area C. This plan, which may be linked to settlement expansion in E1
and other areas, would seriously jeopardize the realization of the two -State solution.
Similarly, I repeat my deep concern over the Israeli demolition orders for Susiya. I
am also concerned about the risk of a forcible transfer of the Um al -Kheir Bedouin
refugee community after the recent demolition of five dwellings next to an Israeli
settlement near Hebron. Demolitions and forcible transfers contravene international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
33. Tensions also continued in occupied East Jerusalem, especially in the autumn
months of 2014. Escalating tensions surrounding access to the holy sites contributed
significantly to the spike in violence. The shooting of a campaigner for Jewish
prayer rights on the Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount on 29 October was followed by
a series of attacks in East Jerusalem, including clashes at the Noble Sanctuary.
Restrictions on access to holy sites in the Old City were imposed on the
Palestinians, leading to multiple clashes between worshippers and the Isr aeli
security forces. King Abdullah of Jordan and United States Secretary of State Kerry
organized separate meetings with President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu in

16/18

15-14704

A/70/354
S/2015/677

Amman on 13 November. Both sides announced firm commitments to maintain the
status quo regarding the holy sites.
34. As of August 2015, 370 Palestinians were held by Israeli authorities in
administrative detention, compared with 477 at the beginning of the reporting
period. I reiterate my long-standing position that those detained must be charged
and brought to trial or released without delay. The Government’s decision on
14 June, which was subsequently approved by the Knesset, to permit force -feeding
of prisoners on hunger strike under certain conditions is in contravention of
international conventions.
35. Palestinians continued to advance their State-building programme. Despite a
strong international consensus that the Palestinian Authority was capable of running
a State, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee was concerned about its economic viabi lity
during the reporting period. It maintained that concerted action was urgently
required to stabilize the fiscal position of the Palestinian Authority, which faces a
deficit of approximately $500 million for 2015, and to rekindle private sector -led
economic growth. Efforts towards structural reform by the Palestinian Authority,
including fiscal containment, and adequate and predictable assistance to the
Government of Palestine by donors were considered essential to manage the deficit.
The International Monetary Fund reported on 29 January that Palestinian economic
activity had contracted in 2014 for the first time since 2006.
36. Israel has taken several steps to ease movement restrictions in the West Bank,
including allowing entry into Israel without per mit for Palestinian men over 55 and
women over 50. Further measures were implemented during Ramadan, although
they were later retracted owing to an escalation in violence. I also note positively
that the number of Palestinians from the West Bank employed i n Israel continued its
rise of the past few years and is today at its highest since the beginning of the peace
process in the early 1990s. I strongly encourage the Government of Israel to
continue implementing measures that would facilitate sustainable gro wth and job
creation for the Palestinian economy.
37. As noted in my last report, I remain seriously concerned about the lack of
political progress and the high risk of an outbreak of violence between Israel and
Palestinian militants. What is important now is for the international community to
work together with the parties on the ground and in the region to create the
conditions for a return to meaningful negotiations. In particular, I urge Israel to
cease all settlement activity in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and to take further steps to ease the restrictions in place in the West Bank and Gaza.
I also strongly encourage all Palestinians to pursue the path of non -violence and
unity, in line with the PLO commitments, and call on them to make efforts to
improve law and order, to combat extremism and incitement against Israel and to
continue building strong and democratic institutions, which are essential to a viable,
independent Palestinian State.
38. I would like to express my deep appreciation to the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, whom I
appointed on 5 February, and his predecessor, Robert H. Serry, whom I thank for his
outstanding performance during his seven-year tenure. I am also grateful to Pierre
Krähenbühl for his able leadership as Commissioner-General of UNRWA. I pay
tribute, too, to all United Nations staff who work in this area under difficult, at
times dangerous, circumstances in the service of the United Nations. In May, Tony

15-14704

17/18

A/70/354
S/2015/677

Blair stepped down from his position as Quartet Representative for the Middle East.
I reiterate my appreciation for his leadership over eight years.
39. As Secretary-General, I will continue to ensure that the United Nations works
towards the establishment of an independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side in peace with a secure Israel, within the
framework of a comprehensive regional settlement consistent with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009), and
in accordance with the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle of land
for peace.

18/18

15-14704
