asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6840

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6840th meeting
Thursday, 20 September 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Notutela
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2012/703)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-51598 (E)

*1251598*

S/PV.6840

mutual accountability. Generous donor pledges for
social and economic development were matched by
Afghan Government commitments, notably in the areas
of good governance, anti-corruption, human rights and
elections.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2012/703)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada, Finland, Japan and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/703, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Following the Bonn Conference
in 2011, the recent series of successful high-level
meetings has redefined and reinvigorated the long-term
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community. The NATO Summit in Chicago produced a
solid commitment to supporting Afghan security forces
well beyond the end of the international combat mission
in 2014. The Heart of Asia ministerial conference in
Kabul put the Istanbul process, regional cooperation
and political consultations on firm ground with
prioritized confidence-building measures. Finally,
in Tokyo on 8 July, Afghanistan and its international
partners concluded a long-term compact based on

2

Continued, predictable support and funding for
Afghanistan is dependent on credible progress in
meeting the mutually agreed Tokyo benchmarks.
Donors in turn have committed not just to funding
levels, but on how money is to be spent. It is understood
that assistance must reinforce Government systems.
That applies also to the United Nations family. And
we, the United Nations family, are also committed to
reinvigorating the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board as a more effective forum to ensure mutual
accountability in driving and monitoring the Tokyo
Framework.
As reported by the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Afghan authorities,
both the military campaign and the security transition
are on time and on track. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/703) shows a decrease in security incidents
between May and July as compared to 2011. Yet many
ordinary citizens and Government officials throughout
Afghanistan continue to point to the ongoing fragility
of the security situation in Afghanistan and to the fear
and insecurity that impede everyday life. Even where
there are no armed clashes, an insidious campaign of
intimidation and targeted killings is claiming the lives
of Government officials, women’s rights activists,
tribal elders and community leaders, including those
actively working for peace. Insecurity comes not just
at the hands of the Taliban and other anti-Government
forces, but also from predatory armed groups and
narcotics rings. The impact is visible in the curtailed
delivery of development programmes and humanitarian
aid. Outreach by Government services and personnel is
limited in many part of the country.
Recently I visited Kunar, a province bordering
Pakistan. There I learned about the concerns of civilians
arising from cross-border shelling. Humanitarian
agencies have registered more than 700 families — that
is, approximately 4,000 individuals — displaced from
Kunar border districts to the neighbouring province
of Nangarhar since April. I was also glad to hear that
authorities in Afghanistan and Pakistan are already
engaged in multi-level dialogue in order to resolve this
situation and address its root causes.

12-51598

S/PV.6840

Reports of uprisings against the Taliban in various
areas of the country are a new development requiring
greater analysis. Amidst three decades of conflict, the
drivers of violence are complex and the actors and their
allegiances fluid. The desire of local communities to
have security and justice has led them to taking the
situation into their own hands. There is a risk of even
greater fragmentation of the security environment.
Many of these localized conflicts would appear to be
resistance to the Taliban, but not necessarily in support
of a greater Government presence. The Government
should eventually be the solution, notably by ensuring
improved sub-national governance and the rule of law.
The success of another transition — that of detention
facilities — will depend in large part on the extent to
which any future administrative detention regime
respects core human rights protections for detainees,
particularly fair trial standards and the prevention of
torture. I call on the new leadership in the National
Directorate of Security and the Ministry of the Interior
to implement the reforms necessary to prevent torture
and inhumane treatment in all of their facilities.
The ultimate key to a future stable Afghanistan will
be, however, successful Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
political transition. The 2014 presidential elections are at
the centre of attention. The conduct of credible polls with
a mandate for the new country’s leadership is essential
to national unity and legitimacy and, as highlighted in
Tokyo, a critical component of ongoing international
support. I continuously encourage wide consultations
and robust public debate over the future election
process, including an improved legal framework for
the elections, independent electoral institutions and the
media coverage of the elections. It is such inclusiveness
that will help ensure the transparency, integrity and
acceptability of the elections and their results. At the
same time, this is a time-bound process, and crucial
decisions by the Independent Election Commission on
voter registration, drawing lessons from past problems
and mistakes and ensuring that all eligible voters
have a chance to vote, are required soon, as is the
demonstrable support of the Government and donors.
The United Nations will support decisions taken by the
Afghan authorities that contribute to the sustainability,
integrity and inclusiveness of the electoral process.
The strong and credible leadership of and by
the Independent Election Commission is another
vital aspect of electoral preparations. In appointing
senior electoral officials, a wide-ranging consultative

12-51598

process on potential candidates who enjoy respect and
acceptability across the political spectrum is essential.
Also crucial is clear agreement, with wide buy-in, on
the final dispute resolution mechanism.
Fostering an environment conducive to building
national accord on a peaceful and stable Afghanistan is
among our priorities. As part of this, we plan to support
a track II inter-Afghan dialogue to help engage civil
society and broad political forces in discussing the
future of the country. Given the increasing urgency
of seeing progress towards peace and reconciliation,
I would consider it useful to reflect upon possible
revisions of the travel ban procedure, while fully
respecting the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the sanctions regime under resolution 1988 (2011). Such
revisions could further facilitate the safe passage and
travel of those anti-Government forces that genuinely
wish to participate in contacts, discussions and talks for
the purpose of reconciliation.
I welcome the continued momentum of the Istanbul
process and the gradual start of the activities of the
relevant working groups on confidence-building
measures. I also welcome the emerging interest
of regional organizations, notably the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, in engaging with Afghanistan and
UNAMA in a structured dialogue for the benefit of
Afghanistan and the region.
At UNAMA, together with the wider United
Nations family, we are working to sharpen and focus
activities in a challenging and ever-shifting security
and political environment. A criticality review — the
first undertaken by a special political mission — is
currently under way. Good offices, regional cooperation
and support for elections, peace and reconciliation;
an impartial voice and advocacy on human rights,
including the rights of women and children; and helping
drive development coherence and humanitarian aid are
at the very core of what UNAMA does and I assume
will also do after 2014, while fully respecting the new,
sovereign Afghanistan.
Despite the closure of nine field offices, UNAMA
still emphasizes national outreach and will continue
to provide support throughout the country. I myself
visited seven provincial capitals in this quarter. In two
of these, Uruzgan and Ghor, while UNAMA will no
longer maintain a permanent physical presence, we
managed to hand over our field offices to other United
Nations agencies. UNAMA’s increased focus on core
3

S/PV.6840

activities amidst transition is taking place in conditions
of a steep budget reduction for 2013. Fewer resources
necessarily mean that UNAMA can deliver less, and
I will not pretend otherwise. But in making strategic
choices, we will focus on support for the Afghan
authorities in the priority areas of our mandate in a way
that ensures maximum impact.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan.
Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): It is truly a pleasure to
be among the members of the Security Council today at
this critical juncture on Afghanistan’s path to peace and
prosperity. I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
September, and convey our appreciation for Germany’s
continual support and assistance for Afghanistan during
its tenure on the Council. Let me also convey a warm
welcome to my good friend and colleague the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ján Kubiš. We
thank him for his clear presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2012/703).
We meet at an important time as Afghanistan is
transitioning confidently into a vibrant, self-reliant
and sovereign nation — a nation that is increasingly
taking full charge of its destiny. The Afghan people are
inspired by the prospect of a future free from violence
and war. And thanks to our joint efforts, important
progress towards that endeavour continues.
As we speak, Afghanistan has surpassed the halfway
point on our transition to full security responsibility.
Given the commencement of the third tranche of
security transition in May, 75 per cent of the country
will be under Afghan security responsibility by the
end of November. Our progress is on track to complete
the security transition by the end of 2013. The Afghan
army and police are showing more resilience and
effectiveness as they take on increasing responsibility
to meet the country’s security needs.
Needless to say, the sustainability of the Afghan
National Security Forces is inextricably linked to the
international community’s long-term support. The
outcome of the recent Chicago NATO Summit was
a clear manifestation of our international partners’
resolute commitment to a strong and effective Afghan
national security force. We also welcome NATO’s
decision to develop a new training, advising and

4

assistance role, which will take effect in 2014, and we
look forward to working with our relevant partners on
the scope and mandate of the new mission.
The Afghan people are encouraged by the
international community’s assurance of assistance in
ensuring peace and prosperity throughout the transition
into the transformation decade of 2015-2024. In that
regard, commitments made at the Bonn conference last
year, the NATO summit in May and more recently at
the Tokyo Conference in July are crucial to our longterm success.
The Tokyo Conference marked the beginning
of a new relationship between Afghanistan and
our international friends based on results-oriented
cooperation and conducted under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. We expect the international
community to meet its commitment in channelling
assistance through our core budget and aligning its
aid with the Afghan national priority programmes.
Combating corruption, strengthening governance and
consolidating the rule of law will remain key priorities
for us.
President Karzai’s decree of July of this year is
a significant step in our counter-corruption efforts.
It will be implemented through clear, time-bound
measures conducted by all Government ministries,
agencies and departments with a view to achieving full
accountability and transparency.
Afghanistan is regaining its legitimate place in the
region and the world, through playing an active role in
its neighbourhood and the international community.
Our multilateral agreements and strategic partnerships
involve long-term commitments among Afghanistan
and our international partners. The partnerships we
have formed, both in our neighbourhood and beyond,
are essential to preserving the historic achievements
of Afghanistan’s young democracy and securing the
country’s future peace and stability.
Thus far, we have concluded strategic, long-term
partnership agreements with United States of America,
India, China, Germany, France, Italy, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
Australia. We see those partnerships as key elements
in our collective fight against the twin menaces of
terrorism and extremism and in supporting our evolving
national ownership in order to achieve future peace and
stability.

12-51598

S/PV.6840

As we continue our transition, with bold steps
towards strengthened Afghan sovereignty and national
ownership, the enemies of Afghanistan have continued
their desperate attempts to undermine our progress
towards a brighter future. Terrorist attacks have
increasingly targeted families and innocent Afghan
men, women and children in many parts of the country,
putting a brutal and tragic halt to their peaceful lives.
Undoubtedly, the unremitting violence plaguing
Afghanistan has resulted from the continued military,
financial and ideological support enjoyed by terrorists,
and the presence of sanctuaries and safe-havens outside
the country’s borders.
Despite the continuing fight against terrorism,
the next few years of political and security transition
will be vital to a stable future for Afghanistan. We are
working diligently to ensure fruitful results in the peace
and reconciliation efforts under way. Our inclusive
peace and reconciliation process seeks to build trust
and confidence among all Afghans. We are determined
to integrate within the folds of society those elements
of the armed opposition who are willing to renounce
violence, cut ties with the terrorist groups and accept
the Afghan constitution.
The High Peace Council has revitalized its approach
to reconciliation efforts. The international community
and our region have an important part to play. The role of
the Security Council will be imperative in that process.
We thank the Council for supporting our reconciliation
efforts by meeting the delisting requests that we have
presented. By the same token, we hope that the new
mandate of the Taliban sanctions committee will
include the necessary adjustments — in recognition
of the importance of an Afghan-owned and Afghanled peace and reconciliation process — to promote a
more responsive and flexible sanctions regime to be
used more effectively and positively in encouraging
those who are willing to join that process. We therefore
look forward to working closely with Council members
to amend resolution 1988 (2011) in a way that further
benefits and accelerates the Afghan peace process.
The violence in Afghanistan has had a drastic
effect on the security and well-being of our citizens. We
express our serious concern about the growing number
of civilian casualties in Afghanistan, the majority of
which are caused by the Taliban and other extremist
groups. Meanwhile, loss of innocent life and harm to
populations have also occurred in the course of NATO
operations. The loss of even one innocent life is one

12-51598

too many. We underscore, yet again, the need to exert
all measures necessary to protect civilian populations.
The greatest challenges to peace and stability in
Afghanistan, such as terrorism, extremism and narcotic
drugs, are shared regionally and internationally. Our
shared threats require cooperative solutions. We are
working with regional countries and other partners for
a comprehensive response to those menaces. Launched
in November of last year, the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan is gaining momentum. The process
was further crystallized at the Heart of Asia ministerial
conference in Kabul in June, with the prioritization of
key confidence-building measures. We look forward to
coming together with our Heart of Asia partners in this
city, in less than a week from today, at the next meeting
of senior officials.
Let me now turn to a matter of deep and serious
concern to my Government and the Afghan people.
The shelling of areas of Kunar province in eastern
Afghanistan from across the Durand Line has led to
unprecedented anger and frustration among Afghans
from all walks of life. We reiterate our call for an
immediate and complete end to such acts, which have
taken the lives of dozens of Afghans, mainly civilians,
and left many more wounded. We remain in close
contact with the Government of Pakistan to address
that issue holistically and resolutely.
Failure to end such attacks risks jeopardizing
Afghanistan-Pakistan bilateral relations, with potential
negative consequences for the bilateral cooperation
necessary for peace, security and economic development
in our two countries and the wider region. Afghanistan
desires close and fruitful relations with Pakistan, a
neighbour with whom we share historical, cultural and
traditional ties.
As we work to tackle the challenges on the
road ahead, let us not lose sight of the historic,
transformative successes achieved thus far. Significant
advances in social and economic development are
clearly evident. Millions of students — boys, girls,
men and women — are enrolled in primary and higher
education. A majority of Afghans now have access to
basic health services and are increasingly taking part
in the democratic process through the exercise of their
right to shape their own destiny.
While we have seen such changes unfolding
throughout the last decade, today we can be proud that

5

S/PV.6840

the initiatives under way in the area of development
are increasingly Afghan-driven and Afghan-led,
with support from the international community.
That characteristic is crucial for the sustainability of
development efforts and for helping Afghanistan to
realize its full potential. With the next Presidential
elections fast approaching, we are fully committed to
ensuring a transparent election process, free of any
external interference.
After over three decades of struggle and suffering,
we are moving ahead with Afghanistan’s recovery and
renewed strength. Afghans recognize the important
indications of our sovereignty. We are determined to
further our efforts towards national ownership across
the board, as the most effective way to ensure lasting
peace and security in our country.
Before concluding, allow me to register the
Afghan Government’s strong condemnation of the
recent senseless, provocative acts of insult to Islam
and Prophet Mohammad, Peace Be Upon Him. While
acknowledging our fellow Muslims’ right to peacefully
protest against those insults, we deplore any violence
resulting from such protests, especially against
diplomatic representations anywhere in the world.
The key to Afghanistan’s future success
is cooperation, both in our transition and the
transformation decade to follow. Building trust and
confidence with the international community is
the basis for our path to security and prosperity. We
are pleased that the Security Council continues to
follow the situation closely, and we are thankful for
their support and the support of the United Nations,
including with regard to revising the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
line with the demands of Afghan sovereignty. With
long-term cooperation and partnership at the centre of
our efforts, we are confident that together we can build
a more peaceful, stable Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing. I also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul to the
Council and thank him for his statement.
Both of those statements presented a clear and
comprehensive picture of Afghanistan today, of its
achievements and of the challenges that still lie ahead.
I will therefore not elaborate on them but will restrict
6

myself to two points that Portugal deems particularly
important.
The first is the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan.
Portugal believes that the Mutual Accountability
Framework represents a practical and verifiable
cornerstone that, together with the results of the Bonn
Conference and the Chicago Summit, will allow us to
build lasting cooperation between Afghanistan and the
international community, strongly founded on shared
interests and accountability. Implementing the Tokyo
Framework will require, in the short and medium term,
not only especially active statesmanship on the part
of the Afghan authorities but also transparency and
renewed cooperation among Afghan and international
partners in a decisive phase that is not without tensions
and risks.
In the case of Afghanistan, integration and
partnership at the regional level are certainly no
less relevant than cooperation with the wider world.
In that regard, progress in regional integration
initiatives, among which we would like to highlight
the Istanbul Process — as do the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/703) and the statements we have just
heard — is an encouraging example of what can be
achieved through vigorous Afghan leadership and a
strong commitment to peace and stability.
Secondly, let me raise the issue of human rights. I
would like to underline the particular predicament of
children in the context of the Afghan conflict. Their
specific targeting is particularly odious, and that matter
must continue to receive due attention in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports. Denying children humanitarian
access to health care and vaccination, as has recently
been the case, is a gross violation of their rights and a
crime against the people and the future of Afghanistan.
The efforts of Afghan and international forces to
reduce civilian casualties must be acknowledged. It is
our hope that the transition and further assumption of
responsibility for security by Afghan forces will also
continue to translate into better tracking and mitigation
of civilian casualties, as well as into reliable and clear
accountability mechanisms.
As regards the rights of women, the information in
the report is far from encouraging. Not only do harmful
traditional practices continue to infringe on women’s
and girls’ rights, but the recent mockery of justice
on the part of the Taliban against a young woman
has rightly caused outrage around the world. The

12-51598

S/PV.6840

courageous and sensitive work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in that
area deserves our full support and appreciation. We
call once more on national authorities and international
partners to support implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women and of a national
action plan for women in Afghanistan. I should also note
that the report mentions that efforts to recruit women
police officers are lagging. We urge the Government of
Afghanistan to continue to address the matter, since it
is critical to ensuring access to justice for women and
children.
I will conclude by reiterating my country’s support
for the work of UNAMA and its Special Representative.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
is undergoing a reconfiguration process that presents
renewed challenges in a very difficult environment. Its
mission is not yet finished. The Security Council will
continue to follow the Mission’s activity closely and
make sure that it will continue to be able to fulfil its
mandate in supporting Afghanistan on its path to peace
and prosperity, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan rightly said.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/703).We would also like to welcome Mr. Ján
Kubiš and thank him for his briefing and his excellent
work at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Let me also
recognize the presence of Minister Zalmai Rassoul,
whom we wish to thank for his helpful intervention.
The Secretary-General’s report discusses some relevant
events that we would like to highlight.
First, we commend the success of the Tokyo
Conference, which has further consolidated the
commitments of the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community and thereby strengthened
a lasting partnership. We support the new Mutual
Accountability Framework, focused on security,
sustainable and legitimate Government structures
and, no less important, the promotion of economic
development in Afghanistan. We will follow attentively
the implementation of the commitments attentively,
and we welcome the Government’s efforts to formulate
ways to implement the results.
In that regard, we know that Tokyo addressed
the importance of holding credible, inclusive and
transparent presidential and parliamentary elections

12-51598

in 2014 and 2015, in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution. We hope that it will be possible to agree
on a legal and technical framework to facilitate those
efforts in a timely manner. It will be particularly
important to ensure that an electoral law and a law on
the duties and structure of the Independent Electoral
Commission are passed in the first quarter of 2013, one
year before the elections.
Secondly, we are pleased that the transition process
in the security sector has, up to now, gone forward as
expected and hoped, though not without significant
challenges that continue to be a cause for concern. On
the one hand, we are encouraged by the continuing
progress being made in the process of transferring
responsibility for security, which now covers 75 per
cent of the population. On the other hand, as we know,
Afghanistan’s problems cannot be resolved through
military means alone. That is why we would like to
see the same degree of progress and resolve directed at
the peace and reconciliation process, which should be
guided and led by the Afghans. We support UNAMA
in its continued role of supplier of good offices. We
also believe that the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) is a worthwhile and
appropriate tool.
Thirdly, we again raise the issue of the protection
of civilians. While we have noted a drop in the number
of civilian victims, we are nonetheless alarmed by the
complexity and intensity of those attacks. We agree
with the report’s assessment that attacks on colleagues
and international counterparts by persons in Afghan
uniform are a worrying development affecting trust
during a security transition that needs to be based on
close coordination between the parties. We also feel
that the situation of women and girls in Afghanistan
is deplorable. We therefore call for concrete steps to be
taken to protect and ensure their rights, and we firmly
support the United Nations in that area.
Finally, we cannot fail to express our concern about
the substantial decline in the resources allocated to
UNAMA, and we hope that efforts will be made to have
that decline affect its operational capacity and ability to
fulfil its mandate as little as possible. This is a delicate
time during which we should rather be considering
strengthening the presence of the United Nations in
order to ensure that Afghanistan will be ready and able
to deal adequately with the stage to come after 2014.
Also, taking into account the enormous humanitarian
needs in Afghanistan, we were struck by the fact that

7

S/PV.6840

on 1 August financing of the Consolidated Appeals
Process was at a level of 33.5 per cent — in other words,
much less than half of the amount that was available
during the same period of 2011.

the lead for security arrangements. The fact that there
has been no significant deterioration of public order in
areas where transition has taken place is a testament to
the success of that programme.

I would like to conclude by saying that Guatemala
supports Afghanistan’s aspirations to become a
democratic, prosperous and stable country, which is
a vision shared by the international community and
which should be demonstrated in the form of political
will.

The issue of so-called green on blue attacks has
featured prominently this week. The security of our
deployed forces in Afghanistan — or anywhere in
the world — remains a top priority, but that does not
imply any shift in the commitment of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to partnering with,
training, advising and assisting our counterparts in the
Afghan National Security Forces.

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/703) and his
Special Representative, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing.
I also welcome the contribution of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
to today’s debate.
I will focus my statement on three areas — the
recent Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan, progress on
transition and the strength of regional cooperation and
support to Afghanistan.
First, with regard to Tokyo, there has been
significant progress on development in Afghanistan
over the last decade. Millions more children attend
schools, and 85 per cent of the population now has
access to basic health care facilities. But Afghanistan
will need further support to maintain the progress. The
Tokyo Conference brought the international community
together to respond to the challenge. Major commitments
were made by international donors to demonstrate longterm support for Afghanistan to a total of $16 billion
over four years. The United Kingdom has committed to
maintaining funding at current levels — £178 million a
year every year for five years.
The Afghan Government has acknowledged that it
must play its part in return. The Mutual Accountability
Framework adopted at Tokyo commits the Afghan
Government to improving governance, undertaking
electoral reforms, tackling corruption and promoting
human rights, especially those of women. We look
forward to working with the Afghan Government in
achieving those goals over the coming months and
years.
Secondly, with regard to transition, the transition of
responsibility for security arrangements to the Afghan
authorities is progressing well. Seventy-five per cent
of the Afghan population will soon live in regions
where the Afghan National Security Forces have taken

8

It is the tragedy of all conflicts that civilians often
carry the heaviest burden of suffering. The protection
of the Afghan civilian population remains at the core
of ISAF’s military strategy. ISAF forces work hard to
minimize levels of civilian casualties. As the report of
the Secretary-General once again highlights, ISAF has
had considerable success in that respect. On the other
hand, the United Kingdom notes with grave concern
that the insurgency continues to target civilians
indiscriminately.
Thirdly, with respect to regional cooperation, the
United Kingdom welcomes the significant progress
made through the Istanbul process. The United
Kingdom is one of a number of countries supporting
the process, sharing expertise and providing technical
assistance where requested. The United Kingdom
Foreign Secretary participated in the Kabul ministerial
conference in June, where we offered our support for
confidence-building measures on disaster management,
counter-terrorism, counter-narcotics and for chambers
of commerce. Regional cooperation of that type will be
key in supporting the future stability of Afghanistan,
and it is reassuring to see such commitment from all
involved.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a vital role to play,
both during and beyond transition, in coordinating
international efforts and supporting the Government
of Afghanistan as it delivers on its commitments. It is
important that we find the right level of funding for
UNAMA’s activities, just as it is essential that clear
strategic criteria underpin decisions to find budget
efficiencies. Special Representative Kubiš has our
full support in that regard, as he seeks to ensure that
UNAMA continues to implement its core mandate as
set out in resolution 2041 (2012).

12-51598

S/PV.6840

Over the course of 2012, the Afghan Government
has made a number of significant undertakings. In
parallel, from the Chicago Summit in May to the
Kabul Ministerial Conference in June and the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan in July, the international
community has demonstrated that its commitment to
Afghanistan is for the long term. Let me conclude by
making clear that the United Kingdom will continue
to work with the people and the Government of
Afghanistan, as well as the international community, to
build a stable future for the country.

months. While those incidents might seem not to have
affected the transition process, which provides for
Afghans assuming total responsibility and leadership
in 2014, it is still necessary to continue increasing the
professionalism and capacity of the security forces
and law enforcement in the Afghan police, including
institutionalization of the mechanisms of accountability
and the fight against impunity, as well as deepening
measures undertaken to provide protection to civilians,
respect human rights and ensure a structure of command
and oversight.

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his presence here
today and for his briefing to the Council. I would also
like to thank him for his work and dedication to the
cause of Afghanistan. We would also like to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
and thank him for his briefing on the situation in his
country today, a country that we will be visiting very
soon.

To that end, the contribution of the International
Security Assistance Force and NATO’s Afghan training
mission continue to be vital. We hope that the recent
incidents will not impact their cooperation and that their
commitments will be upheld in that area beyond 2014.
Advances in the political and reconciliation processes
have also been affected by recent security incidents that
have led to a number of civilian victims.

Colombia supports the international community’s
commitment to Afghan development, which was
renewed during the Tokyo Conference held last July.
There, we agreed to work towards a stable, democratic
and prosperous Afghanistan in the transition into
the transformation decade of 2015-2024, based on
the principles and mutual commitments in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.
The adoption of the presidential decree of 27 July,
which sets forth specific measures and timelines for
fighting impunity and corruption, represents a very
important step towards fulfilling the commitments
undertaken by Afghanistan in Tokyo in the five
priority areas that were identified, namely, democracy
and fair elections, the rule of law and human rights,
public financing and commercial banking, budgetary
implementation and governance, and, finally,
sustainable and inclusive growth. That and progress in
other areas, in both the political and the institutional
arenas, contribute by strenghtening a fully functional
and sustainable State that is capable of providing
basic services to its people and progressively reduce
dependence on foreign aid. Inclusive, transparent
and fair elections, to be held in 2014, will be a clear
indicator of the progress achieved by the Afghan State
in the area of the strengthening of democracy.
With regard to security, we can only express our
concern about the escalation of violence seen in recent
12-51598

It is important that all parties show clear signs
of commitment to the dialogue and reconciliation
process in order to prevent further instability and
fragmentation. We are optimistic about the interest
in dialogue shown by some Taliban groups. In that
regard, cooperation of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities with
the Government of Afghanistan, established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), must be strengthened so that
the tasks and activities developed in compliance with
the mandate continue to be a tool of support to the
peace and reconciliation process.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Special Representative should
continue to give priority to supporting the Government
forces towards an Afghan-led and -owned peace and
reconciliation process and to direct their cooperation
and assistance activities towards strengthening the
role of Afghan institutions in order to meet their
responsibilities in priority areas, such as governability,
economic development and regional cooperation. The
United Nations should continue to play a central role
in coordinating international efforts with the national
authorities so as to ensure consistency with the priorities
identified by Afghanistan.
With regard to the worrying humanitarian situation,
it is crucial that all parties respect humanitarian
principles and facilitate the provision of humanitarian
aid to those who need it most. That must be a fundamental
9

S/PV.6840

principle for participation in the reconciliation process.
Humanitarian agencies are aware of the tremendous
need to provide services such as health care, sanitation,
education and food, which require more funding.
The great national objective should be supporting a
State structure capable of ensuring governability and
economic stability at the local and international levels
and obtaining and access to justice as fundamental to a
sustainable and lasting transition.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs can depend on
Colombia’s full support in all areas that he deems
necessary and in which we can be of use.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I welcome
Foreign Minister Rassoul back to the Council and thank
him for his remarks. I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kubiš again for all that he does
and for his briefing. I want to extend, through him,
our thanks again to the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations country team for their dedicated work
under very difficult circumstances.
Since we last met (see S/PV.6793), the international
community has further demonstrated its commitment to
the Afghan people beyond 2014. As recent events have
shown, the transition is on track and our commitment
to Afghanistan is enduring. On 7 July, President Obama
officially designated Afghanistan a major non-NATO
ally of the United States. That is a powerful symbol of
our commitment to Afghanistan’s future. Afghanistan
and its international partners have charted a responsible
transition, which will transfer full responsibility for
security back to Afghanistan.
The Afghan National Security Forces continue to
grow in size and capability. Those Forces remain on
track to reach 352,000 personnel later this year. Two
thirds of all those who serve in uniform defending
Afghanistan are now Afghans, and over half the Afghan
population is protected by a predominantly Afghan
force. We look forward to the full implementation of the
third tranche of the transition later this year, at which
point 75 per cent of the Afghan population, including
every provincial capital, will be in the transition
process. As pledged at the NATO Summit in Chicago
in May, the international community will support the
Afghan National Security Forces beyond 2014.
While we applaud such developments, we
recognize that many challenges remain, including
so-called insider attacks. The reasons for those attacks

10

vary, but we are working closely with the Government
of Afghanistan on a range of measures to stop them. We
have not and will not allow such attacks to undermine
international efforts to strengthen the Afghan National
Security Forces and put them increasingly in the lead.
We know Afghanistan’s security depends not only
on strong capable security forces, but also on the Afghan
people’s access to economic opportunity and their
belief that their Government is effectively serving their
needs. The international community’s total pledges in
Tokyo of $16 billion in economic assistance through
2015 meet the World Bank’s estimate of Afghanistan’s
requirements, just as Chicago met its security
requirements. That assistance will help Afghanistan
to attract private sector investment and to usher in a
transformation decade, marked less by aid and more by
trade, all in a framework of mutual accountability and
shared responsibility.
We welcome President Karzai’s decree last
month aimed at tackling corruption in Afghanistan’s
institutions and his recent comments on reforming the
justice sector. Both are necessary to strengthen the rule
of law and to attract more trade and investment.
Nothing offers a more credible alternative to
insurgency than the jobs and opportunities that
accompany foreign investment and the expansion of
markets. As Afghanistan develops, we see it at the
centre of a region whose integration will bring greater
prosperity for Afghans and their neighbours. That
new Silk Road is already emerging. Electricity from
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan is powering Afghan
businesses. Trains are running on a new rail line from
the Uzbek border to Mazar-e Sharif. One day, the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
pipeline
could ship billions of dollars worth of natural gas from
Central Asia across Afghanistan to South Asia.
The help of Afghanistan’s neighbours and near
neighbours is necessary for Afghanistan to become
secure, stable and prosperous. We are pleased to see
that vision beginning to come to fruition through the
Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation
for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan and various
regional and trade agreements.
To be sustainable, improved security and greater
economic development must rest on a foundation
of good governance. Credible and broadly inclusive
elections in 2014 and 2015 will bolster the legitimacy
of the Government in Kabul, vest Afghans in its

12-51598

S/PV.6840

success, and send a message to all Afghan factions that
their interests are better advanced through political
participation than violence.
The protection of the rights of Afghan women is
essential to Afghanistan’s future. We strongly condemn
all violence against women and are troubled by recent
reports that underscore the seriousness of the problem.
The United States continues to work with the Afghan
Government, civil society and the international
community to increase awareness of women’s rights,
prevent the abuse and detention of women and girls
and hold the perpetrators of such violence accountable.
We support the United Nations and Afghanistan’s
continuing efforts to establish and to expand the
protection and shelter services for victimized women.
United Nations support for the Afghan people and
the country’s transition has been indispensable. From
supporting regional diplomacy and the political process
to coordinating between the Afghan Government and
donors and implementing the agreements of the Kabul
process and the Tokyo Framework, UNAMA will
continue to play a critical role in Afghanistan moving
forward.
The United States appreciates the United Nations
development and humanitarian assistance contributions
in Afghanistan, as exemplified by the important work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the solutions strategy for Afghan
refugees. We look forward on further discussions on
how the United Nations role will evolve to support
the Afghan people following the security transition.
We trust that UNAMA will consult closely with the
Government of Afghanistan, Council members and
regional partners as it continues planning.
It is the Afghan people, their leaders and the region
who must ultimately make the hard choices that will
shape their future.
As they do, the United States will continue to
support them and welcome the valuable contributions
of the United Nations in shaping this process.
Mr. Bouchaara: (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me in turn to welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and to thank him for his briefing. I also
take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Rassoul, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and to thank him
most sincerely for his statement.

12-51598

During the period covered by the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2012/703), the international
community reiterated its commitment to supporting
Afghanistan at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan,
held on 8 July and co-sponsored by Afghanistan and
Japan. In this context, Morocco welcomes the fact that
the international community has undertaken to earmark,
in the years ahead, more than $16 billion for assistance
to Afghanistan, which attests to the importance that the
international community attaches to that country and
to the need to stand with it in its efforts to bring about
stabilization and reconstruction. The Conference also
saw the adoption of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, which reiterated the commitment of the
Afghan Government with respect to presidential and
legislative elections in 2014 and 2015.
On the political front, the presidential decree
adopted on 27 July laid out the priorities of Mr. Karzai’s
Government for the two years ahead, in particular the
fight against corruption, the renewal of State institutions
and the establishment of a mechanism providing for
better management of State institutions.
On the security front, we note that the number of
incidents has declined considerably since last year. Still,
it is higher than it was in 2010. This slight improvement
took place at a time when the third transition phase
allowed for a transfer of responsibilities to the Afghan
security forces, who now control an area in which 75 per
cent of Afghanistan’s population lives. In addition, we
have seen an increase in the number of Afghan fighters
who have joined the Afghan peace and reintegration
programme, which by mid-August included more than
5,000 new ex-combatants. This will clearly have a
positive impact on security in Afghanistan.
Regional cooperation during this period was
significant, as shown by the Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference held on 14 June in Kabul, which involved
14 countries and seven regional and international
organizations, and identified priority confidencebuilding measures linked to such areas as counterterrorism, the fight against drug trafficking, trade
opportunities and regional infrastructure.
Beyond the Conference, Afghan authorities have
purused their efforts to strengthen cooperation in
areas of common interest with neighbouring States.
We welcome the fact that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has undertaken a number of
visits to the region in order to increase cooperation with

11

S/PV.6840

the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and between those States and Afghanistan.
In a different vein, the humanitarian situation,
particularly that of women and children, calls for the
collective commitment of the Afghan authorities and the
United Nations to providing the necessary assistance to
vulnerable populations. The issue of refugees is also
a problem, both for Afghanistan and for neighbouring
States. As such, additional efforts must be undertaken
in order to repatriate refugees and ensure that they are
reintegrated into their countries of origin.
Afghanistan is a country that has pulled back from
the brink and come a long way towards extricating itself
from fratricidal and deadly conflict. It still has a long
way to go to stabilize, to rebuild itself and to build State
institutions in order to finally ensure the rule of law. To
that end, the role of UNAMA, neighbouring States and
the entire international community is vital in assisting
a country that continues to endure the agony of war.
In conclusion, allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNAMA
for their efforts as they fulfil their mandate.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for his presentation of the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2012/703). My country is grateful for
his efforts and initiatives to help restore lasting peace
in that country. I would also like to acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, and thank him for his statement.
Today, as we hold the third debate on the situation
in Afghanistan this year, we must welcome the tangible
developments on the ground, although significant
challenges remain in the area of security, politics, the
fight against narcotic drugs and corruption, to mention
just a few.
In his report, the Secretary-General observes
that the transfer of responsibility for security to the
Afghan National Security Forces has gone smoothly.
It is my country’s hope that the Government-mandated
Transition Coordination Commission will continue its
efforts to put the finishing touches on the preparations
for subsequent phases of the transition.
We note a slight decrease in the number of violent
incidents, especially suicide attacks, due, among
other things, to measures undertaken by the Afghan
authorities to increase both the police forces and the

12

army, including by recruiting more women within
the national police, creating specialized community
policing units in certain provinces, and establishing
local police programmes. However, we are concerned
that indiscriminate attacks have once again increased
in intensity in recent weeks. We condemn attacks
targeting neutral subjects such as United Nations staff,
in particular locally recruited staff and their partners.
Planned attacks continue to make innocent victims of
political and religious personalities and of peaceful
populations.
The suicide attack of 18 September killed
12 people, including eight South Africans working
for a private aviation company. This clearly illustrates
the atmosphere of insecurity and terror that prevails.
We take this opportunity to reiterate the Togolese
Government’s firm condemnation of this heinous
attack and to present to the South African delegation
our sincere condolences. We encourage the Afghan
Government and the international community to
continue to invest freely in helping the Afghan people
to emerge from this unacceptable situation.
In that regard, we commend the initiatives
undertaken in the area of fighting drugs with the help
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The
approval by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board of the Counter-Narcotics Monitoring Mechanism
developed to that end bodes well in that regard, in our
view. All that remains is to implement these measures
in order to allay the serious concerns of partners and
friendly countries.
The commitments undertaken by the Afghan
authorities are also coming to fruition at the political
level, with President Hâmid Karzai’s announcement
that he will devote the last two years of his term to the
promotion of good governance by fighting impunity and
corruption, promoting accountability and improving
the effectiveness of aid. At the same time, the electoral
events of 2014 and 2015 will be major challenges for
the Government, which, in the terms of the Tokyo
Declaration and the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, must organize presidential and legislative
elections that are credible and inclusive. It is Togo’s
firm desire to see the electoral law on the structure of
the Independent Electoral Commission adopted within
the allotted time frame. In that regard, we dare to hope
that the resignation of the head of electoral operations
will have no impact on the normal functioning of the
process already under way.

12-51598

S/PV.6840

We appreciate the support of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) through the second
phase of the electoral support project Enhancing Legal
and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow, and of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in providing analytical, consultative and logistical
support to the High Peace Council. We also welcome
the fact that the High Peace Council has undertaken
activities to promote political conditions to encourage
the peace process. In that regard, we encourage
continuing the dialogue with all political players.
Over and above assistance from the international
community, Afghanistan more than ever needs the
support of the countries of the region. The tangible
progress made in the areas of regional cooperation
and mutual confidence-building during the Ministerial
Conference held in Kabul in June is a positive sign
of a successful conclusion of the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan. Togo urges the countries concerned
to do everything in their power to remove obstacles to
cooperation with Afghanistan. Specifically, we would
invite the Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan to
continue to work together in order to overcome their
border problems.
In the area of humanitarian assistance, the report
(S/2012/703) notes the commitment of the Ministry
of Public Health to supporting action to reduce infant
mortality. Significant progress was also achieved in the
indicators for women and children. My country is very
pleased with this and places a great deal of hope in the
programme for voluntary repatriation and reintegration
of refugees developed jointly between the Afghan
technical ministries and the United Nations.
The Afghanistan situation will need, as it has in
the past, the international community’s help, especially
after the scheduled withdrawal of international forces in
late 2014. The hopes created by the Tokyo Conference
on Afghanistan in July should not be dashed. The
noteworthy progress that has been made should be
supported and sustained. I reiterate Togo’s profound
thanks to the United Nations and all its specialized
agencies, including UNDP, as well as to UNAMA and
the International Security Assistance Force, for all their
sacrifices with a view to providing Afghanistan with a
promising future.
Ms. Notutela (South Africa): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
for introducing the quarterly report on Afghanistan
12-51598

(S/2012/703). South Africa welcomes the participation
of the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, and thanks him for his assessment of the
situation in his country.
Today’s debate is occurring in the context of largescale violence and demonstrations across the Islamic
world. Afghanistan has not remained immune from
these incidents, as borne out by the suicide attack
earlier this week, which claimed the lives of eight
nationals from my country. These incidents, capped
with escalating violence in Afghanistan over the past
month, have undermined the progress made towards
peace and remind us that much more needs to be done.
South Africa welcomes the continued efforts of
the Afghan leadership, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), regional actors
and the international community to place the country
on a sustained trajectory of peace and sustainable
development. Sustainable peace can be achieved only
through dialogue and reconciliation. The Afghan
Government’s persistent initiatives to engage with the
armed opposition and the ongoing calls of President
Karzai for the armed opposition to lay down their arms
are welcome. Intra-Afghan accommodation is the only
solution for securing long-term stability and security,
including outreach to the Taliban.
The framework provided by resolution 1988 (2011) is
important in facilitating this process. We are concerned
that some elements of Afghan society have chosen not
to engage in the reconciliation process. A commitment
to national reconciliation and a peaceful political
solution remain pivotal for the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. The ongoing efforts of the High Peace
Council to promote political outreach activities and
sustainable peace in the country are welcome. An allinclusive political process must be inclusive of women,
young people and religious representatives in deciding
the future of their country. The creation of civil society
working groups aimed at mobilizing the largest section
of Afghan society in support of the work of the High
Peace Council is therefore a significant development.
UNAMA’s prioritization of providing support to
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process is
necessary to ensuring sustainable peace in the country.
Afghanistan
continues
to
move
towards
consolidating its democratic and governance
institutions. We welcome the legal and legislative
framework that is currently being put in place to
ensure fair, transparent and inclusive presidential and
13

S/PV.6840

parliamentary elections in 2014 and 2015. In line with
the decisions adopted at the Tokyo Conference, we
welcome President Karzai’s pledge during an address
to the special joint session of the National Assembly in
June that, during his remaining two years as President,
he will be committed to further strengthening good
governance, accountability and effectiveness.

level meetings between Afghanistan and Pakistan in
Mazar-i-Sharif and Kabul further enhance the peace
process and assist in those endeavours.
There is an inextricable link between development
and security in Afghanistan. In that regard, we
are encouraged by the solidarity and commitment
demonstrated by the international community during
the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan and the summit
on investment held in New Delhi.

In spite of the decrease in security incidents
and civilian casualties during the reporting period,
UNAMA’s mid-term report for 2012 indicates that
over 3,000 people were killed and injured, of whom
30 per cent were women and children. Women and
children continue to be disproportionately affected by
the conflict. Civilian casualties affected by the conflict
and resulting from International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) air strikes, as well as anti-Government
use of improvised explosive devices remain a concern.
We wish to reiterate that all armed elements operating
in Afghanistan have the responsibility to ensure that
civilians are protected, and the failure of State and
non-State actors alike to uphold that responsibility
should not go unpunished.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that national
ownership, coupled with international support, is crucial
to achieving political, security and socioeconomic
progress in Afghanistan. UNAMA’s role in supporting
the Government in Afghanistan is vital, and we trust that
the reduction of its budget will not have a detrimental
effect on its ability to deliver on its key mandate.

The Secretary-General’s ninth report on the
protection of civilians (s/2012/376) underlines the
importance of accountability. We were reminded of
that in the presidential statement on justice and the
rule of law adopted in January (PRST/2012/1), in which
the Security Council reiterated its call on all parties to
armed conflict to comply with obligations applicable to
them under international humanitarian law and to take
all the required steps to protect civilians.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Kubiš for his analysis of the
situation in Afghanistan. We listened carefully to the
statement of the Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Rassoul. Russia is interested in seeing Afghanistan
become a peaceful, stable, democratic nation. Naturally,
we hope that the threats posed by terrorism and drug
trafficking emanating from that country will be fully
eradicated.

The increase in incidents of green on blue attacks
are of concern. As NATO troops draw down, these
attacks erode trust and have the potential to undermine
the smooth handover from NATO to the Afghan
National Security Forces. Incidents of increased
violence directed at women and the challenges that
women continue to face in the economic, social and
cultural sphere are of concern. We are pleased to note
the commitment of the Afghan Government to address
all these challenges. We favor and welcome the launch
in Kabul of the N-Peace Network, a platform aimed at
supporting the leadership of women in building peace.

Regrettably, as made clear by the spate of recent
incidents, the country continues to face a complex
security situation both in remote regions and in the
capital itself. We are particularly concerned by the
renewed extremism in the north of the country, where
only three years ago the situation was relatively calm.
The terrorists are essentially being pushed northward,
from where they penetrate into the Central Asian
countries. That is a direct threat to the stability of the
region. We are alarmed by the wave of terrorist acts
that has engulfed the country, against the backdrop
of the rapidly advancing transfer responsibilities and
the withdrawal of foreign troops. We express our
condolences to our South African colleagues with
respect to the death of a South African national during
the attack on Kabul on 18 September.

We also emphasize that security in Afghanistan
should continue to be reinforced at the national level by
efforts at the regional level. We are therefore encouraged
by the ongoing diplomatic and political efforts at the
bilateral and regional levels to assist Afghanistan in
its transition to peace and stability. The recent high14

Those initiatives are important for consolidating
global support for Afghanistan’s development and longterm economic sustainability, as well as for ensuring
that the gains registered over the past years are not
reversed.

12-51598

S/PV.6840

The reduction in the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) troop strength should be
offset by the qualitative enhancement of the combat
readiness of the Afghan security forces, so that when
the time comes for the international force to depart, the
Afghan Government will have its own capabilities for
maintaining law and order in order to be able to fully
ensure security. Russia will continue to provide Afghan
forces with assistance in that area.
We have questions with respect to the contradictory
statements that foreign troops will leave Afghanistan in
2014, while foreign bases will remain. We would like
to have full clarity. If the counter-terrorist mission is
completed, that means that foreign bases are being
maintained for some other aim not related to the
Afghan challenge. If the fight against terrorism needs
to continue, there will have to be an extension of the
mandate by the Security Council. In either the case, a
residual military presence should not be used against
the interests of Afghanistan’s neighbours and the
countries of the region.
That is specifically why we look forward to a
constructive dialogue regarding that mandate, troop
strength and the objectives of any possible future NATO
operation in Afghanistan. That can be established
solely under a decision of the Security Council and
only once the ISAF reports to the Council that it has
fulfilled its existing mandate. In the context of an
ISAF withdrawal, it is clear that the role of the United
Nations in the Afghan settlement will grow. Its mission
must be to remain the coordinator of international
civilian efforts to assist in stabilization, while focusing
activities on strengthening Afghan sovereignty and on
the leading role of Afghans in governing their country.
The consequences of reducing the mission force for
operational activities must be fully explored. The issues
of optimizing the participation of Afghan regions must
be addressed together with the Afghan Government and
taking into account the security situation in different
areas of the country.
The situation remains unacceptable with respect to
the illegal production, trade and trafficking in drugs
in the country, which poses a threat to international
peace and stability. We note the efforts of the Afghan
Government to destroy opium poppy crops and fight
illegal drug trafficking. However, addressing those
problems requires a comprehensive approach, with
the United Nations playing a coordinating role. We
are confident that ISAF, regardless of its withdrawal

12-51598

timetable from Afghanistan, needs to enhance the
effectiveness of its counter-narcotics efforts. Particular
attention and decisive action are needed for the challenge
of destroying drug crops and heroin laboratories.
Unfortunately, our persistent attempts to work
out cooperation with NATO in that area via regional
mechanisms, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), are being doggedly rebuffed.
We intend to continue to work within the MoscowParis Pact, which has become one of the more effective
international tools for countering the drug threat. We
also intend to continue to work within the framework
of regional organizations — the SCO, the CSTO and the
quartet of Afghanistan, Pakistan, Russia and Tajikistan.
National reconciliation is one way to ensure the
peaceful settlement of the Afghan problem. We support
the position of the Afghan Government in the context
of that process. It has been approved by the Security
Council and provides for a dialogue with those who have
rejected violence to achieve their political aims, who do
not maintain ties to Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups,
and who recognize and comply with the Constitution of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. Fulfilling those
criteria is a prerequisite for removing individuals from
the sanctions regime.
The possibility of involving different individuals
in a dialogue must be approached very carefully,
taking into account the sanctions regime established
by the Security Council. We oppose behind-thescenes contacts with Taliban groups that circumvent
the Government of Afghanistan, which could send
misleading signals as to the genuine intentions of the
international community in the context of an Afghan
settlement.
The regional dimension of an Afghan settlement
is growing in importance. In that regard, and in
combination with existing regional mechanisms,
it is important to develop the Istanbul process,
clearly with the active role of the United Nations.
We support the approach of the Kabul Conference to
strengthen regional cooperation, including through the
implemention of agreed confidence-building measures.
Russia is prepared to do its utmost to develop regional
cooperation in the interest of Afghanistan in those
areas that could be of true benefit to that country. We
are open to partnerships with all interested countries
in implementing projects that are meaningful for
Afghanistan. We also continue to provide humanitarian
15

S/PV.6840

assistance to the Afghan people. We are confident
that more coherent and coordinated regional efforts
and the implementation of the obligations undertaken
by members of the international community will
contribute to ensuring the sustainable development of
Afghanistan and the prosperity of its people, and will
help to restore an independent, peaceful Afghanistan
that is free from terrorism and drug crime.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to welcome Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and to thank him for
his insightful statement. We are also grateful to Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing, as well as
to the Secretary-General for his report on the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security (S/2012/703).
Today’s debate provides us with an excellent
opportunity to take stock of recent political and security
developments in Afghanistan, as well as of related
regional and international processes. The Government
of Afghanistan continues to make substantial progress
towards the stabilization and development of the
country. It is of paramount importance to maintain the
steady pace of progress attained so far, which requires
equal levels of continued commitment on the part of
both Afghanistan and its international partners.
Although the overall security situation in the
country remains precarious — with ongoing armed
clashes, assassinations and suicide attacks by insurgents,
which pose a serious threat to the overall peace and
stabilization effort in Afghanistan — the reporting
period marked a continued quantitative decrease in
security-related incidents. We take positive note of the
progress made in the process of transferring security
responsibilities to the Afghan National Security Forces
and in the stability that prevails in the areas under their
control.
The Council has called consistently on all parties
in Afghanistan to take measures to minimize civilian
casualties, which, along with causing human suffering,
also seriously undermine national and international
efforts towards peace and reconciliation. In that sense,
we welcome steps taken by the Government, including
the establishment of a civilian casualty mitigation
team in the Afghan National Army, to ensure timely
investigation and accurate incident tracking.
In the political realm, the continued efforts of the
High Peace Council to reinvigorate the activities aimed

16

at creating conditions conducive to a durable peace
process — in particular its practical initiatives to reach
out to a wider spectrum of Afghan society and its close
interaction with regional partners — are commendable.
The same assessment can be made of the implementation
of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
The continued support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan to both the Programme and the
High Peace Council is indispensable in taking forward
a broad and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process, which in turn constitutes the basis of
overall stabilization and durable peace in the country.
Afghanistan’s stronger political dialogue and
cooperation with its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a wide range of issues based on
common vision and mutual confidence are imperatives
for a peaceful and stable future of the country and
the region. We welcome the ongoing efforts and
achievements of Afghanistan and its regional partners
in that regard. We stress the particular importance of
the outcomes of the follow-up Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference held in Kabul on 14 June.
As part of the Istanbul process, my country
participates in a number of confidence-building
measures and has assumed a co-leadership role in
implementing such measures in the fields of counternarcotics and regional infrastructure. We look forward
to fruitful discussions at the next senior officials
meeting scheduled for 24 September in New York.
As the transition period continues towards the
eventual withdrawal of international military forces
and the assumption of overall security responsibility by
the Afghan authorities by the end of 2014, the scope and
gravity of the security and development tasks that the
Government Afghanistan has to deal with are growing,
and the need for the international community’s
enhanced support to the Government of Afghanistan is
becoming even more vital.
Proceeding from that viewpoint, we consider the
Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan held on 8 July as
the major milestone event during the reported period,
complementing and further solidifying the mutual longterm commitments of Afghanistan and the international
community undertaken at the Afghanistan Conference
in Bonn and the NATO Summit in Chicago. The fact
of the international community’s pledge of significant
financial support in Tokyo attests to the confidence
placed in the Afghan Government’s strong dedication

12-51598

S/PV.6840

to building a sustainable, self-reliable and prosperous
Afghanistan.

security forces, to be funded entirely by the Afghan
State by no later than 2024.

Proceeding from the principle of the indivisibility
of security and of brotherly relations with Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan has for many years actively contributed
to international efforts in the country. We have
participated in the International Security Assistance
Force almost from its beginning and have steadily
increased our military contribution to it. We believe
that capacity-building for Afghan institutions must
remain at the heart of international assistance in order
to enable the Government of Afghanistan to exercise its
sovereign authority in all its functions. For that reason,
Azerbaijan has consistently expanded its contribution,
both financially and by providing capacity-building
assistance in non-military spheres in Afghanistan.

Those developments are complemented by the
international community’s ongoing long-term support
of stability and development in Afghanistan through
civilian assistance. That was resoundingly reaffirmed
on 8 July at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan.
At that time, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs
announced an increase in our civilian aid to Afghanistan
of 50 per cent over the level of the past five years,
to €308 million, focused on agriculture, education,
cultural exchange, archaeology, research, economic
development, security and health. In accordance with
our friendship and cooperation treaty, that aid will
be structured according to the Afghan Government’s
priorities.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
Government’s full support for Afghanistan’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity, and I reiterate
our determination to remain an active contributor to
collective efforts in Afghanistan.

I endorse the statement to be made by the observer
of the European Union.

The Tokyo Conference was especially significant
for the commitments taken on by both sides. The
Afghans pledged to work towards good governance; to
organize credible, transparent and inclusive elections
within the agreed timeframe; to implement international
economic recommendations; and to fight corruption
and to protect human rights, especially the rights of
women. We expect the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), in accordance with
its mandate, to play its full role in supporting Afghan
authorities in that difficult but crucial work.

The attacks by Afghan police and soldiers on
their trainers and the actions of insurgents should not
overshadow deeper, positive trends. The transition
is under way and the security of 75 per cent of the
Afghan population is now provided by the Afghan
National Security Forces. As underscored in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/703), there has been
no deterioration of the situation in areas where the
transition has taken place. We have seen that in Surobi
and Kapisa, where by the end of the year the proven
combat-ready Third Brigade of the Afghan National
Army will assume its full responsibilities.

The regional dynamics critical to Afghanistan’s
future continue to be marked by contradictory forces.
The Istanbul process is now guided by Afghans, with
support from neighbouring and partner countries,
which will meet in New York on 24 September to stake
stock. France has expressed its interest in helping to
develop confidence-building measures in counterterrorism, counter-narcotics and natural disaster
management. Moreover, like the Secretary-General we
follow with concern cross-border military activity in
Kunar province and military activities on both sides of
the border.

Security incidents are down by 30 per cent from the
same period last year. The number of civilian victims
has also dropped, although not by as much. More than
80 per cent are still caused by insurgents. Afghan
security forces have reached their maximum troop
strength. We will continue to train Afghan military
and police into 2014, to which we will devote a third of
our overall aid to Afghanistan. Our sole aim is to leave
in place professional, credible and sustainable Afghan

I conclude by commending the support the United
Nations lends Afghanistan through its ongoing presence
over the course of 60 years and the efforts its staff, led
by the Special Representative, who do heroic work
under difficult conditions in service of the Afghan
people and Government. That support requires resolve,
given the budgetary constraints on the United Nations
and its presence in multiple areas of crisis, stretching
the Organization’s limits.

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš
and Minister Rassoul for their statements.

12-51598

17

S/PV.6840

The Afghan Government should increasingly work
to maintain that relationship, first of all by guaranteeing
security for United Nations and embassy personnel. Let
us not forget the United Nations staff members killed at
Mazar-i-Sharif, even as we once again see conditions
virtually identical to those that caused their deaths.
The Afghan authorities should also make full use of
the United Nations sanctions regime as a confidencebuilding measure towards inter-Afghan reconciliation,
for example by proposing new listings.
We are certain that the United Nations in general
and UNAMA in particular will have a major role to
play in Afghanistan in the years to come. We hope that
budgetary considerations will not undermine the ability
of the Mission to fulfil its core mandate as set out by
the Security Council.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
start by joining others in thanking you, Mr. President,
for having scheduled today’s debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would like also to very warmly welcome
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, to the Security Council and thank him for
his statement. We thank also the Secretary-General for
his latest report (S/2012/703) and are appreciative of the
briefing by Mr. Ján Kubiš, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is in the midst of a critical phase of
transition where it assumes responsibility for security
and governance with the drawdown of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by the end of
2014. The sustained commitment of the international
community to Afghanistan is therefore essential if it is
to stand on its own feet.
During the past year, the international community
has renewed its commitment to Afghanistan at
conferences held in Bonn, Chicago and Tokyo, and at
the regional level in Istanbul and Kabul. The Delhi
Investment Summit on Afghanistan, held on 28 June and
hosted by India, was also an endeavour to contribute to
that effort by calling attention to the role and potential
of foreign investment and domestic private-sector
development in providing a narrative of opportunity
and employment to counter the anxiety related to the
ISAF drawdown.
As we assist Afghanistan in attaining its longcherished goal of self-reliance, we also need to bear
in mind the fact that the infrastructure of terror is
still intact in the region. The Secretary-General’s

18

report rightly notes that “little has changed in the
underlying dynamics to mitigate a deep-seated cycle of
conflict” (S/2012/703, para. 62). Further, a diminished
international presence will have a large financial
impact in many areas, which, at least in the short term,
may even exacerbate predatory behaviour.
Afghanistan continues to face an existential threat
from terrorism, drawing upon ideological, financial and
logistical support from beyond its borders. The security
situation remains fragile and has been compounded over
the past two months by a sharp increase in the variety,
spread and intensity of attacks by the Taliban and their
backers. Moreover, cross-border shellings have caused
large-scale disruptions to normal life and have sparked
public outrage.
The Afghan National Security Forces are illequipped to repel the challenge without substantial
assistance from the international community. We need
concerted action to isolate and root out the syndicate
of terrorism, which includes elements of Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba, and other terrorist and
extremist groups.
We welcome the pledges made at the Tokyo
Conference of $16 billion of financial aid through 2015
and to sustain support through 2017 at or near the levels
of the past decade. At the same time, we are conscious
that these figures represent a baseline, or minimum
requirement, for Afghanistan to sustain itself.
The Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is a
noble effort that we fully support. However, we must
not forget that true mutuality can be achieved only at
equal levels of capacity. Good governance requires
a strong State that has full control over its territory,
which is not yet the case in Afghanistan. While
good governance must be a necessary component
of international assistance to Afghanistan, it is not
enough. It must be complemented by strong leadership,
the strengthening of the Afghan National Security
Forces and the development of an investment regime
in Afghanistan that protects the national interest while
promoting investment.
India visualizes its partnership with Afghanistan
as needs-based and long-term, not conditions-based or
transitory. We remain unwavering in our commitment
to assisting the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour
to build a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous
nation.

12-51598

S/PV.6840

During the past decade, India has pledged up to
$2 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
We have managed to carry out some of the most
economical and cost-effective projects in Afghanistan.
The $500 million assistance announced by our Prime
Minister in May 2011 is being spent from 2012 to
2015. The projects under consideration will be in line
with the projects suggested under the national priority
programmes of the Government of Afghanistan. The
pace and nature of the utilization of the present and
future Indian assistance will be determined by the
preference, comfort level and absorptive capacity of the
Afghan Government.
As Afghanistan takes forward the task of national
reconciliation even as it assumes full responsibility
for security, we fully support efforts aimed at regional
confidence-building as a critical component of
international efforts to support the country. Enhanced
development assistance and foreign investments in
Afghanistan and the building of regional linkages will
be critical to ensuring an irreversible transition in the
country.
The Istanbul “Heart of Asia” process is an important
step in that direction. India has also partnered in this
regional consensus towards the stability and prosperity
of Afghanistan by leading the two commercial
confidence-building measures, that is, the measures
related to chambers of commerce and commercial
opportunities initially agreed upon for implementation
in the Istanbul process.
In our view, regional cooperation on projects of
multilateral scope and benefit could give an impetus
to this scenario. We are fully cognizant of the fact that
the economic viability of Afghanistan depends on its
fuller integration into its neighbourhood, so that it can
regain its historical role as a land bridge between South
Asia, Central Asia, the Middle East and Eurasia. The
development of transport infrastructure and transit
arrangements linking Afghanistan to the north, south,
east and west, including through the Chabahar port,
would benefit not only Afghanistan but the entire
Central Asian region by creating trade, transit and
investment linkages.
Moving forward, we need a sustained international
commitment to strengthen the Afghan Government’s
capacity for security, governance and economic
development. We need to create an enabling environment
where the Afghan people can live in peace and security

12-51598

and decide their future themselves, without outside
interference, coercion or intimidation.
We support the good work done by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
It is important that amid the cutback in the United
Nations footprint in Afghanistan and the reconfiguration
of UNAMA due to budgetary constraints, all efforts be
made to avoid any adverse impact on its operational
capacity and mandate implementation.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, and thank him for his presentation on the
situation in Afghanistan. I should like also to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ján
Kubiš, for his briefing.
To date, Afghanistan’s peace and reconstruction
process has achieved positive results. The building up
of the Afghan National Security Forces is progressing
smoothly, thereby laying a solid foundation for a
comprehensive takeover of security and defence
responsibilities.
Afghanistan is actively developing its economy
so as to improve people’s livelihoods and is engaging
in trade and cooperation with other countries. China
welcomes these developments.
China has always firmly supported Afghanistan
in its efforts to maintain its national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, and to realize
enduring peace and stability. We hope that the
international community will adhere to the principle of
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process and continue
to support the Government and the people of Afghanistan
in their efforts towards peace and reconstruction and to
realize, at an early date, the objective of an Afghanistan
governed by Afghans.
With respect to advancing the peace and
reconstruction process in Afghanistan, I should like to
stress four points.
First, security, stability, the political process,
economic development and national reconciliation
all are important aspects of Afghanistan’s national
reconstruction that need to be pursued with vigour. We
support Afghanistan’s efforts to enhance its ability to
develop autonomously and increase its Government’s
capacity. Continuing to comprehensively push for an
Afghan political and national reconciliation process is

19

S/PV.6840

conducive to an early realization of the country’s longterm security and stability and will create favourable
conditions for economic and social development.
Secondly, the transfer of security responsibilities to
Afghan forces must proceed gradually. The withdrawal
of forces from Afghanistan by the parties concerned
should occur with full consideration for the need to
maintain Afghanistan’s security and stability. In that
process, the international community must give priority
to helping the country enhance its security sector
capacity-building. China is seriously concerned about
continued civilian casualties, especially about report
sof the death and injury of women and children in air
attacks. All sides should strictly abide by international
humanitarian law and relevant international law and
effectively protect civilians.
Thirdly,
Afghanistan’s
reconstruction
and
development require the international community’s
ongoing support and help. The international
community has committed to providing $16 billion
in financial assistance to Afghanistan by 2015. That
assistance should be reflected in actual deeds as soon
as possible. The international community’s assistance
to Afghanistan must fully respect the priority areas set
out by the country and support the full implementation
of the national development strategy.
Fourthly, China strongly supports greater
cooperation among countries of the region on the Afghan
issue on the basis of the principles of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit. Regional cooperation
initiatives should fully respect Afghanistan’s
sovereignty, prioritize the legitimate concerns of the
countries of the region, and be conducted consistently
on the basis of adequate consultations. Strengthened
regional cooperation can benefit from fully utilizing
existing regional mechanisms, such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
China supports the United Nations efforts in
promoting peacebuilding in Afghanistan. We hope that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the Afghan Government will strengthen
their coordination and cooperation. We hope that
UNAMA will continue to play a central coordination
role in the international community’s efforts to assist
Afghanistan.
China and Afghanistan are friendly neighbours.
China will continue to support Afghanistan’s
peacebuilding, provide help to Afghanistan within

20

our capacity and support Afghanistan in its efforts to
realize peace, stability and development.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important debate. I warmly
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
and thank him for his statement. I would also to
thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2012/703). Under the leadership of Mr. Kubiš, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is to implement a challenging mandate. But
the United Nations role in Afghanistan should adjust
to emerging realities, characterized by the projected
drawdown of international forces and the onset of
the phase of transformation. Similarly, a reduction
in the budget of UNAMA must not compromise core
objectives of the United Nations in the medium and
long-term perspectives.
The Secretary-General’s quarterly report under
consideration today has provided some mutual insights
on the prevailing situation in Afghanistan. I would
like to share some of those with the Council; they say
a lot and yet need to be pointed out. The fact that it
was seen necessary to write in the report that Chairman
Rabbani and senior members of the High Peace Council
“visited Saudi Arabia and agreed with their Saudi
Arabian counterparts on the need to work with Pakistan
in advancing the peace process and to utilize the
important role of” (S/2012/703, para.12) the ulema and
religious leaders, is not necessarily being reflected on
in today’s debate, but was considered important enough
to be stated at an important venue. On 15 July, at a
similar event in Kandahar city, “participants adopted
a 15-point resolution, emphasizing the need for the
rule of law” — and I say that pointedly — “reform of
security agencies and improved outreach by provincial
peace committees”(ibid., para. 13) It then points out
that 69 per cent of all incidents took place in Kandahar,
Kunar, Nangarhar, Ghazni, Khost and Helmand
provinces.
Then the concern increases. UNAMA has expressed
concern over the appointment of alleged human rights
abusers to positions of responsibility, as well as over
several reports of abuse involving Afghan local police
personnel. Furthermore, it says that there have been
continuing reports of defections from various Afghan
security bodies. That includes 17 members of the
Afghan local police in the north-western province of

12-51598

S/PV.6840

Badghis, who are understood to have joined the Taliban
on 24 June, and a further 93 who switched sides on
3 July. This is a worrying development affecting trust
during a security transition based on close coordination
between Afghans and their foreign mentors. Included
in that development is an incident that took place on
17 August in which a local police recruit was understood
to be a former insurgent.
That raises a point that needs to be looked at closely
here, as we have discussed those matters in other
aspects. On the pro-Government side, civilian deaths
and injuries caused by air strikes, night raids and other
military operations have decreased significantly. But
air raids continued to cause more civilian casualties
than any other tactic used by pro-Government
forces. Furthermore, with regard to the Ministry of
Information and Culture’s risk of curtailing freedom
of speech and increasing Government control of the
media, the presidential decree of 27 July, as stated in
the Secretary-General’s report, “contains language
that can potentially restrict the right to receive and
impart information, with the media ordered to ‘refrain
from anti-State propaganda and anything that may
lead to negative motivations’ ” (ibid., para. 35). With
regard to the most the important aspect, which no
civilized society can do without — I am referring to the
judiciary — the report says, “The period also saw the
creation of several working groups to revise the Penal
Code. Appointments of a new Chief Justice and one
member of the Supreme Court, whose terms expired
two years ago, are pending.”(ibid., para. 43)
There is mention of the increasing narcotics
problem, but after hearing so much about the Tokyo
Conference, I want to refer to an important element.
Given the depth of humanitarian needs in Afghanistan,
following the mid-year review, the consolidated appeals
process increased to $448 million to address the lifesaving needs of approximately 8.8 million people.
It is worrying that as of 1 August, funding stands at
only 33.5 per cent, less than half of what was available
during the same period in 2011.
I now turn to the ISAF report, where it talks of
the security situation. During the reporting period,
insurgent-initiated attacks increased by 6 per cent,
compared to the same period in 2011. In the Regional
Command South-west, insurgent-initiated attacks have
increased by 13 per cent. In the Regional Command
South, the insurgent-initiated attacks for the reporting

12-51598

period have increased by 6 per cent. In the Regional
Command North, the insurgent-initiated attacks have
increased by 29 per cent. In the Regional Command
West, the insurgent-initiated attacks have increased
by 46 per cent. The last two cover the furthest side of
Afghanistan, miles away from anything close to us.
In the capital, it is good to know what has reduced
the entire aggregate. The insurgent-initiated attacks
have decreased by 22 per cent for the Kabul area. It now
seems that by October, there will be 352,000 troops and
police in Afghanistan. Yet, we have this report of the
ISAF that I find disconcerting.
I now move to an article from Foreign Policy
magazine published, I believe, in Washington, D.C. It
says that it is incorrect, if not disingenuous, when we
say that the Taliban’s momentum has been blunted. It
continues,
“The Taliban’s spear is sharp as ever. Last week,
on 14 September, it cut through Camp Bastion, one
of the most secure foreign bases in Afghanistan.
There . . . it destroyed six jets valued at up to
$180 million.”
It continues,
“The U.S. surge is over. All troops brought into
Afghanistan after December 2009 will have
returned home by the end of this week. But the
Taliban surge has just begun.”
Sadly, it also says,
“Meanwhile,
in
Helmand
and
Kandahar
provinces — the heart of [the] surge — nearly 30 per
cent of children suffer from acute malnutrition.”
(“So Much for the Good War” by Arif Rafiq, www.
foreignpolicy.com, Sept. 19, 2012)
I will now quote briefly from The New York Times,
in August. On 9 and 10 August, eight American and
British soldiers were killed. On 13 August, there were
two more green-on-blue attacks. On 17 August, there
were two American Special Forces members shot to
death by a new Afghan local police patrol. And in
early September, which is of even greater concern to
me, American officials said that the training of Afghan
local police and special operations forces had been put
on hold.
I will move to another aspect which I consider
equally serious, as quoted in The New York Times on
18 August.

21

S/PV.6840

“In one of a series of recent steps, the military
decreed that American and NATO service members
should always carry a loaded magazine in their
weapons, to save precious moments if attacked by
Afghan forces. Another initiative, now a priority,
is a program named ‘Guardian Angel’ that calls for
one or two soldiers to monitor the Afghans during
every mission or meeting, officials say.
The ‘angels,’ whose identities are not disclosed to
the Afghans, must be prepared to fire on anyone
who tries to kill a coalition service member.”
Now, I do not know how everyone will take that.
But I have been reading from official documents and
two of the most renown publications in America.
The Secretary-General has made an important
point on the need to transform security gains into public
perception of greater security. He has also expressed the
need to factor the financial impact of the withdrawal of
international forces.
It remains to be seen whether security and
humanitarian risks associated with a possible economic
shrinking following the withdrawal, have been
addressed forthrightly. The Secretary-General has
rightly noted that Afghan peace and reconciliation is
essential to avoid protracted conflict and instability. I
share that observation in addition to a long-term solution
to the challenges that lie on the path of the sustainable
reconciliation process, under Afghan ownership.
The process must not be complicated by
inexplicable caveats or conditionalities. Sustainability
of the reconciliation process can only be ensured
if stakeholders share the goal of reconciliation.
International partners should facilitate the convergence.
The idea of reconciliation, under any coercion,
contravenes a fundamental lesson of Afghan history.
We are committed to an Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation process. We are not only committed,
we are supportive of the objectives and work of the
Afghan High Peace Council. Our commitment to the
reconciliation process was reiterated in a joint statement
issued after the visit of our Prime Minister to Kabul
in July. We hope that our efforts will be supplemented
by meaningful international cooperation based on
pragmatism and attention to ground realities.
The security situation in Afghanistan is a matter
of paramount importance for Pakistan. Afghanistan’s
march on the road to transition, particularly in the

22

security sector, is not too encouraging, at the moment.
While we value the effectiveness of Afghan national
security forces, the importance we attach to them
is evidenced from our financial contributions made
at the Chicago summit of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Our offers for training and
capacity-building in the past are on record.
Despite our bilateral arrangements, often not
acknowledged in this venue, Pakistan has sought
closer regional engagement with Afghanistan and its
international partners on all security-related issues. We
continue our active participation in the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan and a number of trilateral and
quadrilateral processes manifest our commitment.
We look forward to the senior officials meeting
of the Istanbul Process next week in New York. Our
ongoing intelligence and military cooperation with
Afghan and international counterparts is self-evident.
Improvement in military cooperation should be
acknowledged by all of the players. We welcome the
deliberations of the Tripartite Commission meetings,
which resumed in May.
Pakistan is also maintaining a robust presence
of our security forces along the international border
with Afghanistan. We recently have enhanced our
presence and monitoring through check posts and
regular patrolling. Our deployment of security along
the international border far exceeds the number of
international and Afghan forces deployed on the other
side, which might also be the reason why so many
attacks take place on the western side of Afghanistan.
And we continue to be resolute, despite the high human
and economic cost of this endeavour.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
often eclipsed by the glare of security and political
challenges. We have suffered substantially, and I need
not read the figures here, as I had intended to do. But
we will have to say that we have shown considerable
restraint in the wake of attacks on our check posts
across the international border. We will not join the
blame game, and we will seek to address those issues
with objectivity.
Against this backdrop, cross-border attacks into
Pakistan are being actively discussed with ISAF,
including the border coordination mechanism, as part
of the ongoing coordination and cooperation between
Pakistan and ISAF, based on mutual respect and mutual

12-51598

S/PV.6840

interest. We hope that such interaction will help end
terrorism across border posts. As a matter of interest,
on 13 September a flag meeting was held between the
two forces to discuss this very issue.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
somewhat unfortunate, as the country continues to suffer
from natural calamities, food insecurity and the impact
of never-ending conflict. We remain by far the largest
contributor to the easing of the humanitarian burden by
virtue of hosting more than 2 million registered Afghan
refugees. We hope that those refugees’ dignfied return
will be achieved through the implementation of the
solution strategy agreed in Geneva in May. In my home
of Karachi, we are now facing serious issues resulting
from the large numbers of refugees coming together
in that southern city. We will nevertheless call for
immediate measures to address the current shortfalls
in humanitarian assistance for Afghanistan and the
Afghan people. That assistance should be insulated
from the impact of the financial shortfalls that are so
rampant at the United Nations at the moment.
Pakistan is supportive of the counter-narcotics
efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Afghanistan. NATO-ISAF operations are
also vital to the disruption and neutralization of the
narcotics industry and its growing funding streams.
Our collective goal must be the complete eradication
of cultivation and the progressive elimination of the
manufacture and trafficking of higher derivatives.
That is not necessarily happening yet, but Pakistan
will continue to support bilateral and regional efforts
against narcotics.
In conclusion, let me express my confidence that
the redoubtable people of Afghanistan will overcome all
their pressing challenges and seize new opportunities
for a brighter and more prosperous future. Pakistan will
remain their committed and steadfast partner.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Germany.
At the outset, I would like to warmly welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan to the
Council, and to thank him very much for his statement.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his
briefing. He and his colleagues in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
country team can count on Germany’s firm support in

12-51598

their dedicated work in what are sometimes difficult
circumstances.
I would like to offer our condolences to the families
of the victims of the most recent attacks. In one of
them, eight South Africans were killed in a particularly
malicious attack in Kabul on Tuesday. They were
working closely with their colleagues from the German
police project team in Afghanistan.
Today I would like to focus on three key issues. The
first is that the Tokyo Conference has complemented
a series of international conferences on Afghanistan.
At those conferences — Bonn, Chicago, Kabul and
Tokyo — the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community agreed on a long-term
partnership and a framework for Afghanistan to assume
full responsibility for its security and development.
The challenge ahead is now achieving a swift and
comprehensive implementation of the decisions taken
at those conferences. Germany remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to do so and to
achieve stability, economic growth and development.
The Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is
of paramount importance in achieving Afghanistan’s
governance and development objectives. Germany
looks forward to sustained progress in the five
key areas agreed on in Tokyo. We encourage the
Afghan Government to finalize its national priority
programmes and to transform them into “vehicles for
tangible development results”, to quote the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2012/703). My country has
pledged $560 million annually in contributions to the
implementation of Afghan Government priorities.
Secondly, regional cooperation and support for
Afghanistan have been further strengthened by the
Kabul Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference. Agreement
on seven concrete confidence-building measures has
been achieved, which will contribute to fostering
cooperation in the region and thus to stability and
prosperity. We look forward to supporting this process.
We are offering our specific expertise in the areas of
regional infrastructure and chambers of commerce.
We welcome the initiative taken by the Government of
Afghanistan to hold a meeting for senior officials here
in New York in the coming week to take this process a
step further.
Thirdly, the number of civilian casualties has been
reduced. We welcome this development, which is due
mainly to improved standards and measures taken by the

23

S/PV.6840

International Security Assistance Force and the Afghan
security forces. We encourage our Afghan partners to
further strengthen their efforts in that regard as they
progressively take over full responsibility for security.
Let me conclude by underlining that the United
Nations will continue to play a crucial role during the
transformation decade to come. The task for UNAMA
is a challenging one — to support preparations for the
upcoming elections; to protect and promote gains in the
human rights situation, particularly women’s rights; and
to support the Afghan Government in ensuring effective
coordination among donors and other international
partners. Germany will therefore continue to lend its
full support to UNAMA in implementing its mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would first like to thank
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for his participation in this debate and his
comprehensive statement. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Kubiš for his comprehensive
and informative briefing on the important work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I would further like to express my enormous
respect for the Mission staff for their deep commitment
and dedication to working on this difficult assignment.
As host and co-Chair of the Tokyo Conference
held in July, Japan would like to express its sincere
appreciation to all of our partners for helping to make
the high-level meeting a success. I would like to
reiterate our gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Kimoon for his presence and to Special Representative
Kubiš for his untiring dedication to helping with the
preparation efforts in Kabul. On 8 July, in the presence
of President Karzai and representatives and leaders
from more than 80 countries and organizations,
including from civil society, we adopted the Tokyo
Declaration, in which the international community and
Afghanistan reaffirmed their historic partnership in the
form of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
In this road map, the Afghan Government committed
to achieving more efficiency and transparency in its
governance, while the international partners gave their
word that they would stand beside Afghanistan in its
efforts to gain stability and self-reliance beyond 2015,
and also committed to providing more than $16 billion
through 2015. Japan’s contribution to socioeconomic

24

development and security capability enhancement
will reach around $3 billion in about five years. Those
reciprocal commitments will be updated through
periodical senior official meetings and ministeriallevel meetings.
Building on the outcomes of the NATO Summit
on security, the Kabul Ministerial meeting on regional
cooperation and the Tokyo Conference on development,
Afghanistan now has a road map for working towards
a stable and prosperous future. Also, as stated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/703), the third
tranche of the transition of security responsibilities to
the Afghan National Security Forces is progressing as
planned, and it outlines a path to self-reliance for the
nation.
In order to realize those road maps, sustained
political will and actions must follow. For that to occur,
we cannot, first of all, stress enough the necessity
of substantively improving the security situation on
the ground by strengthening the Afghan National
Police and Army. At the same time, however, we have
witnessed some recent shocking incidents, including
targeted killings of civilians and insider attacks within
various Afghan security bodies. Japan renews its call
for the Afghan Government, in partnership with the
international community, to make further efforts to
grapple with the task of stopping the cycle of violence.
In the field of development, we commend the Afghan
Government’s efforts to devise an implementation
plan for the 16 governance targets in the five major
areas described in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. We welcome the issuance of the
presidential decree on governance as an expression of
the Government’s firm determination. It is our strong
hope that concrete actions will be undertaken and
positive changes made on the ground. We look forward
to seeing tangible progress before the first ministerial
meeting, which the Government of the United Kingdom
has kindly agreed to host in 2014.
I would like to express our strong hope that a stronger
and more accountable Government in Afghanistan
under the committed leadership of President Karzai
will be able to achieve lasting stability in the country
through commitments fulfilled and follow-up efforts
undertaken. In the short term, conducting the upcoming
presidential election in a fair and inclusive way is
of utmost importance for lending legitimacy to the
Government. In the longer term, the predominant task

12-51598

S/PV.6840

for a legitimate Afghan Government is to proceed with
the peace and reconciliation process.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the positive
trend of an increasing number of former anti-Government
personnel enrolling in the reintegration process through
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
As a strong supporter of that reintegration programme,
Japan believes that the accumulation of successful
cases can support the reconciliation process as a
whole and lead to a successful peace process. It is also
encouraging to see that non-governmental and civilian
actors are making efforts to contribute to the process.
Recalling a series of recent large-scale insurgent
attacks against foreign missions, including the one
against the Japanese embassy in Kabul in April, the
Government of Japan would like to stress once again the
importance and urgency of properly securing the safety
of members of international organizations, such as
United Nations, diplomats, aid workers and, moreover,
the general public, in accordance with established
international laws and regulations. In that context, we
welcome the Security Council press statement issued
last Friday. I join my colleagues in calling upon the
relevant authorities to protect missions and fully respect
their international obligations in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his comprehensive briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2012/703). I would also like to warmly
welcome the Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, to New York and to thank him for
his insightful statement.
Afghanistan stands at an important crossroads
today. As responsibilities are handed over to Afghan
authorities at an accelerated rate, significant political
and economic challenges remain, many of which
have been highlighted in the Special Representative’s
insightful briefing. Tackling those challenges and
building a sustainable, stable Afghanistan is crucial,
not only for the future of the Afghan people, but also
for peace and stability in the region, Asia and the world.
From our point of view, there are three key pillars
that will determine the result of the transition and
transformation process.

12-51598

The first pillar is the international community’s
approach to Afghanistan. A strong display of will
from the international community will strengthen the
hopes of the Afghan people for the future. From that
perspective, we welcome the pledge at the Chicago
and Tokyo Conferences of continued commitment
to the country’s future stability and prosperity in the
transformation decade. While we are moving on to the
implementation of the Framework based on mutual
pledges and commitments, we must remain in touch
with the realities and developments on the ground.
Meanwhile, the continued engagement of the United
Nations in Afghanistan in all fields during the period
of transition and post-transition is crucial. We believe
that that is also the wish of the Afghan people.
The second pillar is to strengthen the Afghan
Government and move towards local ownership. The
people and the Government of Afghanistan are at the
centre of the transformation process. Empowering them
is essential. That is only possible by strengthening
governance and the rule of law. We welcome the
pledges of the Afghan Government following the Tokyo
Conference in that direction. Ensuring the concrete
implementation of those pledges with the support of the
international community will be a pressing issue in the
upcoming months.
Elections are another key element in providing a
smooth transition and local ownership. We would like
to commend the Afghan efforts and international actors
in the area, in particular, the Independent Election
Commission, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Development Programme. We also recognize the positive
steps taken towards democratization in Afghanistan in
the last few years. Finally, a comprehensive peace and
reconciliation process under Afghan leadership and
ownership is vital. Turkey will continue to support the
process in every way possible, with the best interests of
the Afghan people in mind.
The third pillar is the regional dimension. The role
of Afghanistan’s regional partnerships in establishing
and sustaining a secure, prosperous and peaceful
Afghanistan is crucial. Sustained regional engagement
remains key to addressing common challenges, such as
terrorism, barriers to trade and investment, illicit drugs
and refugees.
The Istanbul process, which seeks to find creative,
comprehensive and pragmatic solutions to regional
solutions, has become an important milestone in that
25

S/PV.6840

respect. As the Council well knows, the Istanbul
process, which seeks to strengthen Afghan leadership
and regional ownership, aspires to collectively enhance
political dialogue among all of the Heart of Asia
countries in a results-oriented and practical framework.
The process recognizes Afghanistan’s crucial role
and historical position in promoting connectivity and
cooperation across the heart of Asia. Indeed, as Special
Representative Kubiš pointed out, the Istanbul Process
helps define regional assistance based on mutual
interests.
We are extremely pleased that the Istanbul process
is moving towards a development and implementation
phase based on the framework accepted at the Kabul
Ministerial Conference on 14 June. Several follow-up
meetings were held in the aftermath of the Conference
with senior officials, Kabul-based ambassadors and
technical-level working groups. The next senior
officials meeting will be held here in New York on
24 September.
Turkey, which co-leads the counter-terrorism
confidence-building measures implementation process
with Afghanistan and the United Arab Emirates, hosted
a technical working group meeting on 3 September in
Ankara. The follow-up meeting took place in the United
Arab Emirates on 18 September.
We are also glad to see the concrete progress in
other key confidence-building measures (CBMs),
underlining the region’s commitment to the Istanbul
process. Pakistan will host a meeting on disaster
management on 20-21 September in Islamabad. India is
convening a technical-level meeting on the Chambers of
Commerce CBM in New Delhi, I believe my colleague
mentioned. The Counter Narcotics CBM, led by the
Russian Federation and Azerbaijan, will serve as a
crucial tool to further efforts in combating illicit drugs.
There are concrete progress and regional commitment
on all other CBMs, fostering the spread of regional
cooperation.
As Afghanistan’s regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort in contributing
to the vision of a secure, peaceful and self-sufficient
Afghanistan. That is to the benefit of us all. Turkey
will remain committed to the vision of a safe, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan. To that end, Turkey will
always remain in solidarity with the Afghan people.
In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
support for the crucial role played by the United Nations

26

in Afghanistan. I would especially like to commend the
valuable efforts of the United Nations and UNAMA. in
particular in taking the Istanbul Process further, and to
express our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš and his team.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area, as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Like others, I would first like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2012/703) and
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing and
for the remarkable work that he does under continuing
difficult circumstances. I would also like to thank His
Excellency Foreign Minister Mr. Zalmai Rassoul for
his statement and his presence here today.
The international conferences held in Bonn last
year and in Kabul and Tokyo earlier this year, as well as
the summit in Chicago, have reaffirmed the partnership
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community for that country’s long-term
security, economic growth and development. The
conferences set out the way forward for Afghanistan
to progressively assume responsibility for all aspects of
policy and to achieve its development and governance
goals.
In this three-monthly statement, we would like
to first focus on the latter two goals, highlighting the
outcome of the Tokyo Conference. Secondly, in view
of the upcoming senior officials meeting, organized
by the Government of Afghanistan in New York on
24 September, we want to briefly address regional
cooperation. The Tokyo Conference resulted in
an agreed mechanism for achieving Afghanistan’s
development and governance goals, namely, the Mutual
Accountability Framework. With others, we believe
that mutual accountability is of paramount importance
in view of the unprecedented financial support pledged
by the international community to Afghanistan.

12-51598

S/PV.6840

On our side, we are giving more than €1 billion in
development assistance to Afghanistan per year. The
EU commitment to Afghanistan is long term, that is,
for the transition and beyond. For the period from 2014
to 2020, the European Union will continue to prioritize
and to enhance support to Afghanistan. We remain
committed to increasing the levels of coordination of
that support and to ensuring its alignment with the
Government of Afghanistan’s priorities, as set out in the
national priority programmes. We are also committed
to helping Afghans develop the ability to provide their
own security. As such, we maintain a strong support to
the development of a civilian police force through the
European Union Police Mission.
For its part, the Government of Afghanistan has
committed to achieving five key development and
governance goals: first, representational democracy
and equitable elections; secondly, governance, the
rule of law and human rights; thirdly, the integrity of
public finances and commercial banking; fourthly,
government revenues, budget execution and subnational
governance; and, fifthly, inclusive and sustained growth
and development. The European Union welcomes and
supports the renewed progress in those critical areas.
The international community’s ability to sustain
support for Afghanistan depends on the Afghan
Government making real and tangible progress in those
areas, as set out in the Tokyo Framework. That not only
will increase support for continued aid to Afghanistan,
but also is essential for the capacity of the country to
absorb the exceptional aid levels that the international
community has committed to providing. It will ensure
that the Afghan people experience the benefits of that
aid.
In that regard, we look forward to the finalization
of the national priority programmes, in particular the
national priority programme on law and justice for
all. That programme will be essential in convincing
all Afghan citizens, in particular women, children and
minorities, that the Government of Afghanistan is able
to deliver justice and that the rule of law will protect
their rights. It will also increase the investor confidence
necessary to achieve sustained economic growth.
The added delays in designing that support and
reform programme are a source of concern due to
the programme’s key role in delivering the Tokyo
Framework commitments. The European Union’s
continued support to that sector depends on a swift

12-51598

finalization of that programme. In that regard, we hope
the recent changes to the Government of Afghanistan
will lead to the finalization of all national priority
programmes, as well as the consolidation of the Afghan
National Security Forces.
As part of its long-term commitment to Afghanistan,
the European Union actively supports regional
cooperation among Afghanistan’s neighbours, both
at the political and the project levels. Since 2004, we
have contributed more than €65 million to development
projects directly aimed at Afghanistan’s capacity to
benefit from a stronger involvement in the region. I can
confirm that we have every intention to stay engaged in
that important field in the years to come.
The cooperation of the countries in the region
is certainly a key to achieving more stability and
prosperity. Like others, we were encouraged by the
progress achieved by the countries of the region in
defining and agreeing on seven concrete confidencebuilding measures at the June Kabul Heart of Asia
Ministerial Conference. All of those are very important.
As the European Union, we, as supporters, committed
ourselves to cooperating closely with the Heart of Asia
countries on three confidence-building measures,
namely on disaster management, counter narcotics
and commercial opportunities. We now hope for swift
progress in implementation. Together with the Heart of
Asia countries, we will now ensure an active follow-up
to identify viable projects for cooperation.
It is important to build on the momentum achieved
and to focus efforts on implementation. However, it is
clear, in our view, that confidence-building measures
should be intended to support what we hope will be a
growing political process, not to substitute for it.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our full
support for the essential role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan as we move beyond
the transition. Its work will be of key importance in
supporting the preparations for the upcoming elections,
monitoring the human rights and humanitarian
situation, and making coordination bodies, such as the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, work more
effectively.
The aim of our overall strategy in Afghanistan
remains clear — to support Afghanistan on its path
towards becoming a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous society.

27

S/PV.6840

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for Germany’s continuing leadership on Afghanistan
here in New York. Allow me to especially welcome the
important presence of His Excellency Foreign Minister
Rassoul and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš.
2012 will be remembered as the year when
the common goal we have of a secure and stable
Afghanistan, with strong prospects for long-term
economic and social development, was underwritten
by unprecedented support from the international
community. The commitments pledged at the Chicago
summit, and most recently at the Tokyo Conference,
give us the best chance at reaching that goal. Such
support, which, as we know, included pledges for the
Afghan National Security Forces and $16 billion over
four years, underlines the importance of Afghanistan’s
stability, not just for itself, but for regional and global
security. The outcomes of those key meetings send an
undiluted message both to the people of Afghanistan
and to the insurgency: Afghanistan will not again be
abandoned.
My own country has underpinned our bilateral
relationship through a comprehensive long-term
partnership, increasing our development assistance
from $165 million this year to $250 million by 2015, and
providing $100 million a year to the Afghan National
Security Forces’ sustainment. Since the Council last
met, we have signed a memorandum of understanding on
development cooperation, which provides a long-term
framework to ensure the effective implementation of
Australia’s development partnership with Afghanistan.
We welcome the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework and Afghanistan’s vision of self-reliance. It
is now up to us and the Afghan Government to implement
the Framework. Through the Framework, Afghanistan
itself now has the tools it needs to make progress
on peace and security, to improve governance and
economic development, to tackle corruption and protect
human rights, and to develop regional cooperation and
private-sector and civil society engagement.
We know that the role of the United Nations will
become increasingly important as the international
military presence is reduced. The presence of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
sends a reassuring signal of the collective resolve to

28

protect the progress that is being made. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s assurances in his most recent
report (S/2012/703) that despite a substantial decrease in
resources to UNAMA, the United Nations commitment
for Afghanistan is undiminished, and we ourselves
remain a strong supporter of the UNAMA mandate.
The successful conduct of the political transition
in 2014, accepted by the Afghan people, is critical
to Afghanistan’s future stability, and, to this end,
credible presidential and parliamentary elections are
vital. We welcome the commitment Afghanistan has
made to announce its election timetable, consistent
with its Constitution and domestic laws, by early 2013.
Clearly, however, there is still a lot of work to be done
to ensure the elections’ success. We support the work
of the United Nations on elections, and, through our
development partnership, Australia is working to
promote participation in public debate and Government
decision-making, particularly by Afghan women.
The importance of an Afghan-led peace process,
the work of the High Peace Council, and the Afghan
Peace and Reintegration Programme were all reinforced
at Tokyo. However, the fact is that there has been,
unfortunately, little progress in peace talks. Those have
effectively stalled.
Despite the challenges, political dialogue will be
key to securing Afghanistan’s future, and peace cannot
be made at the expense of the gains of the past decade,
particularly in human rights, democracy or the rights of
women and children.
Regional cooperation is also important for security,
a peace process and economic development. Australia
will continue supporting the “Heart of Asia” process,
and we look forward to the next round of meetings here
in New York next week.
The process of transferring security responsibility
to the Afghan National Security Forces is proceeding
well. While the transition process will inevitably
experience challenges, it remains on track, and that
must be recognized. The Security Forces’ security
leadership, as we know, covers 75 per cent of the
population. By the middle of next year, the Security
Forces will lead the delivery of security across their
nation.
Australia welcomes efforts by the Afghan
Government and coalition forces to mitigate the threat
from insider attacks, which, as we know only too well,
have claimed many lives recently, including those of
12-51598

S/PV.6840

Australian personnel. As tragic as such incidents
are, we must not let them dent our resolve to see our
mission through, so Afghanistan does not again provide
sanctuary for international terrorism.
To conclude, my Government remains committed
to working with the Afghan Government, the Afghan
people and our international partners to ensure that,
after far too long, the people of Afghanistan can once
again enjoy peace and stability. Of course, we all know
that this will come only with resolve, strong mutual
commitment, relentless hard work and long-term strong
commitment. My own country will remain committed
to that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Taalas (Finland): Finland aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank Foreign Minister Rassoul and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ján
Kubiš for their statements.
The pledges made at the Tokyo Conference
demonstrated the sustained commitment of the
international community to supporting Afghanistan.
They were a sign that Afghanistan will not be
abandoned after 2014. The Afghan Government and
the international community need to concentrate on
implementing the outcomes of the Tokyo Conference,
with a special reference to mutual accountability. The
finalization of national priority programmes is equally
important.
Finland has consistently supported Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is one of our largest development partners.
Our total official development assistance from 2012
to 2016 will be more than 125 million euros. A major
part of that aid will be channeled through the United
Nations system and the World Bank.
The Tokyo Conference highlighted two priorities
for Afghanistan’s future development: good governance
and human rights. It is crucial for the consolidation
of democracy that the presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2014 and 2015 be credible and transparent.
In this regard, the passage of the electoral law and
the duties and structure of the Independent Election
Commission should be secured within the first quarter
of 2013. Every effort should be made to enable the
elections to be free and fair. The full and effective

12-51598

participation of all citizens—women and men alike—is
essential.
Good governance, democracy and the rule of law
are priorities in Finland’s cooperation with Afghanistan.
The Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund has been a key
financing channel for our aid.
Human rights, particularly women’s rights, were
another priority in Tokyo. Although remarkable gains
have been made, the progress achieved in fulfilling
Afghanistan’s human rights obligations has not been
sufficient. Today, Afghan women still face insecurity
in public spaces and at home as well as lack of access
to an unbiased justice system and legal representation.
The full and equal participation of women at all levels
of society is a prerequisite to development, economic
success and social stability. We should ensure that
human rights, including women and children’s rights,
remain at the heart of our common strategy for
Afghanistan.
In 2010, Finland started a twinning cooperation
with Afghanistan on the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions on women, peace and security.
Trilateral cooperation between Finland, Afghanistan
and UN-Women is under way, with the Afghan National
Action Plan for Women in Afghanistan as a goal.
An active civil society plays a central role in
developing society. In Afghanistan, civil society can
offer valuable support to the Government’s efforts to
improve the well-being of all Afghans and in fighting
corruption.
Finally, I would like reiterate our full support
for the dedicated work of the United Nations and its
agencies in Afghanistan. In particular, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has a
central role in providing good offices to the peace
process, promoting and protecting human rights and
coordinating international aid efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): This debate comes
at the end of a pivotal year for Afghanistan. Over the
past 12 months, the international community has been
involved in a series of high-level discussions with
Afghanistan about its engagement there post-2014.
Through conferences in Istanbul, Bonn and Kabul,
the Chicago NATO Summit in May and the Tokyo
Conference in July, the international community

29

S/PV.6840

reaffirmed its commitment to the long-term security,
stability and development of a democratic Afghanistan
from the end of the transition phase in 2014 through the
transformation decade to follow.
Canada joined the international community at
the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in pledging its
support for Afghanistan, particularly in empowering
and enabling Afghan women to shape their destiny,
by announcing that we will contribute $227 million in
development assistance to Afghanistan from 2015 to
2017. That funding is in addition to the $300 million
in development assistance that Canada is currently
contributing through 2014. It also complements our
Prime Minister’s earlier announcement at the NATO
Summit held in May of $330 million from 2015 to 2017
to help sustain the Afghan National Security Forces.
In addition, Canada disbursed over $20 million in
2011-2012 to key agencies providing humanitarian
assistance in Afghanistan.
The success achieved in the next decade will be
judged in large part by the extent to which Afghanistan
is able to establish a functional democracy, based on
credible and transparent elections, a professional and
efficient civil service, access to justice, respect for the
rule of law and the protection of human rights, including
freedom of religion.
In recognition of this, Canada is rigorously
monitoring the establishment and implementation
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework to
support the achievement of Afghanistan’s governance
and development goals. Canada also appreciates
the ongoing efforts of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board to ensure the effective delivery of aid
aligned with the Afghan national development strategy
and the Government of Afghanistan’s national priority
programmes.
Canada also turns to the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission and other leaders of Afghan
civil society to ensure that the people of Afghanistan are
seeing the results of what their leaders have promised
them. Transparency and accountability will be central
to ensuring that international funds are used effectively
and appropriately.
President Karzai’s July 29 decree on Government
reform was a helpful first step, but meaningful reform
will require consistent and concerted commitment
from the highest levels of Government to eliminate
corruption and maintain confidence in the public

30

sector over the long term. There is much work yet to
be done. These measures will foster foreign investors’
confidence, helping the country to attain economic
independence, and we look forward to seeing the
Government of Afghanistan follow through on those
initiatives.
(spoke in French)
It is equally imperative that the Afghan Government
continue to work towards a truly inclusive, just and
fair society. In particular, the rights of women and
girls must not be overlooked. Rather, they must be
integrated through accomplishments that result in the
emergence of women leaders among Afghanistan’s
political leaders, in the Afghan Supreme Court, in the
civil service and in civil society.
Canada’s ongoing civilian programmes will fully
integrate infant and maternal health, increased access
to education and justice, and greater participation
of women in civil society and political life. The
Government of Afghanistan must also remain active
in its efforts to improve the lives of women and girls.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
increase awareness and enforcement of the law on
the elimination of violence against women. We also
encourage Afghanistan to recognize the different
effects that conflict has on women and men, and to
increase women’s role in decision-making with regard
to conflict prevention and resolution, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Women
must not be forsaken for the sake of stability.
It has been a challenging year for those who
are working on the ground to improve security in
Afghanistan. Although civilian deaths are down,
Taliban attacks on civilians continue to take a
devastating toll. More than 2,400 civilians have been
killed or injured by insurgents in the first half of 2012
alone. As a result of the conflict, a large number of
civilians cannot access basic services or humanitarian
aid. In addition, aid workers continue to be targeted,
and the rising trend of insider attacks, which have
taken the lives of 51 International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) soldiers so far this year, is deeply
troubling. Nevertheless, Canada remains committed
to supporting the transition of security responsibilities
to the Afghan authorities, in particular as the secondlargest contributor of personnel to the NATO training
mission in Afghanistan and through our civilian police
deployment focused on training the Afghan National
Police.
12-51598

S/PV.6840

However, Canada recognizes that the conditions
necessary for a sustainable peace cannot be achieved
through military means alone. That is why Canada
supports Afghan-led efforts to reach out to those who
renounce violence, respect the Afghan Constitution and
sever ties to all terrorist organizations, and to offer to
those who do meaningful alternatives to violence within
a peaceful and democratic society. It is only through
the establishment of an open and fair dialogue among
all Afghans that the country will reach a permanent
resolution to the conflict.
(spoke in English)
Canada understands that Afghanistan’s challenges
cannot be addressed in a vacuum. Regional cooperation
to address issues related to security, customs
enforcement, counter-narcotics and effective border
management, including the movement of people, is
vital to solidifying the gains made over the last 10
years. Canada has played an active role in addressing
these issues by facilitating the Afghanistan-Pakistan
cooperation process to foster dialogue between the
two countries to improve cooperation on border
management. We will continue to work with both
countries to improve communication and coordination
going forward, but with a caveat. Canada calls for

12-51598

effective implementation of the confidence-building
measures established by the parties to the Istanbul
Process in June. Those measures underscore the shared
responsibility of States for addressing regional issues,
including disaster management, counter-terrorism
and the commercial development of Afghanistan’s
economic opportunities so as to make the country more
self-sufficient.
As we move forward from transition to
transformation, Canada remains committed to working
with the Government of Afghanistan, Afghan civil
society and regional and international partners to
sustain the progress that has been made over the past
decade and to help find long-term solutions to build
a sustainable peace. This cooperation will enable
Afghanistan to build a more peaceful, prosperous,
stable and secure country that respects human rights
and the rule of law and that will never again be a safe
haven for terrorists.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

31
