36

General AHembly--Seventh Session

any form of political association which would involve
r.nnexation of the Trust Territories in any sense, or
would have the effect of extinguishing their status as
Trust Territories, and affirmed the view that measures
of customs, fiscal or administrative union must not in
any way hamper the free evolution of each Trust Territory toward self -government or independence,
Recalling its resolution 563 (VI) of 18 January
1952, requesting the Trusteeship Council to submit to
it, at its seventh session, a special report containing a
complete analysis of each of the administrative unions
to which a Trust Territory is a party, and of the status
of the Cameroons and Togoland under French administration arising out of their membership in the French
Union,
Re.calling the studies O on administrative unions undertaken by the Trusteeship Council in 1949 and 1950,
and in particular the important analysis of administrative unions contained in resolution 293 (VII) adopted
by the Council on 17 July 1950,
Recalling the regular annual reports adopted by the
Trusteeship Council in 1951 and 1952 on each of the
Trust Territories participating in an administrative
union,
1. Takes note of the special report ' submitted by
the Trusteeship Council in compliance with General
Assembly resolution 563 (VI), and the observations•
made tlM-reon by the General Assembly Committee on
Administrative Unions;
2. Calls to the attention of the Administering Authorities the observations and conclusions contained
in the special report of the Trusteeship Council and
the observations of the General Assembly Committee
on Administrative Unions;
3. Requests the Administering Authorities to continue to transmit promptly to the Trusteeship Council
information as complete as possible concerning the
operation of the administrative unions affecting Trust
Territories under their administration, indicating the
benefits and advantages derived by the inhabitants of
the Trust Territories from administrative unions;
4. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities concerned will take into account the freely
expressed wishes of the inhabitants before establishing
or extending the scope of administrative unions;
5. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities concerned wilt consult with the Tn~steeship
Council concerning any change in or extension of existing administrative unions. or concerning any proposal to establish new administrative unions;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
regular examination of each administrative union affecting a Trust Territory; and to study these administrative unions, not only with regard to the four safeguards enumerated in Trusteeship Council resolution
293 (VII), but also with regard to the interests of
the inhabitants of the Territory and ,the terms of the
1 See O.iirial Rtcords of th, Tnut11ship Council, Fifth
Stssion, tfmws, agenda item 10, \>· 255 and Offidal R,cords of
thr Gm,ral Asstmbly, Fifth St1.ntm, SvpJ>ltmmt No. 4, annex.
'See O/Jiciol R,cords of tht Gtntral Assnnbly, St'Vmth
St1sion, S"vpplnn,nt No. 12.
• See document Afl,'Z17.

Charter and the Trusteeship Agreements, as well as
any other matters which the Council may deem appropriate.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.
650 (VII). Ceseation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance of the question of
cessation of the transmission of information and the
information 9 supplied on that subject by the Netherlands Government, and in view of the short time remaining for the conclusion of the work of the seventh
session,
Decides that the Committee set up 10 to study the
factors which should be taken into account in deciding
whether a Territory is or is not a Territory whose
people have not yet attained a full measure of selfgovernment, should examine carefully the documents
submitted by the Netherlands Government relating to
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam in tht light of
the resolution on factors adopted by the General
Assembly, and report to the Assembly at its next regular session.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

651 (VII). Question of. South West Africa
The General Assembly
Decides to postpone consideration of the question
of South West Africa until the eighth session of the
General Assembly, and requests the Ad H oc Committee on South West Africa, established by General
Assembly resolution 570 A (VI) of 19 January 1952,
to continue on the same basis as stated in that resolution and further requests the Committee to report
to the General• Assembly ·at its eighth session.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

652 (VII). The Ewe and Togoland unification
problem
The General Assembly,
Having adopted at the sixth session resolution 555
(VI) on the Ewe and Togoland unification problem,
which recommended, inter alia, that the Trusteeship
Council arrange for the dispatch of either a special
mission or its next periodic visiting mission to the
two Trust Territories concerned to study thoroughly
the Ewe and Togoland unification problem, including
the functioning of the proposed Joint Council for

• See document A/2177.
10 See resolution 648

(Vil).

llelolutlom adopted on reporta of the Fourth Cmnmittee
Togoland Affairs and submit to the Trusteeship Council a detailed report thereon, including specific recommendations, which shall take full account of the real
wishes and interests of the peoples concerned, and requested the Trusteeship Council to submit to the General Assembly at its seventh session a special report
covering aU aspects of the problem,
H avi•g received and examined the special report 11
of the Trusteeship Council, including the resolution 11
adopted by the Council at the second part of its eleventh
session on 25 November 1952,
Having similarly received and examined the special report 11 of the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Trust Territories in West Africa, 1952, on the Ewe
and Togoland unification problem, transmitted to the
Assembly by the Council with its aforementioned special report,
Havi•g heard the statements H of Mr. Olympio
(All-Ewe Conference), Mr. A.ntor and Mr. Odame
(Joint Togoland Congress), and Mr. Kpodar (Parti
togolais du progres) ,
Having heard the observations 111 of the representatives of the two Administering Authorities and taken
note of the written observations 19 of the United Kingdom Government on the special report of the Visiting
Mission,
N oling the view set forth in paragraph 7 of the observations of the United Kingdom that "During this
period of trust the Administering Authority must provide political institutions, systems of education and
information, and freedom of speech and political activity: which will enable the various political parties
to place their programmes before the pebple of the
Trust Territory and, by democratic methods, to seek
to enlist the support of a majority of that people",
Rtcalli•g statements of representatives of France in
the Trusteeship Council and the General Assembly to
the effect that it is the policy of their Government
to promote the development of representative political
institutions and democratic political activity in the
Trust Territories under French administration and
that the people of these Territories will, when the period of trusteeship comes to an end, have full freedom
of choice as to the future political status of these Territories, whether in association with another political
entity or otherwise,
Beari,rg •• mind that the unification of the two Togolands is the manifest aspiration of the majority of the
population of both Trust Territories,
Desiri•g to promote the political advancement of
the two Trust Territories and their freely expressed
wishes in conformity with the basic objectives of the
Trusteeship System as set forth in Article 76 of the
Charter,
11 See document
11

A/221!9.

See Trusteeshii>_ Council resolution 643 (XI).
11 See document T /1034.
i . See Offieial Ricord,$ of IM G,n,rol A11lfllbly, Slf!ffllll
S111iort, Fowl/a C°"""itl11, 300th, 301st, 302nd, 304th and

305th meetinp.

11 See 01/icial R1cord1 of 11,, Tnu1111m~ COMncil, Eln,1nth
S11.non, 457th and 458th meetings.
18 See document T/1039.

17

1. Continues to urge, as set out in its resolution
555 (VI), that the two Administering Authorities
concerned and the peoples involved exert every effort
to achieve a prompt, constructive and equitable settlement of the problem, taking fully into account the
freely expressed wishes of the people concerned ;
2. Regrets that the consultations undertaken by
the Administering Authorities did not achieve the purpose of paragraph 5 of resolution 555 (VI) inasmuch
as the election procedures devised did not result in
the participation of all the major groups in the two
Trust Territories;
3. Recommends that the two Administering Authorities concerned carry on full and extensive consultations with the principal political parties in the two
Territories and make every effort to bring about the
re-establishment of the Joint Council for Togoland
Affairs, or a similar body, on a basis which will enlist
the co-operation of all major segments of the population so that it may be an effective and representative
organ for the consideration of the common problems
of the two Territories ;
4. Urges all the principal parties in the Two Territories to make every effort to assist constructively in
these consultations ;

5. Recommsnds further that the terms of reference
of the Joint Council or similar body should be such as
to enable it to consider and make recommendations
upon all political, economic, social and educational
matters affecting the two Trust Territories, including
the question of the unification of the two Territories,
and that, as a first stage, the Joint Council should be
reconstituted, and re-established as soon as possible, by
means of direct elections on the basis of universal
adult suffrage exercised by secret ballot ;
6. Jnmtes the two Administering Authorities to
give increasing attention to the possibilities of promoting and expediting the general development of Togoland under British administration and Togoland under
French administration provided by the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance for the economic development of under-developed countries adopted by
the United Nations;
7. Urges the two Administering Authorities to intensify their efforts to bring about the more rapid evolution of the northern parts of both Territories so that
the peoples of these sections will be better qualified to
play their role and express their views in the political
development of the Territories;
8. Recommends that the two Administering Authorities concerned examine further all the frontier
difficulties complained of in the various petitions and
communications on this matter sent to the Trusteeship
Council and to the Visiting Mission and that they take
all possible steps to reduce or eliminate them;
9. Expresses its conviction that the implementation
of the declared policies of the Administering Authorities wm provide conditions in which the inhabitants of
the Trust Territories can determine their own political
destinv, and considers that this freedom of choke
should be exercised through accepted democratic
processes;

·ss

General Aasembl,-&weuda Seaioa

10. Recommends that the two Administering Authorities, through the Joint Council or otherwise, take
steps to promote common policies on political, economic, and social matters of mutual concern to the
two Trust Territories;
11. Notea that resolution 643 (XI) of the Trusteeship Council requests the Administering Authorities to
report fully to the Council in advance of the eighth
session of the General Assembly on all steps taken by
them pursuant to the special report of the 1952 Visiting Mission;
12. Requests the Administering Authorities to include in such reports accounts of steps taken by them
pursuant to the present resolution, as well as a full
account of all factors affecting the unification question ;
13. Requests the Trusteeship Council to submit to
the General Assembly at its next regular session a special report on the implementation by the Administering
Authorities concerned of the present resolution and
the action taken by the Council thereon.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

653 (VD). Participation of the lndlpnoua In•
habltanta of the Truat Territorlee In Ille 18!•
ernmelll of thoee Tenltoriee ad In the work
of the Truateeahlp Couneil
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 554 (VI) of 18 January 1952
invitmg the Trusteeship Council to examine the possibility of associating the inhabitants of the Trust Territories more closely in its work,
Bearing in mind the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System enumerated in Article
76 of the Charter,
Considering it both desirable and necessary that the
indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories should
have every opportunity of developing their ability to
_take charge in due course of the public affairs of their
Territories,
Notin~ the consideration n given to this question
by the Trusteeship Council at its tenth and eleventh
sessions, and resolution 466 ( XI) adopted by the
Council on 23 July 1952.
Taking into account the fact that there has not yet
been opportunity for action to be taken pursuant to
this resolution,
1. Expresses the opinion that the objects of resolution 554 (VI) would be better achieved through the
active participation of merJ?ber_s ~f thej indigenous
population of the Trust Temtones m the government
of those Territories and in the work of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Shares the hope expressed by the Trusteeship
Council in resolution 466 { XI) that the Administering
Authoritia will find it appropriate to associate suitably
1

tT

See 0/Jiciol Rtcord.t of llu Tnul1e1hi' CCHmCil, Tmth

Ses.nmt, 388th, 389th, 408th and 409th meetings, and E/rr,mth
S,ssion, 454th meeting.

qualified indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories in the work of the Trusteeship Council as ,part
of their delegations or in any other manner whkh they
deem desirable ;
3. I n'll#es the Administeri~ Authorities to give
careful attention to Trusteeship Council resolution
466 ( XI) and to the present resolution with a view to
giving. effect to the suggestions contained therein ;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include in
its reports to the General Assembly information on action taken pursuant to resolution 466 ( XI) and to the
present resolution.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

654 (VII). Report of the Tnuteeship Council
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report 11 of the Trusteeship
Council covering its fourth special session and it11 tenth
and eleventh sessions;
2. R1commends that the Trusteeship Council, in
its futJtre deliberations, take into, account the cOQJIDaltl
and suggestions made in the course of the dilcuuion
of the report of the Council at the eeventh ll!llion
of the General Assembly.
;:
410th p1,,,.,, ,,.,,,_,,
21 D,c,mb,r 1952.

655 (VD.). Hearins of pelitlonen from 11N Tl'IIII
Territory of iLe C..eroona under P'naell
admlnlatration
The Genera! Assembly,
H Otling grotJt1d oral hearings 11 to repretentatives
of organizations in the Cameroons under French administration,
COftlideriffg that the Trusteleship Q.>uncil has not
yet examined the reporta of the Administering Authorities on the Trust Territoriea of the Cameroons under
British and French administration for 1952, and allo
has not yet received the reports of the Visiting Miuioa
to Trust Territories in West Africa, 1952, and that
these report■ may give a fuller account of the matter,
COftlidering that on several of the more important
matters raised by the petitioners the Trusteeship <:ouncil, and in some cases the General Assembly, has previously made observations and recommendations m1 the
light of the considered views of the Adminiatednc
Authority,
1. Takes
of the statements 10 of the representatives of organizations in the Qu\leroom under
French administration, which constitute a valuable contribution to an understanding of the problems in the
Trust Territory;
11 See OJjeiol R,ctwd.t of llw GfllfflJI Aun,617 S,w,elll
SesNm, S•t'''"""' No. 4, and document A/21SO/A.d4l.
11 See O/ficial R1corrls of ,1w Gmwol A11,_,,ly; ~ l l t
S11riort, Fowth Commill11 309th to 312th meetings iacl111ive.

"°''

io Ibid.

1
