S/2020/351

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 30 April 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith copies of the briefings provided by
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn
of Africa, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium,
China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger,
the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference convened on
Tuesday, 28 April 2020. Statements were also delivered by the representatives of the
Sudan and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
President of the Security Council

20-06323 (E) 040520 080520

*2006323*

S/2020/351

Annex I
Briefing by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the developments pertaining to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA), including its support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM). I will also update the Council on recent developments since
the publication of the Secretary-General’s report before the Council (S/2020/308).
Despite the improving relations between the Sudan and South Sudan, it
remains very unlikely that progress will be made in determining the final status
of the Abyei Area in the short to medium term. Given that the African Union (AU)
Commission and the AU High-level Implementation Panel are stretched dealing with
other priorities, the enhancement of the United Nations support to the African Union
through the appointment of a deputy head of mission for UNISFA has become more
important while the Special Envoy works with the AU to seek ways to revitalize the
political process. In that regard, in a positive development, on 4 March, UNISFA
held consultations with Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok of the Sudan to resolve the
issues of the Athony airstrip and the appointment of a deputy head of mission. The
Prime Minister has expressed his willingness to support the mission in those areas.
At the local level, the security situation in the Abyei Area remains volatile,
with episodes of heightened tensions between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya
communities, an increase in criminality and the presence of armed elements in
UNISFA’s area of responsibility. UNISFA strove to contain insecurity and to keep
the Abyei Area a weapons-free zone through rapid response and presence in sensitive
areas. However, the movement of armed men reported by the local population on
several occasions during the reporting period remained a source of concern.
UNISFA troops have also been subject to attacks by armed elements. In the
latest incident, on 24 April, in Sector Centre, UNISFA forces challenged an armed
Misseriya herdsman in Nainai, who fired upon them. In a separate incident on the
same day, also in Sector Centre, a Misseriya armed group, with automatic assault
rifles, engaged with UNISFA troops at the Alal post.
With regard to the major escalation of violence between communities, in
which, on 19 January, three Misseriya were killed at Nainai by attackers suspected to
be Ngok Dinka and, on 22 January, 33 Ngok Dinka were killed by Misseriya armed
elements at Kolom in what is believed to be a retaliatory attack, UNISFA established
a joint investigative team to conduct a preliminary investigation into the incidents in
the aftermath of the attacks. Tensions, which had rapidly escalated, are now slowly
easing thanks to the preventive deployments and engagement of the mission with the
local communities.
On 16 March, a traditional leaders’ conference, comprising both Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya Paramount Chiefs, took place in Diffra, Sector North. The two sides
acknowledged the need for peace and agreed not to escalate the situation. A followup meeting with the two Paramount Chiefs took place in Diffra on 9 April. While no
agreement has yet been reached on the southern migration of Misseriya herders for
the forthcoming dry season, these meetings managed to bring together the traditional
leaders of the two sides for the first time since the Kolom attacks in January. They
were also the first meetings in that format since November 2017, when the leaders
met in Addis Ababa during an Abyei Joint Oversight Committee meeting. Although
still insufficient to restore stability to the area, these are encouraging steps taken
by the two communities. Our paramount concern is to sustain the positive dialogue
restored between the two communities. Following the completion of the Kolom
2/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

investigation report by the mission, I will be discussing with the Force Commander
what other steps may be undertaken to prevent the repetition of such incidents in
the future.
In other developments, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism made some progress towards reaching the benchmarks specified by
resolution 2497 (2019). Clear guidance for the operational activities of the JBVMM
was provided in the outcome document of the ordinary session of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism, held in Juba on 19 February. Both parties have now fully
deployed the complete number of national monitors, as per the agreement. Freedom
of movement for aerial and ground monitoring missions was also fully guaranteed.
The team site at Abu Qussa/Wunkur was then successfully established on 13 January.
With respect to the current police generation process, the deployment of the
three authorized formed police units (FPUs), expected to be on the ground by July,
is facing serious delays due to the travel restrictions decided by the Government of
the Sudan to prevent the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The process for the deployment of the first identified FPU from Ethiopia was
well advanced by early March, with the completion of the predeployment visit to
the mission area. However, all further steps had to be suspended in view of the
COVID-19 pandemic outbreak.
Although no cases of COVID-19 have been recorded within UNISFA, the
UNISFA COVID-19 task force medical teams are visiting all team sites and sectors
to verify the state of preparedness in the mission. Engineering work has been
completed to establish a 16-bed quarantine area for uniformed personnel. I welcome
the Prime Minister’s assurance that he will soon put together a team to conduct
the necessary consultations with the Ministry of Defence and Intelligence for the
use of the Athony airstrip, which would significantly improve UNISFA’s medical
evacuation capability and address its current logistical challenges.
At the local level, on a daily basis UNISFA conducts sensitization with a large
section of interlocutors, including civil society, women’s associations, communities
coming to the different marketplaces and dedicated meetings with Paramount Chiefs,
judges and prosecutors, to encourage hand-washing and social distancing. As a result
of the discussions in detention centres, the chief criminal court decided to release
13 detainees convicted of petty crimes to help decongest the cells and to comply with
the World Health Organization guidelines on social distancing. Agencies are also
in discussions with the local administration on requirements for screening sites in
several locations of the Abyei Area.
While the months ahead will no doubt bring new and unprecedented challenges
as we grapple with the COVID-19 pandemic, the UNISFA leadership will continue
to engage with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to facilitate the
implementation of the pending aspects of their previous agreements and the UNISFA
mandate. UNISFA will also continue to play a stabilizing role in the Abyei Area and
along the border regions.
I would therefore seek the continued support of the Security Council for the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for a further
period of six months, until 15 October 2020.

20-063233/29

S/2020/351

Annex II
Statement by Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to once again brief
the Security Council on the progress made in the implementation of resolution 2046
(2012), which concerns the outstanding bilateral issues between the Sudan and South
Sudan and the conflict in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
This briefing is taking place at a time when the world community is facing a
deadly global pandemic in the form of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In the
Sudan and South Sudan, the COVID-19 pandemic has wide-ranging health, human
and socioeconomic implications, compounded by plummeting oil prices, a desert
locust invasion and climatic vagaries. Urgent external support will be needed to
help both countries offset those challenges. The pandemic will also likely have a
negative effect on the peace processes in the two countries, including by significantly
slowing down engagements. My Office is currently coordinating United Nationswide technical support to enable the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) secretariat to formulate a regional strategy and develop an action plan in
response to the pandemic pursuant to the decisions of the IGAD virtual summit
meeting of 30 March, chaired by Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok.
Since my previous report to the Council, in October 2019 (see S/PV.8644),
I have had opportunities to engage with the authorities in the Sudan and South
Sudan as well as with regional actors. My joint visit with Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix to Abyei last February, in the aftermath of the tragic
Kolom incident, was part of these efforts. Undeniably, both countries have been
consolidating their improved relations, notably through the constructive roles played
in each other’s peace process. In that regard, South Sudan has continued to host and
facilitate the Sudanese peace process under the auspices of President Salva Kiir
Mayardit. Conversely, the Government of the Sudan’s mediation contributed to the
compromise between President Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar that led to the formation
of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity on 12 March 2020.
Furthermore, having inherited the South Sudan file as the new IGAD
Chairperson at a time when the opposition and the incumbent Government were
deadlocked on the number and boundaries of states, Prime Minister Hamdok,
alongside his co-guarantor President Museveni of Uganda, is credited with having
helped to resolve the issue by encouraging President Kiir, on the sidelines of the
African Union summit in early February, to return South Sudan to 10 states. Prime
Minister Hamdok thereafter congratulated the South Sudanese leader on “the
courageous decision” he took on 15 February, which espoused the IGAD position.
Demonstrating the changed spirit of the relationship, President Kiir condemned the
assassination attempt on Prime Minister Hamdok in Khartoum on 9 March. In the
same vein, the Sudan, while guaranteeing the security of Mr. Machar in Khartoum,
ensured that Lieutenant General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, also known as Hemedti,
accompanied him to and from Juba for consultations, including during his faceto-face meetings with President Kiir during the period from September 2019 to
February 2020.
The strength of the improved relations between the two countries was put to
the test by two sad developments. The first was a deadly armed attack perpetrated
by Misseriya herdsmen in the Kolom locality of Abyei on 22 January against a
community of Ngok Dinka, and the second was the sudden death from natural causes
on 25 March in Juba of the Sudanese Minister of Defence, General Jamal Al-Din
Omar, after he had jointly chaired the meeting of the Joint Political and Security
4/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Mechanism, along with his South Sudanese counterpart. Admittedly, the emphasis
put by both parties on deepening their cooperation and supporting each other’s
stability and peace is commendable.
In the Sudan, where Prime Minister Hamdok is leading a challenging transition,
his attention is largely directed at defusing tensions and finding consensus between
political players in Khartoum, including on issues resulting from the increasingly
dire economic situation. Meanwhile, the Prime Minister is also seeking to deliver on
his commitment to peace through negotiations with the armed movements. In this
regard, the recent statement by General Al-Burhan, the President of the Sovereign
Council on the unity of the leadership of the transition is encouraging. In South Sudan,
President Kiir and First Vice-President Riek Machar are striving to re-establish
a partnership that has twice shown its limits, while striving also to overcome the
political stalemate on the sharing of states and the allocation of governors.
Otherwise, cooperation in oil management between the two countries
has remained strong. After a decision to extend the agreement on oil beyond its
December 2019 deadline to March 2022, South Sudan has been steadily making
payments relating to the transitional financial arrangement by providing the Sudan
with 28,000 barrels of oil per day. Of the initial amount due of $3.02 billion, South
Sudan now owes approximately $500 million and will continue to use the facilities
based in the Sudan and to export its oil through Port Sudan against payment of a
fixed processing, transit and transportation fee. The effect of the drastic fall in oil
prices this month on this cooperation has yet to become clear.
As most Sudanese armed opposition movements settled for President Kiir’s
facilitation of their negotiations with Khartoum, and with the possibility of moving
them to a third country ruled out, the talks resumed in Juba in January and are
ongoing. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, the talks have proceeded in a virtual
format. Prime Minister Hamdok remains open to discussing all issues and the root
causes of the Sudan’s many conflicts in the hope of reaching an agreement that
unites all Sudanese. Encouragingly, opposition movements have also restated their
irreversible determination to achieve peace.
Crucially, despite disagreements between the parties on issues such
as secularism, autonomy and self-determination that have resulted in several
extensions to the initial deadline for concluding the talks, significant progress
has been achieved globally, as evidenced, inter alia, by the renewed commitment
to unilateral ceasefires by armed movements. At the behest of President Kiir, the
South Sudanese lead mediator has travelled occasionally to Khartoum to brief the
Sudanese authorities on progress in the peace process. The talks are now scheduled
to end on 9 May, but it remains to be seen whether this deadline will be met under
the current circumstances.
So far, the Government has signed framework agreements with the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-North) (Agar), as well as with armed
movements from Darfur and eastern Sudan. The agreements address the key concerns
pertaining to marginalization, lack of development and participation in governance
institutions. However, they do not completely address the issue of the separation
of religion and the State, which SPLM-North (Agar) sees as critical. The next
negotiation phases will be concerned with security arrangements and participation
in transitional institutions.
Negotiations with Darfuri armed movements delivered a major outcome when
agreement was reached with the Government on 11 February to establish a special
court for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Darfur and to seek
justice through the International Criminal Court. Notwithstanding progress on the
20-063235/29

S/2020/351

Darfur track, the absence of the Sudan Liberation Movement/Abdel Wahid from the
talks remains a source of grave concern.
Similarly, talks with the SPLM-North faction of Abdelaziz Al-Hilu (SPLMNorth (Al-Hilu)) do not appear to have made any headway. Although present in Juba,
Al-Hilu has refused to engage with the Government unless it agrees to a secular
Sudan and self-determination for Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The
Government’s position is that these issues should be addressed by the constitutional
conference and not through the negotiations in Juba. A joint committee on reforms
established on 6 April has been mandated to, inter alia, meet with Al-Hilu in a bid
to break the impasse.
Despite their support for each other, the Sudan and South Sudan have
undertaken minimal bilateral engagements within the framework of their
cooperation agreements as they have continued to focus on their internal conflicts.
However, they have stopped accusing each other of supporting or hosting their
respective rebels. Instead, they are mutually reinforcing each other’s efforts aimed
at ending internal conflicts. While both countries are careful to avoid dealing with
any points of conflict amid the challenges of their respective transitions and the
COVID-19 pandemic, it is hoped that the rapprochement and strengthened relations
will subsequently provide the incentive for them to address the outstanding issues
under the cooperation agreements, including the situation in Abyei. In this regard,
the announcement on 23 January by President Salva Kiir and General Hemedti of
the establishment of a joint mechanism to protect civilians, the deployment of a
disengagement force to the area, and the creation of a committee to investigate the
Kolom incident are all positive steps. It is hoped that these issues will feature on
the agenda of the next Joint Political and Security Mechanism session in Khartoum,
which was postponed to an unspecified date due to concerns over COVID-19 and the
sudden death of the Sudanese Defence Minister in Juba.
With regard to the Two Areas, Prime Minister Hamdok’s visit to the area on
9 January and his openness to discussing all issues have raised hope that conflict
there may soon be a thing of the past. However, the wrangling between the two SPLMNorth factions must cease and forward movement is required on the negotiation
track involving the SPLM-North (Al-Hilu).
At my meeting with President Kiir on 17 January, I congratulated him on his
mediation of the Sudanese peace process, which was beginning to see concrete results,
and stressed the importance of sustained engagement with Sudanese authorities on
various bilateral issues. The President agreed and assured me that once peace is
achieved in both countries they would be in a better position to discuss outstanding
issues in view of a mutually beneficial relationship. The Foreign Minister noted that
the two countries would also prioritize reconciliation in Abyei for now. Accordingly,
during the meetings with Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities in Abyei on 12 and
13 February in the company of Under-Secretary Lacroix, I stressed the importance
of reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.
My Office will continue to engage with the authorities of both countries, as well
as with key regional actors, including the African Union and IGAD, as appropriate, in
order to encourage them not only to build peace and stability within their territories
but to also advance the implementation of all binding cooperation agreements.

6/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex III
Statement by Mrs. Karen Van Vlierberge, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations
I thank the briefers for their briefings.
As always, a discussion of Abyei cannot take place without referring to
developments in both the Sudan and South Sudan. The transitions taking place in
both countries can positively influence efforts to resolve the question of Abyei. We
welcome the positive steps taken in the past months.
We understand also that these transitions, alongside with dealing with the
human and economic impact of the coronavirus disease crisis, require the full
attention of both Governments. However, we urge them to keep the matter on their
agendas in order to reach a final settlement on the status of Abyei. The full and
complete commitment of both Governments is required for a sustainable peace in
the area to be reached. This includes creating the conditions for the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) to carry out its mandate.
We note that the security situation remains fragile, with some tragic outbursts
of violence having taken place. We call on the parties to bring the perpetrators
to justice.
We agree with the Secretary-General that UNISFA continues to play a crucial
role in curbing violence and increasing crime and in protecting civilians, including
through the mitigation of intercommunity tensions. We also welcome UNISFA’s
efforts to foster peace, dialogue and conflict resolution, including by supporting the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
UNISFA cannot be an open-ended substitute for the normal administrative
and public services that the population of Abyei is entitled to receive. This is why
a solution through political dialogue is needed. We call on all parties to remain
engaged to that end and seize the momentum of transition. Pending a final settlement
on the status of Abyei, a responsible exit of the mission is difficult to envisage.
Finally, previous Security Council resolutions must be implemented, in
particular by appointing a civilian deputy head of UNISFA and by increasing the
police component of the mission. We look forward to greater progress in this regard.

20-063237/29

S/2020/351

Annex IV
Statement by Mr. Yao Shaojun, Acting Deputy Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
I thank Under-Secretary Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for
their detailed briefings. I also welcome the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan
and of Ethiopia at today’s meeting.
At present, the situation in the Abyei Area remains generally calm and stable.
The political situation in the Sudan and South Sudan has witnessed positive progress.
The two sides have strengthened their interaction and cooperation on Abyei and
have been actively cooperating with the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA). These positive developments have not come easily, especially
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Secretary-General notes
in his report that the Abyei Area still faces many challenges and that the security
situation remains fragile (S/2020/308). The proper resolution of this issue is of vital
importance to the stability of the Sudan, South Sudan and the entire region.
The Security Council should continue to fully respect the leading role of the
Sudan and South Sudan in resolving the Abyei issue, listen carefully to the views of
both sides and support the efforts of regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
hope that the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan will continue to seek a
political solution to this issue, including through the establishment of administrative,
judicial and public security institutions. The international community should provide
assistance to both sides, especially on fighting COVID-19.
We continue to support UNISFA in implementing its mandate. The mission
has an important role to play in maintaining the stability of the Abyei Area. China
welcomes the efforts that Ethiopia has undertaken as one of the main troopcontributing countries, notes the Secretary-General’s recommendations, and supports
the extension of UNISFA’s mandate. In this regard, we should listen carefully to the
views of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, the AU and the troopcontributing countries. At the same time, we appreciate the efforts being undertaken
by the Secretariat to address the COVID-19 pandemic and encourage it to improve
the safety and security of peacekeepers in UNISFA.
China stands ready to work with African countries and the international
community to contribute to resolving the Abyei issue and to promote peace, stability
and development in that region.

8/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex V
Statement by Mr. José Singer Weisinger, Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic
We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy OnangaAnyanga for their briefings.
This reporting period has been marked by positive steps influenced by the
peaceful transitions in both countries. Nevertheless, the recent violent attacks
that have taken place in Abyei, which have resulted in deaths, kidnappings and
burnt villages, in addition to other fatalities, are highly concerning. Owing to
the insecurity, humanitarian agencies have been unable to implement aid projects
in some territories. The very fragile situation is exacerbated by recurrent armed
attacks, the effects of climate change and, now, the threat of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which requires united efforts in order to contain its spread.
Since the conflict started, the Sudan and South Sudan have paid limited
attention to their responsibilities in respect of Abyei as they face other pressing
issues. More needs to be done to allow for the consolidation of peace and security by
fostering a viable political process that ultimately leads to the full implementation
of the Agreement of 20 June 2011. Accordingly, it is also critical that the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) be provided with an appropriate
mandate, capabilities and resources. The appointment of a civilian deputy head of
mission and other key civilian and police staff, as well as the operationalization of
the Athony airstrip, would be a great boost to that end.
We welcome the progress made on the deployment of the joint military
observer teams across the Abyei area and on the implementation of the benchmarks
of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
The people of Abyei expect solutions to their priority needs, including health
care, nutrition, food and water, as well as their human rights to be protected. It is
concerning that cases of sexual and gender-based violence involving minors are being
reported and that women in the Abyei area lack representation in decision-making
processes. In that regard, we welcome the reappointment of a female representative
on the Ngok Dinka joint community peace committee and the ongoing drafting of
an action plan to promote coherent implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
To conclude, we would like to highlight the initiative to convene a conference
of traditional leaders on 9 April, as well as the scale and comprehensiveness of
advocacy for the protection of human rights, especially those of women and children.
In order to achieve sustainable peace, the Sudan and South Sudan must take concrete
action to fulfil their commitments and the Council should turn its attention back
to that issue. The upcoming discussions on UNISFA’s mandate present us with the
perfect opportunity to do that.

20-063239/29

S/2020/351

Annex VI
Statement by Mr. Gert Auväärt, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Estonia to the United Nations
I also would like to thank the briefers.
Estonia welcomes the positive developments that have taken place over the
past six months. Allow me to also express our gratitude to the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and Ethiopia for their contributions.
We recognize that the transitions in the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as
the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, require the full attention of
both Governments. However, we call on the parties to capitalize on their improving
relationship to push for progress on the question of Abyei. Most importantly, it cannot
be overemphasized that there is no substitute for a meaningful political process
between the parties. The more that process is delayed, the worse the situation seems
to get on the ground. The deteriorating security situation is a stark reminder of that;
so is the worsening humanitarian situation. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic
is only amplifying that threat. Therefore, we call on the Sudan and South Sudan to
revive a viable political process leading to the implementation of the Agreement of
20 June 2011. That could be significantly helped by the appointment of the civilian
deputy head of the mission. In addition, we encourage regional actors to actively
engage the parties on the Abyei question.
Meanwhile, it is the responsibility of the Security Council to tackle
the negative security trends decisively now. In that connection, Estonia has
three recommendations.
First, in the light of increasing criminality and intercommunal violence, it is
crucial to expedite the deployment of the remaining authorized UNISFA personnel,
especially the police component. While we recognize that the COVID-19 pandemic
is causing delays, we call for the issuance of the visas needed for the deployment of
all UNISFA personnel without further delay.
Secondly, we need to institute as much accountability as possible to bring
the perpetrators of violence to justice. In that context, we call upon the authorities
to launch joint investigations into the deadly incidents in Kolom in January.
Accountability will not only deter persons from causing future incidents but will
also help to build much-needed trust among communities.
Thirdly, we need to deploy human rights expertise to UNISFA. That will help
strengthen the capacity of the local authorities to address human rights abuses and
thus prevent further violence.
Estonia supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the
mandate of UNISFA for the next six months. However, the parties must show their
willingness to make progress towards resolving the Abyei question.
To conclude, we welcome the recent encouraging signs of progress.
Nevertheless, we also call on the parties to urgently build on that positive momentum,
especially through a meaningful political process towards a final resolution of the
Abyei question. Further delays will only continue to prolong the plight of the people
of Abyei.

10/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex VII
Statement by Mrs. Anne Gueguen, Deputy Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy
Onanga-Anyanga for their very informative briefing.
I will be brief and limit my remarks to three points.
First, France condemns in the strongest terms the escalation of intercommunal
violence and recent violent clashes in Kolom. In that context, I would like to stress our
deepest concerns over reports of sexual violence against women and children and of
internal displacements. We call on the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan
alike to coordinate an investigation as announced and recall that those responsible
must be held accountable and brought to justice. Those terrible events confirm that
the situation in Abyei is still fragile and that the deployment of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains absolutely necessary.
However — and this is my second point — only a genuine political process
to address the issues of Abyei and the border demarcation can really stabilize the
security situation there. France calls on both Governments to seize the opportunity
inherent in the improvement of their bilateral relations to tackle the Abyei question
and launch a serious dialogue with the aim of achieving a political solution, in
accordance with the Agreement of 20 June 2011. We welcome the progress in the
peace processes in both countries, as reported by Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga,
and encourage all armed groups in Darfur to join the negotiations.
France also encourages the African Union, the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and the United Nations Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa to
intensify their mediation roles with a view to achieving a political solution between
the Sudan and South Sudan, in accordance with the 2011 Agreement. We should
all do our best to prevent the situation in Abyei becoming a new frozen conflict
and UNISFA an open-ended mission — as the Secretary-General writes in his most
recent report (S/2020/308), the international community can neither accept nor
afford that.
My final remarks address the reconfiguration of UNISFA, pursuant to the
relevant decision of the Security Council. We deeply regret that the three formed
police units are still pending deployment. We call on both Governments to provide
full support to UNISFA in the deployment of its personnel, including by issuing the
requested visas. The three formed police units must be deployed as soon as possible;
that is the only way to deal with the high level of criminality in Abyei, and to adapt
the force to the current challenges. At the same time, both parties should engage to
implement the Abyei police service, in line with the 2011 Agreement.
Lastly, France urges the United Nations and all the stakeholders to do their
best to deploy the civilian deputy head of mission and the civilian team. UNISFA
must be able to support the peace process, including at the communal level, and to
engage with the African Union and the relevant stakeholders in Juba and Khartoum.

20-0632311/29

S/2020/351

Annex VIII
Statement by Mr. Jürgen Schulz, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations
The United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is crucial for
stabilizing the Abyei area as long as there is no lasting political settlement and hence
no governance structure that can address the many challenges for the population
arising from a lack of socioeconomic development, humanitarian needs and rising
criminality and intercommunal violence.
The mission must be adequately equipped to address these challenges.
In this context, let me express our gratitude to Ethiopia for contributing
high-quality peacekeepers.
Regarding the forthcoming UNISFA mandate renewal, we agree with the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the mandate should be extended by
six months. However, as we have said here again and again, the mission must be
calibrated to effectively respond to the changing realities on the ground. The mission
must have the capacity to address the rise in criminal activity; support communitylevel peace processes, mediation and dialogue; and advance its support to the African
Union Commission and the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, as well
as to the two parties.
To address rising crime rate and deteriorating overall security situation, we
underline the urgent need to strengthen the police component. We note with great
concern and disappointment that the mandate adaptations made by the Security
Council have not been implemented. On a positive note, female officers account for
almost 30 per cent of the police component. This percentage should be maintained
once the enlargement of this component is finally implemented.
We strongly urge the Sudan to issue visas without further delay, in particular
to allow the mandated increase in UNISFA’s police personnel as soon as the current
restrictions imposed in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) allow for
their deployment.
We also see a continued need to strengthen the civilian component of the
mission in order to support the efforts of the communities in Abyei to reconcile and
create enduring peaceful relations. Particular support is needed for initiatives for the
full and effective participation of women at all stages of the peace process.
The mandate needs to ensure continued effective human rights monitoring,
including of any sexual and gender-based violence and violations and abuses of
human rights, including those committed against women and children. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation to deploy more human rights
expertise to UNISFA.
Regarding the political process, Abyei needs a political solution and both
parties — the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan — are in the driver’s
seat. Sustainable peace in both countries, which are so closely intertwined, cannot
be achieved without a constructive solution to the Abyei question. To date, little
progress has been made by the parties on the issues of border demarcation or the
process leading to a final status of Abyei.
We commend the efforts of the UNISFA leadership to convene peace
conferences in the Abyei Area to bring together the traditional leaders of both the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya and urge the parties to support these efforts.

12/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

We further urge the parties to jointly investigate the attacks of 19 and
22 January, which left 36 civilians dead, and to jointly bring the perpetrators to
justice. Such action would be a sign of responsible ownership by both parties.
The question of Abyei cannot be solved by the international community but
only by the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan. We offer our support,
but local stakeholders must not operate under the false impression that they can hide
behind the international community forever.
We encourage regional actors to actively engage the parties on the question
of Abyei. We would welcome more detailed reporting in the Secretary-General’s
reports on the engagement of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
and of the Special Envoy.
There is a need to make tangible progress and define a finite timeline. We
call on the parties to hold regular meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and to consult on Abyei at the
ministerial level.
To conclude, echoing the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire,
it is paramount that differences be resolved with a view to dedicating all efforts to
curbing the spread of COVID-19.

20-0632313/29

S/2020/351

Annex IX
Statement by Mr. Muhsin Syihab, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations
We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy OnangaAnyanga for their important briefings.
Indonesia commends the positive engagement between the Sudan and South
Sudan, as well as their respective transitions and hopes for their continuation in
Abyei. However, the fragile security situation in Abyei remains cause for concern.
Unless checked effectively, it could exacerbate the existing socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges.
This is especially perilous amid the looming coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. We hope that the current grave situation will be used by both Governments
to intensify peacemaking and put all energies behind ensuring that the effects of the
pandemic on the people of Abyei and those within their domains are minimized. On
this note, I would like to underline three key issues.
The first is enhancing the capacity of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). UNISFA’s presence remains essential to maintaining
stability in Abyei. Thus, enhancing UNISFA’s ability to fully discharge its mandate
remains our utmost priority. UNISFA’s reconfiguration must be geared towards
enabling the mission effectively to respond to the challenges on the ground and meet
them with appropriate personnel and capability support. It is especially important to
enhance UNISFA’s readiness for the COVID-19 pandemic.
Indonesia supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation to renew the
UNISFA mandate for six months, and looks forward to working with other Council
members on the mandate renewal.
Secondly, on cooperation between the Sudan and South Sudan, both countries
need to seize the positive momentum in their bilateral relations to propel the
negotiations on Abyei forward. We join the Secretary-General in his call for the two
countries to resolve outstanding issues expeditiously, including the implementation
of their Agreement of 20 June 2011. Abyei’s peaceful resolution is a test case of the
political transitions in the Sudan and South Sudan. This also requires further effective
engagement from countries of the region, the African Union and the United Nations.
Thirdly, it is vital to promote intercommunal dialogue. Indonesia notes with
concern the recent clashes in Abyei, most notably in Kolom. We call for an immediate
joint investigation followed by remedial actions to help the two communities heal.
UNISFA’s role in enhancing intercommunal dialogue in Abyei through
the Joint community peace committee is commendable. The traditional leaders
conference last month was also a positive initiative. More such undertakings, topped
with enhancing the rule of law, are critical for peacebuilding.
Hence, UNISFA’s work on capacity-building for the community protection
committees and its support of traditional justice mechanisms must continue. The
additional deployment of the remaining authorized United Nations police and formed
police units is also of critical importance.
In conclusion, Indonesia fully supports the efforts of the Sudan and South
Sudan to reach a peaceful solution in Abyei as a part of their journey to peace.

14/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex X
Statement by Mr. Niandou Aougi, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the Niger to the United Nations
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
the situation in Abyei (S/2020/308).
In his report, dated 16 April 2020, the Secretary-General draws attention
to the need for the Sudan and South Sudan to build positive momentum in their
bilateral relations in order to make progress towards resolving the border dispute
between them over Abyei. In that regard, the Niger welcomes the political progress
made in both countries, including the peacebuilding process under way in the Sudan
and the formation of a Transitional Government of National Unity in South Sudan.
Those developments are conducive to peace in Abyei.
Congratulations are due to the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA), on the one hand for the efforts made in the prevention of intercommunity conflicts, particularly through the implementation of quick-impact
projects to support the local population, and on the other hand for the efforts it
has kindly made to organize several rounds of peace conferences in the Abyei
region — conferences that brought together the traditional chiefs of the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya.
My country strongly condemns the tragic events that took place in the Kolom
region on 19 and 22 January and calls on the parties to jointly investigate those
events and take measures to bring the perpetrators to justice. That would promote a
rapprochement between the two warring communities.
We call on the parties to continue the process of border demarcation, focusing
on bilateral political consultations leading to the establishment of a political
administration. We also call on them to consider meetings with both the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to facilitate and render
effective the border demarcation process within the framework of the Joint Border
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. In addition, we support the appointment of
a civilian head for UNISFA and call on the Abyei partners to opt for a compromise
solution in the border demarcation process.
In conclusion, my country supports the extension of the mandate of UNISFA
for six months and commends the mission for the preventive measures implemented
in the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Given that culture of
performance, the Niger is pleased to note that the mission has appointed a COVID-19
coordinator, assisted by a working group, not only to protect personnel but also,
above all, to ensure that its activities continue unabated for the greater good of the
people of Abyei.

20-0632315/29

S/2020/351

Annex XI
Statement by Mr. Dmitry Polyanskiy, First Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
Allow me to thank our briefers — Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga — for their interventions.
Despite the fragility of the security situation in Abyei, peacekeeping efforts
contributed to making the Area more stable. We commend the activities of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in maintaining good
relations with local communities. The measures taken by the Blue Helmets to
prevent intercommunal conflicts and ensure cooperation on law enforcement and
economic activities in the area of the Amiet common market are also commendable.
The 19 February meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the
16 March traditional leaders conference helped promote much-needed dialogue
among all the parties.
The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) is an
integral element of the system for preventing incidents between the parties. UNISFA’s
support for the Mechanism significantly contributes to stabilizing Abyei.
We would like to highlight the professionalism and courage demonstrated by
the Ethiopian peacekeepers, who serve in one of the most difficult and logistically
complex peacekeeping operations in the world.
The joint efforts of all parties are required in order to successfully promote a
long-lasting settlement between the Sudan and South Sudan. There is an international
legal basis for that — well-known resolutions of the Security Council and the
African Union, as well as a package of bilateral agreements concluded between the
two countries in September 2012 in Addis Ababa. In that regard, we expect the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel to continue its valuable work with
the Sudanese and South Sudanese parties.
We note steady normalization in relations between the Sudan and South Sudan.
The participation of Khartoum, together with the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan made a significant contribution to the
settlement process in that country. We also highlight President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s
mediation efforts to promote negotiations between the Sudanese authorities and
armed groups. The accumulated positive momentum in bilateral relations should be
used to resolve the Abyei issue.
We understand that in current conditions there are objective factors that
prevent Khartoum and Juba from accelerating the settlement of the final status of
Abyei. In such circumstances, maintaining the presence of UNISFA is still very
important. In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s proposal to extend
UNISFA’s mandate, including its support for the JBVMM, for six months.

16/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex XII
Statement by Ms. Halimah DeShong, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the
United Nations
My delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy
Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings on the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA).
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the positive political developments
in both the Sudan and South Sudan. We remain hopeful that this momentum will
translate into greater cooperation and a renewed commitment between the two
countries to find a just political resolution to the final status of Abyei.
We acknowledge the progress and challenges highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report (S/2020/308). In particular, we note the fragile security
situation in Abyei, including the ongoing intercommunal violence — as evidenced
in the Nainai-Kolom attacks on 19 and 22 January. We condemn those attacks
and lament the heightened tensions between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya
communities. We welcome UNISFA’s efforts to investigate those violent incidents
and encourage the authorities to proceed with the joint investigation as agreed during
the 19 February Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting in Juba.
Equally, we urge the Abyei communities to exercise the utmost restraint,
and we call on the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to cooperate fully
with UNISFA. UNISFA’s tireless efforts to ensure peace and stability in the region,
including to maintain Abyei as a weapons-free zone, are laudable. We commend
UNISFA for its regular constructive engagements with the administrative and
traditional leaders, as well as with the joint community peace committee. We also
welcome the advances within the framework of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, and we urge the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee to convene
regular meetings.
The difficulties in Abyei will not be resolved unless the key drivers of
intercommunal conflicts are robustly tackled. We therefore urge the parties to fulfil
their obligations as stipulated in the 2011 agreement between the Government of the
Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the Abyei Area and the 2012
cooperation agreement between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of
South Sudan.
We remain concerned about the dire humanitarian situation in Abyei, which
is expected to be exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Likewise, the
dreadful environmental conditions in the region, which are compounded by the
adverse effects of climate change, continue to negatively alter the security, economic
and social landscape. Amid these immense challenges, we emphasize the need for
unhindered humanitarian service delivery to those who require urgent assistance.
My delegation encourages the inclusion of women in the decision-making
process in Abyei. We welcome the work of UNISFA in support of the women and
peace and security mandate. We also note marginal progress on the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and some progress on the benchmarks
specified by resolution 2497 (2019). We call on all parties to adhere to the stipulations
outlined in the outcome documents of the ordinary sessions of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism held in Juba on 13 October 2019 and 19 February 2020.

20-0632317/29

S/2020/351

UNISFA remains an interim security force, and therefore it is critical to
resolve the status of Abyei. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands in solidarity
with the people of Abyei and reaffirms its commitment to UNISFA. We also thank
Ethiopia for its invaluable contribution through its peacekeepers, and we reiterate
our support for the critical mediating role played by the African Union.

18/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex XIII
Statement by Mr. Jerry Matjila, Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations
I would like to express my delegation’s gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their enlightening briefings today.
Allow me to make the following key observations on the political developments as
well the status of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
South Africa welcomes the positive political developments that have taken
place both in the Sudan and South Sudan in the recent past, including those
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report for the period of 16 October 2019 to
15 April 2020 (S/2020/308). With the positive developments that have taken place in
the Sudan thus far, we emphasize the continued need for unity in the Sudan’s ruling
political coalition.
We continue to urge the two countries to use the renewed rapprochement to
finalize the outstanding issues with regard to Abyei. The tensions reported earlier
this year highlight the volatility of the region and its potential to unravel the progress
made to bring about stability in the Area.
South Africa encourages the Sudan and South Sudan to continue inclusive
political dialogue in order to implement their agreements on border issues and to
meet the benchmarks previously set by the Security Council.
With regard to the developments pertaining to UNISFA, South Africa
appreciates and welcomes the importance of the stabilizing role that UNISFA and
the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) continue to
play along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan. South Africa welcomes
the progress that has been made by the JBVMM on benchmarks specified by
resolution 2497 (2019).
Furthermore, South Africa welcomes and encourages the continued work of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee.
We note the Secretary-General’s mention that, in this time of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, engagement in the foreseeable future may need to take on new modalities.
My delegation is encouraged by the UNISFA-facilitated meetings between the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya on 16 March and 9 April to discuss putting an end to
the intercommunal tensions. We welcome their renewed commitment to peace and
security in Abyei. We hope that continued interactions between the two sides will
lead to an agreement on resolving outstanding issues.
Lastly, South Africa welcomes the progress that UNISFA has made in promoting
the women and peace and security agenda in the Abyei region by promoting women’s
participation at all levels of decision-making, including in conflict prevention and
resolution processes. We also thank Ethiopia for its continued efforts in contributing
to the easing of security tensions in Abyei.

20-0632319/29

S/2020/351

Annex XIV
Statement by Mr. Tarek Ladeb, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the United Nations
I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa, for their briefings. We welcome the participation of
the representatives of the Sudan and Ethiopia.
We express our appreciation for the stabilizing role of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the Area and along the border between
the Sudan and South Sudan, including its support to the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM). We would also like to commend Ethiopia
and its peacekeepers for their dedicated contribution.
The ongoing political transitions in the Sudan and South Sudan represented
pivotal developments over the past few months, which inspired hope in positive
change and comprehensive peace. The Governments of both the Sudan and South
Sudan have been actively engaging with each other through reciprocal visits by their
leaders and mutual support for their respective peace processes. We believe that it is
important for the Sudan and South Sudan, and for the Security Council, to capitalize
on those positive developments so that the pursuit of just and sustainable peace in
both countries extends to the Abyei Area.
We encourage both Governments to foster rapprochement and mutual trust,
with a view to reaching a lasting settlement of the status of the Abyei Area. We also
urge them to revitalize their cooperation, including with the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, so as to resolve outstanding issues, as outlined in the
cooperation agreement between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of South
Sudan of 2012.
Tunisia notes the overall progress in the implementation of the UNISFA
mandate in Abyei and along the border, as outlined in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/308). We commend in particular the continuous engagement of the
mission with the officials in Khartoum and Juba, as well as at the Abyei local level.
However, despite the encouraging political trends, challenges remain in view
of the, sadly, avoidable intercommunal violence, the threat of armed groups and the
widespread weapons within the Abyei Area.
We are concerned about the escalation of attacks across intercommunal lines,
the latest of which was on Mabok village in southern Abyei on 13 April. We express
our support for UNISFA’s efforts in pushing local peace processes forward to resolve
seasonal migration issues and promote intercommunal reconciliation. We also praise
UNISFA’s efforts to empower women’s participation in local peace committees in
order to enhance the prospects for lasting peace.
The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has forced a
priority shift for many affected countries across the globe. We reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire and call on parties to exercise self-restraint
within the Abyei Area, so that the Sudan and South Sudan can focus on carrying out
their challenging State-building tasks.
On the way forward for the United Nations presence in Abyei, we would like
to endorse the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his report on the
extension of UNISFA’s mandate and its support for the JBVMM for a further period
of six months, which remain vital for the stabilization of the Abyei Area and along
the border.
20/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

We are of the view that UNISFA’s mandate needs to be calibrated and
contextualized so as to align with the priority shifts of and the pace maintained
by the parties in order to bolster peace, security and development endeavours and
effectively counter the COVID-19 pandemic.
We stand ready to engage constructively in the upcoming negotiations on
further modalities for such extension.

20-0632321/29

S/2020/351

Annex XV
Statement by Mr. David Clay, Political Coordinator of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and both of our briefers this morning.
I would like to start by expressing the United Kingdom’s support for the
peoples and the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan in their efforts to
respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
As the Council discussed on Friday in relation to the Sudan, the damaging
impacts of the pandemic will only add to the already significant humanitarian and
socioeconomic challenges faced by both countries. We welcome the quick responses
of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to COVID-19 and their efforts
to mitigate its effects. So far the United Kingdom has contributed approximately
$6 million to the United Nations COVID-19 preparedness and response efforts in the
Sudan and more than $4 million to the efforts in South Sudan.
We know that the COVID-19 pandemic is also taking a toll on peacekeeping
missions and on the brave personnel serving in them around the world. In this regard,
we once again commend the Ethiopian Government for its continued contributions
to the Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). COVID-19 underlines the
importance of ensuring swift provision of medical evacuation for United Nations
personnel and the maintenance of supply chains. That is particularly the case for
UNISFA, given its remoteness.
We recognize that the COVID-19 response will dominate the agendas of
the Governments in Khartoum and Juba for some time, as is the case for countries
around the world. But we continue to urge both Governments not to lose sight of
their respective peace processes or of the importance of finding a final settlement
on the status of Abyei.
We welcome the progress made in South Sudan on the implementation of
the Agreement of 20 June 2011, with the formation of the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity, and in the Sudan as the civilian Government continues
to implement the Constitutional Declaration.
In Abyei, we welcome the efforts made by UNISFA on a range of activities,
including engagement with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, the
implementation of the quick-impact projects, mediation of local community
dialogues, raising awareness of gender issues and the removal of explosive hazards.
But despite those efforts, we remain very concerned by the fragile security
situation in Abyei. Of particular concern is the increase in intercommunal violence
and attacks on mission personnel. The recent episodes of heightened tensions,
increased criminality and the presence of armed elements in UNISFA’s areas of
responsibility have left civilians displaced and highlighted the continued absence of
law and order in Abyei. All this underlines the need for progress to be made towards
a final settlement. It is a matter of deep regret that this has been lacking so far.
Turning to the mission itself, the United Kingdom supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for a further six
months. The mission continues to have a vital role not only in ensuring stability but
also in facilitating work towards a settlement of the situation in Abyei. The Council
has long highlighted the need to boost the civilian and police components of the
mission in order to contribute to that effort. We welcome the update from UnderSecretary-General Lacroix on the deployment of police to UNISFA, and, like other
22/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Council members, we hope to see further progress soon. We are disappointed by the
delay in issuing visas for police and urge the Government of the Sudan to expedite
this process.
In the meantime, the Council should ensure that UNISFA remains adequately
resourced to deliver on its mandated activities. We look forward to working with
members of the Council to ensure that the mission continues to be able to maintain the
stability of Abyei and to assist in the achievement of a final settlement on its status.
Finally, regarding the two areas, we welcome the commitment of the
Government of the Sudan and of a number of armed movements to engage in peace
talks aimed at achieving a comprehensive peace across the Sudan. Here we continue
to urge all sides to engage constructively, immediately and without preconditions in
these negotiations so as to deliver a peaceful and swift solution to the conflict areas,
including the two areas. Meanwhile, we also continue to urge all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and allow humanitarian actors to deliver aid to those
most in need, without hindrance.

20-0632323/29

S/2020/351

Annex XVI
Statement by Ms. Cherith Norman-Chalet, Acting Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations
I thank Under-Secretary Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for
their briefings and for their joint visit to Abyei in February.
We commend the activities of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) during this difficult period of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, including its vital support for local peace and protection committees, as
noted in the Secretary-General’s report of 16 April (S/2020/308).
The United States recognizes Ethiopia’s leadership and welcomes the
Ambassador today in support for UNISFA, as well as some positive steps that the
Sudan and South Sudan have undertaken to address insecurity in Abyei, such as joint
security monitoring. We welcome the Ambassador to the Sudan here today as well.
However, despite those steps, the United States is concerned about the recent
violence in Abyei, as was outlined. In January, attacks in the area of Kolom led to the
killing of more than 30 civilians. In mid-April, there was an armed attack on Mabok
village. This violence, the brunt of which has been borne by women and children,
is unacceptable.
Perhaps most troubling, though, is that it demonstrates the lack of political
progress made by the Sudan and South Sudan in resolving outstanding border issues.
The people of Abyei and those along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan
deserve better. This violence should serve as a call to action for the Sudan and South
Sudan. Their leaders should capitalize on the improving relationship and agree on
the implementation of arrangements for security and the administration of Abyei.
The Council has repeatedly mandated a reconfiguration of UNISFA to address
current security dynamics. Today we call on the parties to remove the obstacles
preventing UNISFA from realizing its mandate.
Moving forward, the United States encourages senior United Nations officials
to redouble their efforts with the parties and with the African Union to allow
UNISFA’s mandate to be fully implemented. Furthermore, we urge them to push
for progress in establishing joint security and administrative arrangements. The
participation of women is absolutely critical in these discussions.
The United States remains committed to peace and security in Abyei and
across the region, especially in these challenging times.

24/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex XVII
Statement by Mr. Dang Dinh Quy, Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam to the United Nations
At the outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their insightful briefings. Viet Nam
would like to commend and express our support for the work of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the Special Envoy. I also welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and of Ethiopia in
our meeting today.
Viet Nam is closely following the situation in the Sudan and South Sudan and
strongly welcomes the recent progress made in the political and security spheres of
both countries as well as in the relations between them. We believe these achievements
can create important momentum for both sides to actively engage in addressing the
Abyei issue. We are pleased to see that, according to the most recent report on the
topic (S/2020/308), Abyei has become more stable and secure. However, the security
situation in Abyei remains fragile due to increasing intercommunal violence, crime
and the presence of armed elements. We are also concerned about the threat of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Abyei, as the Sudan, South Sudan and many
countries in the region have reported confirmed cases. I would like to emphasize the
following five points.
First, we underline the importance of a timely and appropriate resolution of
the issue of Abyei, which we believe is of vital importance to the peace, security
and stability of the Sudan, South Sudan and the region. In this regard, we call on
the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve the issue at any early date through peaceful
means, in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the agreement between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement on temporary arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011. At the same time, the Security Council should continue
to take into full account the views of the two sides on this issue.
Viet Nam warmly welcomes the efforts of UNISFA aimed at promoting
cooperation and dialogue between the Sudan and South Sudan. We acknowledge
UNISFA’s robust support for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism and note that progress has been made on the benchmarks of resolution
2497 (2019). We are also aware of the challenges posed by COVID-19 to this process
and encourage UNISFA to continue to support both countries in conducting dialogue
via remote means.
Secondly, while the final solution to Abyei is still pending, it is important
to ensure security and sustainable livelihoods for the people in the Area, given the
increasing impact of climate change and the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
presence of UNISFA has been essential to maintaining stability in Abyei. Viet Nam
calls on the Governments of both the Sudan and South Sudan to continue to support
UNISFA in carrying out its mandate, as well as to support the appointment of a
civilian deputy head of mission and the establishment of the Abyei police service,
as recommended by the Secretary-General. Cooperation between both Governments
and UNISFA in combating COVID-19 should also be strengthened.
Thirdly, we highlight the role of the regional and subregional organizations,
namely, the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), in supporting the resolution of the Abyei issue. We also commend the role of
neighbouring countries, especially Ethiopia, for their vital contributions to UNISFA.
Further cooperation between the United Nations and regional actors will provide
synergy to help the Sudan and South Sudan resolve their outstanding issues.
20-0632325/29

S/2020/351

Fourthly, with regard to the mandate of the mission, Viet Nam supports its
extension, as recommended by the Secretary-General in his report. We look forward
to working with Council members on the renewal of the UNISFA mandate in the
coming weeks. We believe it is important also to take into consideration the views
of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, the AU, IGAD and troopcontributing countries in this matter.
Fifthly, we would also like to commend the strong role of women in UNISFA,
which we see as a strong example of female participation in United Nations
peacekeeping. The current female-to-male ratio in UNISFA is 10.9 per cent, much
higher than the average representation across all missions. This is a solid foundation
for UNISFA to further strengthen its activities in promoting gender equality as well
as the empowerment of women on the ground, which is already very commendable.

26/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Annex XVIII
Statement by Mr. Omer Mohamed Ahmed Siddig, Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations
Let me begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. Taking note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/308) on the progress in implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), I would like to emphasize the
following points.
We commend UNISFA’s leadership and personnel for their efforts aimed at
preserving peace and stability in Abyei. I take this opportunity to once again assure
the Security Council of my Government’s support for the mission so that it may
carry out its mandate and functions in an effective and efficient manner.
The Sudan reaffirms its commitment to all agreements signed with the
Republic of South Sudan and their terms of reference, foremost of which is the
agreement between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement on temporary arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area, which was signed on 20 June 2011, and the cooperation agreement
between the Sudan and South Sudan of 27 September 2012. It is to be noted that
the 20 June 2011 agreement remains the principal basis for negotiations on the final
status of Abyei.
Following a meeting last January between the President of South Sudan and the
Deputy Chairman of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan, the two countries agreed to
establish a joint mechanism to protect civilians in Abyei. A couple of weeks later, the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism, which comprises high-level representatives
from the two countries, met in Juba and was briefed by the Force Commander of
UNISFA. The Joint Mechanism agreed on a set of arrangements designed to avoid
any relapse or escalation between the communities. The Mechanism also agreed to
refer the following issues to the leadership of the two countries: the increase in the
number of joint police forces, the appointment of a civilian deputy head of mission,
and the use and operation of the Athony airstrip. The Joint Mechanism was supposed
to have held a follow-up meeting in Khartoum on 13 April 2020, but it was postponed
owing to the outbreak of coronavirus disease.
In conclusion, the new political order in the Sudan offers a major positive
paradigm shift in the relations between our country and the brotherly South Sudan.
Building on that paradigm shift and on the constructive outcome of the meeting of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, these two neighbouring countries will
be able to prevent escalations of tensions or violence, resolve any communal clashes
and achieve a lasting and amicable solution to the final status issue of Abyei in
accordance with the agreed terms.

20-0632327/29

S/2020/351

Annex XIX
Statement by Mr. Taye Atskeselassie Amde, Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the Dominican
Republic’s successful presidency of the Security Council despite the difficulties
caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
for their comprehensive briefings. We also welcome the presence of our brother the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
Following the adoption of resolution 2497 (2019), my Government continued
to meet its commitments with regard to the deployment and mandate delivery of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). The new political
dynamics in the Sudan and South Sudan have created an encouraging atmosphere
for all of us. Ethiopia greatly appreciates the two Governments for their continued
support to UNISFA’s leadership and peacekeeping force.
The mission faced serious difficulties over the past year, especially after the
two unfortunate helicopter accidents in 2019 and the subsequent suspension of those
operations by the United Nations Secretariat, which has significantly constrained
the mission’s air operation capability. As we all understand, UNISFA is one of
the most remote peacekeeping missions, but it continues to rely solely on civilian
helicopters. I want, therefore, to draw the attention of the Council to the fact that
our contingents are often exposed and overstretched in their efforts to cover the vast
territory, including in the context of the work of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism.
Reviewing the conception of operations in the dry season and increasing foot
and mobile patrols alone cannot prevent threats or secure every inch of the Area.
Furthermore, we are extremely concerned that armed groups and individuals remain
present in the weapons-free zone. The security situation continues to suffer from
the failure to stop murders, livestock rustling and intercommunal clashes. The lack
of respect and serious observance of the weapon-free-zone provision is becoming
dangerous, especially in the volatile migration season.
We are encouraged by the political will and support of the leadership of the
two countries. The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, the joint military observer
teams and the joint community peace committee are also showing progress in their
respective tasks. However, more needs to be done to ensure the success of UNISFA
and its continued ability to fulfil its heavy responsibility. In that regard, more
concrete actions by the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as by
the United Nations and the African Union, are needed to expedite a resolution of
Abyei’s final status.
To put things into perspective, UNISFA was facing security challenges one
month after the adoption of the current mandate, with troops subjected to active
fire, including by well-armed groups. The challenge was further aggravated by
more volatility in the Abyei box, and, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/308), incidents on 19 and 22 January regrettably claimed 36 lives. Following
the Kolom incident, my Government encouraged UNISFA to rigorously conduct
wider discussions and engage with the Dinka and Misseriya communities with the
objective of curbing the escalation of violence.
Late this month, UNISFA forces were engaged in ambushes and armed assault
incidents in Nainai and Alal, where two assailants lost their lives. The troops abided
by the rules of engagement and acted in self-defence. Again, on 24 April, three armed
28/29

20-06323

S/2020/351

Misseriya men riding a tricycle opened fire at the UNISFA team operation base in
Alal. In response to those seemingly connected incidents, UNISFA has intensified
ground patrols, including search and recovery operations in the Kolom and Youra
bridge areas. It is extremely worrisome that the mission has so far recovered 27 assault
rifles, 48 magazines, 1,220 rounds of ammunition and seven war-like equipment
kits, in addition to similarly worrisome quantities since 28 November 2019.
UNISFA troops remain on high alert in anticipation of additional attacks. The
mandated protection of the Abyei Area from aggressive armed attacks and different
forms of crime is becoming a daunting task that requires an organized response by
the mission, the host countries and the United Nations.
Ethiopia recognizes the importance of strict compliance with international
humanitarian law by all parties. We uphold the role of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in tracking grave violations against women and children in the context
of UNISFA’s mandate and pledge our full support. In the same vein, the authorities,
including the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, must intensify their outreach to the
communities in Abyei and assist UNISFA in ensuring that the Abyei box remains a
weapons-free zone as required by the Security Council.
In view of the above, I wish to highlight the following four critical measures
that are instrumental to the delivery of the mission’s mandate.
First, UNISFA-facilitated meetings between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
leaders in Diffra should be complemented by maintaining momentum on the
discussions in order to reach an agreement on the final status of Abyei and to resolve
the stalled southward movement of herders. That will help in easing the current high
level of tension.
Secondly, the troop cuts in favour of the planned deployment of three formed
police units (FPUs) is impacting UNISFA’s capabilities. Its forces are overstretched,
especially in the light of the increase in crime. In that regard, we wish to emphasize
the need to suspend the withdrawal of the additional 295 troops scheduled for 15 May
until restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic are lifted and the planned
FPU replacements are on the ground to assume the security responsibilities. We
expect that UNISFA will be adequately resourced, including funds for preventive
and preparedness measures in relation to COVID-19 and the desperately needed
funds for quick-impact projects. In that connection, alleviating the situation of
arrears remains not only a matter of principle but also a moral obligation.
Thirdly, we trust that all the relevant authorities will be continuously consulted
regarding the decision of the Council on the appointment of a civilian deputy head
of mission and the operationalization of the Anthony airstrip, the latter being very
important to improving UNISFA’s medical evacuation capability, particularly in this
difficult time of global pandemic.
Fourthly, it is important that the tragic events in the Kolom area and several
other criminal cases be jointly investigated with a view to bringing the perpetrators
to justice. That will not only help with remedial actions, but it will also contribute to
trust- and confidence-building measures between the two communities and ensure
long-term interdependence and fraternity.
Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating the firm commitment of the
Government of Ethiopia to ensuring that UNISFA succeeds in delivering on its
mandate. In that regard, we will further strengthen our close coordination with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as with the United Nations.

20-0632329/29
