United Nations

S/PV.6396

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6396th meeting
Wednesday, 13 October 2010, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Habib
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Progress of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (S/2010/386)
Report of the Secretary-General on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-57830 (E)

*1057830*

S/PV.6396

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Progress report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2010/386)
Report of the Secretary-General on women’s
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Finland,
Ireland, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal,
South Africa and Thailand, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Peter Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Germany.

Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2010/386, which contains the
progress report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
and document S/2010/466, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on women’s participation in
peacebuilding.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. Before I invite him
to take the floor, I would like to inform the Council
that we will hold informal consultations after the
statement by the Secretary-General, and that thereafter
we will resume this meeting. I now invite the
Secretary-General to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: One of the most
difficult and important tasks facing the United Nations
is to ensure that nations emerging from devastating
conflicts are not allowed to slide back into violence.
Building peace may sound straightforward, but we
know from painful experience that it is not. Success
requires patience, long-term commitment and the
involvement of a wide range of actors working
together. We face real difficulties every day as our field
missions, funds, programmes and agencies, each in
their own way, work to provide the kind of help that
nations need to rebuild after war. We feel keenly and
constantly the need to do better.

table.

It was in that spirit that my report last year on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) set out an agenda for action to help the
United Nations deliver more rapid and effective
support to national peacebuilding efforts and to ensure
that the impacts of those activities would endure.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His

We are making progress in Burundi, Haiti, Nepal,
Sierra Leone and elsewhere. Let us remember that for
people who have suffered through conflict, progress
cannot come fast enough. The ultimate test is how well

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Wittig to take a seat at the Council

2

10-57830

S/PV.6396

we deliver on the ground and how well we give people
signs of hope, beyond mere words and promises.

peacebuilding financing more flexible and tolerant of
risk. I urge Member States to support these as well.

One year since I issued that report, I am pleased
to report that we have made real gains in carrying
forward the specific recommendations I put forward
aimed at better organizing our peacebuilding efforts.
But we still have further to go. I see four areas that
require our particular attention.

Thirdly, we need more effective partnerships.
Greater cooperation and joint approaches within the
United Nations are important, but they are not enough.
We must build deeper strategic partnerships. With that
in mind, we have begun strengthening cooperation and
developing closer institutional links with the World
Bank.

First, we need to get the right people in the right
place at the right time. We now deploy special
representatives and other United Nations leaders more
rapidly to crisis situations. All senior staff now have
managerial compacts to define their goals and priorities
and to improve their accountability.
The demands on leaders in crisis situations are
growing. They are now expected to implement broader
Security Council mandates, provide a strategic vision,
ensure proper coordination and undertake joint
planning. We need to give them the properly trained
and equipped support teams that will enable them to
perform the full range of their responsibilities right
from the very beginning.
Such demands underpin the review of
international civilian capacities that is currently under
way. The review is anchored in the need to ensure that
international assistance in the aftermath of conflict is
driven by national needs and priorities, that we make
better use of the capacities of women and the global
South, and that our responses become faster and more
flexible. I look forward to the recommendations of the
Senior Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, led by Jean-Marie Guéhenno, early
next year. Meanwhile, I encourage all Member States
to be engaged in and contribute to the outcome of the
review.
Secondly, we need predictable financing.
Whatever type of United Nations presence there is, we
and our national partners need sufficient and timely
funding, especially in the middle of a crisis response.
In fragile transition situations, the Peacebuilding Fund
can quickly finance early action, which can in turn
prompt other sources to provide longer-term funding.
The Fund has streamlined its procedures, enabling it to
respond more swiftly to urgent needs. I encourage
Member States to contribute to its replenishment.
But the Fund is only one among many. Many
other efforts are under way, aimed at making all

10-57830

Partnerships work best when roles are clear.
Greater clarity and deeper capacities are being
established in core areas such as mine action,
mediation and electoral assistance, but we still need to
review the institutional arrangement in areas such as
security sector reform and the rule of law. To this end, I
am encouraging a frank examination of the
comparative advantages of various United Nations
actors and other partners, based on available capacities
and presence. This will be an important priority in the
coming months, and I rely on the support of the
Council.
One of the most important partnerships is the one
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. A closer collaboration can help the
Council to support peacebuilding more effectively
from the very start, including by enabling
peacekeeping operations to have an impact as early
peacebuilders and by ensuring that integrated
peacebuilding offices institutionalize these early
achievements.
With respect to the recent review of our
peacebuilding architecture, I look forward to the
outcome of discussions by the Council and the General
Assembly.
Fourthly, we need to put women at the heart of
peacebuilding. That is where women should be, not
only because of their peacebuilding needs, but above
all because of their capacities. Yet we have not truly
achieved this, nor have we fully implemented
resolution 1325 (2000). While their voices are critical
for ensuring that the foundations of peace are just and
equitable, women are still not systematically included
at all stages of the peace process.
My new report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466) provides a comprehensive
strategy to address these challenges. It identifies the
hurdles women confront in seven key areas: mediation,

3

S/PV.6396

post-conflict planning, financing, civilian capacity,
post-conflict governance, the rule of law and economic
recovery. It makes specific commitments for each,
thereby providing a framework for the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
But that did not happen without dedicated
funding for women’s needs. Conflicts leave States
severely weakened and social structures decimated. In
such situations, women are vital to ensuring that the
basic survival needs of families and communities are
met. I have therefore stipulated that all peacebuilding
funds managed by the United Nations will henceforth
allocate 15 per cent of their funds to projects that
address women’s specific needs, advance gender
equality or empower women. Advancing the cause of
women and peace and security enhances the legitimacy
of peace processes and governance structures. It must
be an integral part of our peacebuilding efforts, not an
afterthought.
The work of rebuilding societies broken by
conflict requires long-term commitment, a truly
integrated approach and significant amounts of human,
financial and institutional resources. There is no set
sequence of peacemaking, followed by peacekeeping,
followed by peacebuilding, but rather a need for us to
be flexible and bring our tools into play at the
appropriate moments.
It is essential for us to develop the peacebuilding
architecture and promote greater coherence within the
United Nations system. Meeting these challenges will
bring us closer to our overarching goal of building
sustainable peace. I will continue to rely on the
Council’s support and cooperation in that endeavour.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
As announced earlier, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations. The 6396th
meeting will resume shortly.
The meeting was suspended at 10.30 a.m. and
resumed at 11.15 a.m.
The President: At this meeting the Council will
hear a briefing by His Excellency Mr. Peter Wittig. I
now give the floor to Mr. Wittig.
Mr. Wittig: Last year the Security Council
recognized that the Secretary-General’s 2009 report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict

4

(S/2009/304) was an important contribution to a more
effective and coherent international response to postconflict peacebuilding. The Council also saw the
continued
engagement
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) as the Secretary-General embarked
on the implementation of his ambitious agenda for
action. While a number of recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in last year’s report addressed
internal United Nations system mechanisms, there has
been a general sense that the PBC is the most suitable
platform to generate support for Member States for a
shared and coherent United Nations peacebuilding
agenda. The PBC therefore has regularly engaged with
and been able to contribute ideas and perspectives to
the two reports of the Secretary-General before the
Council today: S/2010/386, a progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
and S/2010/466, on women’s participation in
peacebuilding.
Last week the Organizational Committee of the
PBC convened a meeting to consider those two reports.
We had received a comprehensive briefing by Assistant
Secretary-General Judy Cheng-Hopkins. The meeting
was also briefed by Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Chair of the
Secretary-General’s Senior Advisory Group for the
Review of International Civilian Capacities, another
important process emerging from the 2009 report on
peacebuilding.
Allow me to share with the Council today a few
points that have emerged from the PBC discussions last
week. First, on the matter of capacity development, we
stressed the importance of strengthening national
ownership and national capacities, in order to lay solid
foundations for sustainable peacebuilding. We
emphasized the linkage between national ownership
and national capacity development as an overarching
principle for an effective peacebuilding strategy.
Secondly, with regard to roles and responsibilities, we
noted the progress made in clarifying roles and
responsibilities in the areas of mine action and
meditation. We also underlined the need to make more
considerable progress in bringing clarity to the roles
played by different actors in the United Nations
system, in such key areas as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform and rule of law. We shall anticipate the outcome
of the ongoing reviews of roles and responsibilities in
these areas. As we all know, a more coherent and
effective peacebuilding response will benefit from

10-57830

S/PV.6396

clarity and consequently from establishing solid
accountability frameworks for actions in these priority
peacebuilding areas.
Thirdly, where the relationship between the
United Nations and the World Bank is concerned, the
PBC devoted a significant portion of its activities in
2010 to exploring means to strengthen the partnership
with the World Bank. We therefore welcome the
ongoing initiatives to strengthen the relationship with
between the United Nations and the World Bank at the
headquarters level and underline the need for more
concrete progress in the field. There are encouraging
signs of more dynamic country-specific linkages, such
as in the case of the Central African Republic.
Fourthly, on financing, we cannot overemphasize
the need for coordinated and more predictable financial
support for peacebuilding initiatives. We therefore
reaffirm the need for flexible financing for
peacebuilding instruments. We noted in this regard the
progress made in the process for Peacebuilding Fund
projects approval through the Immediate Response
Facility and an increased envelope from this facility for
up to $10 million.
The PBC has contributed to the report on
women’s participation in peacebuilding during the
drafting phase. We noted the action plan, which aimed
at a more gender-responsive peacebuilding agenda. As
members are aware, the PBC mandate recognizes the
role that women play in peacebuilding, both as victims
of conflict and as critical agents for positive change
and for rebuilding societies emerging from conflict.
The PBC will continue to work with all relevant actors
in the countries on its agenda, to ensure that its advice
is gender-responsive and that women’s role and
participation in peacebuilding are appropriately
reflected. We also look forward to engaging with the
newly established UN Women, and we take this
opportunity to congratulate Mrs. Michelle Bachelet on
her assumption of the leadership of that new agency.
In conclusion, I wish to note that the progress in
developing the Secretary-General’s reports related to
peacebuilding has helped to highlight a number of
opportunities and challenges facing the continuing
evolution of the United Nations peacebuilding agenda.
By generating the need for the actors to engage in and
contribute to the recommendations, we are gradually
placing emphasis on the need for better integration of
efforts. The PBC is committed to continue to champion

10-57830

the cause for a more responsive, coherent and
integrated United Nations peacebuilding agenda. A
closer synergy between the Security Council and the
Commission will certainly be a crucial step on the path
towards that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Wittig for his
briefing.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): We are very
grateful for this opportunity to discuss the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and on women’s
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466). I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission for their briefings today.
Over two and a half years have passed since the
first
peacebuilding
report
(S/2009/304)
was
commissioned. That report was commissioned as a
result of concerns about the support provided by the
international community — including, in particular, the
United Nations — to countries emerging from conflict.
Many of the issues that it identified were not new, but
the process gave fresh impetus to the effort to resolve
the familiar problems of fragmentation, weak
leadership, lack of strategy and sluggish deployment of
civilian experts and finance. The same is true for the
women and peacebuilding report. Many of the issues in
this good report are also not new. The problem has
been one of delivery, not ignorance of the issues.
We have made progress over the past two years,
but not enough. What we now need over the next two
years is a shift from reflection and debate in New York
to roll-out and implementation on the ground. And to
do that, we propose a five-point course of action.
First, we need to wrap up outstanding
programmes of reform. These include finalizing the
civilian capacity review, clarifying roles and
responsibilities, and putting in place new and creative
ways to enhance the relationship between the United
Nations and the World Bank.
Secondly, we should learn lessons about what
works from those reforms that have already been
completed, notably on leadership, integrated planning
and finance. We must ensure that those lessons are
systematically
fed
into
the
planning
and
implementation of other missions. Here, I would like to
highlight the example of Sierra Leone, where good

5

S/PV.6396

leadership and integration of effort have led to a real
step-change in United Nations support to the country.
Thirdly, we need to focus on issues where there
are persistent bottlenecks to sustainable peacebuilding.
The United Nations system, working closely and more
effectively with other international partners, should get
better at helping a country unblock those bottlenecks.
We have seen time and again that a lack of progress in
a number of key areas — including, in particular,
security sector reform and strengthening the rule of
law, restoring other core government functions and
revitalizing the economy — can hold back progress
and risk a return to conflict.
Fourthly, we need to see real progress on the
ground in priority countries. For example, in Liberia
we want to see the transition of the United Nations
presence shortly after the elections. We see the
Peacebuilding Commission, following its very helpful
recent review, as having a critical role in preparing for
this by helping to extend and boost police capacity so
that the United Nations can hand over responsibility
for safety and security to the national authorities.
Another example is the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. This Council sent a strong signal earlier
this year in turning the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo into
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The focus
should increasingly be on stabilization, with
peacebuilding going hand in hand with robust
peacekeeping. We cannot successfully address the root
causes of the violence and insecurity that prevail in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without reforming
the police and the army and without real improvements
in the capability of the country’s justice sector.
Fifthly and finally, post-conflict peacebuilding
cannot be truly successful without ensuring that
women are an equal part of the process. They need to
be routinely involved in conflict resolution, postconflict peacebuilding and governance in order to
achieve sustainable peace. In this, the tenth anniversary
year of resolution 1325 (2000), we welcome the
Secretary-General’s report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding as an important step in that direction.
The challenges to effective women’s participation in
peacebuilding are significant, but this is all the more
reasons for unity of effort. The Secretary-General’s
report sets out a clear direction for the United Nations

6

system, the international community and conflictaffected States to deliver a practical difference to
women’s involvement on the ground. We consider that
the newly established United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women will have an
important role in driving this forward.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): My delegation is
grateful to Uganda for having organized this debate, as
it gives us an opportunity to continue our discussions
on the two latest reports on peacebuilding. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for having presented
them today. Austria warmly welcomes both reports and
looks forward to the United Nations system’s
continued coherent engagement in implementing the
agenda for action, as well as the new action plan laid
out in the report on the role of women in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).
I should also like to welcome the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador Wittig,
and to thank him for his presentation today and his
leadership of the Commission.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
later in this meeting.
The Secretary-General’s follow-up report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) rightly points out that, despite important
progress made by the United Nations and its partners in
the area of peacebuilding, the main challenges remain.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to enhance
effective leadership, both at Headquarters and in the
field, as well as those aimed at improved planning and
strategy development. Enhanced coordination, from
our point of view, must also take place outside of the
United Nations system in order to avoid duplication
and to ensure the efficiency of peacebuilding efforts.
We appreciate efforts to intensify cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, such as
the European Union and the African Union, as well as
with the international financial institutions. It is
essential to make maximum use of partners with a
comparative advantage on the ground.
My country has repeatedly stressed the
importance of national ownership of peacebuilding
processes. In order to promote national leadership and
ensure the sustainability of progress, all peacebuilding
efforts need to draw upon existing national capacities

10-57830

S/PV.6396

to the greatest extent possible. We therefore welcome
efforts to assess existing capacities as a basis for the
deployment of international civilian expertise. The
ongoing review of civilian capacity will contribute to
ensuring that civilian expertise in peacebuilding is
deployed in an efficient and timely manner, and that
specialized skills to address women’s need are
included.
Decisive action aimed at establishing durable
peace and long-term sustainable development must be
undertaken from the earliest stage onwards and go
hand in hand with the possible deployment of
integrated peacekeeping missions. This is a point that
the Council has repeatedly discussed over the past
months and years.
Restoring the rule of law, ensuring respect for
human rights, and providing for the effective
disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of
former combatants, security sector reform and the
return and reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons must be key priorities in the
immediate aftermath of a conflict. They must be
complemented by the reform and re-establishment of
effective and independent justice institutions and
reconciliation mechanisms.
A coordinated and coherent approach is needed in
order to ensure women’s full participation in all
peacebuilding efforts. The relative absence of women
from peace negotiations and post-conflict planning
processes has recently been demonstrated by concrete
figures in a study by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women. Women rarely assume core
Government functions; they are not able to ensure that
their issues are addressed in peace accords and peace
processes; and they are not in a position to ensure the
prioritization of their needs in planning processes or
adequate financial allocations to address them. This
problem needs to be addressed by the Council and the
United Nations system in a more consistent manner.
Austria therefore fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s
action
plan
for
gender-responsive
peacebuilding with its seven commitments, and calls
upon the Secretariat and other relevant bodies and
agencies to translate these commitments into concrete
programmes, ensuring that the peacebuilding priorities
identified by the Secretary-General in his 2009 report
(S/2009/304) are met in a gender-responsive way to
ensure the full participation of women.

10-57830

Austria highly welcomes the crucial role of the
PBC in addressing a country’s post-conflict needs and
in promoting and ensuring women’s participation in all
peacebuilding efforts as outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General.
We would like to underline the need for the
Council to involve the PBC and make use of its advice
from the very outset. This is clearly an area where
improvement — if I may say so — is possible. I would
add that this also applies to the relationship between
the Council and the country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We have also looked at
possibilities for intensifying this cooperation, and I
think the informal working group on working methods
has made a number of very important suggestions in
this field as well.
By promoting a coherent and integrated approach
that highlights the principles of national ownership and
regional cooperation, the PBC provides valuable
support for long-term democratic consolidation and
sustained economic development. The fact that Liberia
has recently been added to the agenda of the PBC
proves that the PBC’s engagement continues to be
perceived as providing substantial advantages and
benefits to post-conflict countries.
We welcome the report of the three co-facilitators
on the review of the Commission (S/2010/393, annex),
its thorough analysis of strengths and weaknesses and
the broad range of recommendations made therein, and
it will be good to hear all three facilitators today in the
framework of our debate.
Austria looks forward to the Council’s and the
General Assembly’s consideration of the report and to
the adoption of a resolution in due course in order for
the Secretary-General and all other relevant actors to
set the implementation of the recommendations in
motion.
Furthermore, we are looking forward to regular
updates by the Secretary-General on efforts to ensure
women’s full participation in peacebuilding. The
indicators to measure progress in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) constitute a useful tool to
track progress in this regard.
Finally, Sir, I would like to thank you and your
delegation for preparing the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted today.

7

S/PV.6396

Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador Wittig for
their leadership, as well as the Chairs of the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
country-specific
configurations for all they do to advance the
Commission’s work both in the field and in New York.
The United States continues to strongly support the
Peacebuilding Commission’s work, since promoting
sustainable peace lies at the heart of the United Nations
mission.
Today let me underscore four key points. First,
former Secretary-General Annan used to speak of the
“missing middle” between peacekeeping and
sustainable
development.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) was created five years ago as an
important first step towards filling that gap. Supporting
sustainable peace requires linking many actors
together. Progress has sometimes been slower than we
would have hoped, but the Commission today is
delivering on the commitment it has made to the
countries on its agenda. Indeed, the addition of Liberia
to the PBC’s agenda demonstrates growing faith in this
important new institution. And the United States
decision to take on a leading role in the PBC’s recent
mission to Liberia is a signal of our commitment to
Liberia’s recovery, as well as to the PBC’s ongoing
development.
Much of the PBC’s success will be judged by its
work in country-specific situations. And we are
therefore pleased that more countries are choosing to
become part of its agenda. This is a testament to its
potential for generating greater coherence among
donors and spurring frank dialogue on the underlying
causes of instability that so often mean tragic relapses
into conflict.
The Peacebuilding Commission is gaining
strength as an institution. It continues to play an
important role by bringing additional attention and
resources to countries emerging from conflict and
proposing strategies to build sustainable peace in the
wake of bitter conflict. But to truly serve as the leading
actor on peacebuilding, the Commission must do more
to link ambitions in New York with programmes in the
field. It must also coordinate better with international
institutions running programmes and assessing needs in
post-conflict countries.
The PBC should also encourage a range of actors
including United Nations funds and programmes,

8

traditional and non-traditional donors, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the peacebuilding community
of civil society, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and academia to support coherence in the field
through more inclusive dialogue, greater innovation,
stronger best practices and better coordination,
resource delivery and capacity-building.
Secondly, the success of United Nations efforts is
highly dependent on the experience and capabilities of
its field personnel. Sometimes the sacrifice of a
battalion of soldiers can be wasted, if it is not
accompanied and succeeded by the timely advice and
engagement of seasoned civilian peacebuilding experts.
But often these key civilian personnel are hard to find,
or take too long to recruit and deploy. We therefore
appreciate the Secretary-General’s decision to launch a
high-level
review
of
international
civilian
peacebuilding capacities and look forward to its results
early in 2011.
Thirdly, if United Nations efforts to build peace
are to be truly sustainable, they must incorporate
women throughout the process. Where women’s roles
are ignored, peacebuilding is more likely to fail.
Gender is not just a box to be checked. It is a key
ingredient in the planning phase, throughout
implementation and in the evaluation of plans.
The seven-part action plan laid out by the
Secretary-General pushes this process forward and
commits to the more systematic and substantive
engagement of women in peacemaking and planning
processes in the wake of armed conflict. We endorse
that commitment strongly, and we recognize the need
for adequate funding to support women’s roles in
peacebuilding. But we must also remember that an
action plan means little, unless and until it is
implemented. The United Nations must therefore
commit itself to monitor, evaluate and adapt the
proposed action plan, lest we lose the very impact that
we seek.
Finally, each organ of the United Nations,
including every major fund and programme, should
embrace peacebuilding’s cross-cutting nature. Efforts
to build sustainable peace can start with the arrival of
United Nations peacekeepers, aid workers or
diplomats, and they can continue through the longerterm development efforts. But peacebuilding success
ultimately depends on leadership from the country
emerging from conflict itself. And the United Nations

10-57830

S/PV.6396

must make it a top priority to build the capacities of
local leaders and communities.
With the right mandate, leadership and resources,
the United Nations can and should play an
indispensable role in helping post-conflict societies
find their footing on the path to lasting peace and
prosperity. So we must work together to develop the
critical peacebuilding capacities needed to fulfil the
Council’s mandate to advance international peace and
security and to improve the prospects for lasting
progress in countries emerging from conflict and
chaos.
The United States is pleased as well to support
the draft presidential statement to be issued by the
Council today.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. France
endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the European Union.
I think that everyone around this table is in broad
agreement regarding the need to improve the
effectiveness of the means by which the international
community takes action to prevent a country recently
emerged from conflict from relapsing into a crisis. I
believe there is also consensus on the fact that this is a
long-term and difficult endeavour. It is difficult
because it requires that institutions with very different
practices and traditions, and that clearly cherish their
autonomy, work together. It is also difficult because we
must simultaneously conduct a set of very different
tasks — from the disarmament of armed groups to the
strengthening of State institutions — and because one
cannot employ a sequential approach. As we have
already heard in this Chamber, we have to
simultaneously conduct peacekeeping and lay the
groundwork for peacebuilding. Lastly, it is difficult
because we must better assess the risks associated with
new threats, such as drug and human trafficking,
organized crime and even corruption, which have great
potential to destabilize fragile countries.
In this respect, I believe that there is no more
telling example of what we are discussing here than the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
am not the first to cite this example. We know that we
cannot indefinitely remain in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, but that we can withdraw the United
Nations forces only if we leave behind State
institutions that are sufficiently sound to ensure the

10-57830

development and stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We will do so, of course, alongside the
Congolese authorities.
These reconstruction tasks are tremendous.
Moreover, we might well ask ourselves whether the
area is really in a post-conflict situation. It is therefore
essential that a responsible relationship be established
between the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the actors of the international
community as a whole.
The United Nations have drafted a state
reconstruction plan for Kivu — the stabilization and
reconstruction plan for areas emerging from armed
conflict — and we must ensure that all the international
institutions, in particular the European Union, which is
the leading donor to and backer of countries emerging
from crisis, work together towards the same goal.
There is a need for synergy. Given the gravity of the
crisis from which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has only recently emerged, it is the primary
challenge for our Organization.
We have examples of relative success. Sierra
Leone was raised as an example by my British
colleague, but we also have the positive experiences of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi. We must learn from these
experiences insofar as they guarantee a political
dialogue with the authorities of the host country and
close coordination in the reconstruction efforts led by
various United Nations agencies.
The withdrawal strategy for these offices should
be carefully prepared — because these situations are
looming already and will continue to be an issue — in
order to avoid opening new gaps or the re-emergence
of tensions due to a lack of resources or attention from
the international community. There is no one-size-fitsall solution. Each problem must be considered on a
case-by-case basis by the international community.
We are closely following the work of the Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, led by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno.
This matter was raised by Mr. Peter Wittig and the
Ambassador of Austria. We are awaiting bold
recommendations to better meet the real needs of postconflict countries and the competencies available at the
international level from other Member States and our
system as a whole.

9

S/PV.6396

To work towards peacebuilding as soon as an
armed conflict has ended is to pay due attention to the
contribution of women as a key aspect of
peacebuilding. How could we imagine setting aside
half of a society that is trying to rebuild itself? Leaving
women out would undoubtedly pave the way for future
disasters. That is why we believe that women must
have access to decision-making in the political,
economic, social and cultural arenas in a more
systematic manner and on an equal footing with men.
In this regard, we fully support the work of the
Secretary-General and we invite the United Nations
system — and above all UN Women and its Executive
Director, Ms. Bachelet — to implement it.
We have been discussing this matter for a long
time. It is a complex task, but we have unfortunate
examples in Timor-Leste and Haiti demonstrating that,
without integrating the peacebuilding stage into the
very design and implementation of peacekeeping
operations, we will fail. We must therefore continue to
improve the resources at our disposal. That is why, Sir,
I thank you once again for organizing this debate.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting to discuss the topic of
peacebuilding and the significance of female
participation in this process. We are confident that our
deliberations today will constructively contribute to
this important item on the Security Council’s agenda.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Kimoon and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Peter Wittig, for their
detailed briefings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that the process
of peacebuilding must be supported by a variety of
national and international actors at different levels,
including political, technical, operational, national and
regional. It is very important that, in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the roles and responsibilities of
different actors within the United Nations system be
clearly defined.
Peacebuilding, as a primarily national challenge
and responsibility, is largely shaped and sequenced by
national factors. In that respect, an early focus on
national capacity development is a central theme of the
United Nations system’s engagement in peacebuilding.
The development of national capacity and ownership
are among the key priorities in this process.

10

We are aware of the fact that peacebuilding
priorities may vary in response and can include
inclusive political processes, the provision of basic
services, restoring core Government functions, or
providing basic security or economic revitalization
measures. Those activities are aimed at making peace
self-sustaining.
If we are to be able to provide security and
deliver services to the population in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, priority must be given to the
restoration of State authority and the capacity-building
of national institutions. Only a viable State with a
strong structure will contribute to peace and stability
and reduce the risk of relapse into conflict.
Stronger partnerships with Member States,
regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions, civil society and other actors are
preconditions for delivering greater impact and results
on the ground. In order to implement certain
peacebuilding tasks, it is crucial to strengthen
connections and linkages within the United Nations
family. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to provide
early and predictable support in priority areas of
peacebuilding.
In that regard, the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, with its integrated and coherent
approach, should be emphasized. As a unique
intergovernmental advisory body, its function of
addressing the needs of countries emerging from
conflict towards sustainable peace is of vital
importance. The need to link security and development,
recognized in the mechanism of the Peacebuilding
Commission, should be linked to utilizing its potential
to play the preventive role defined in its mandate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that
mainstreaming women’s participation in peacebuilding,
addressing their post-conflict needs, increasing their
engagement in post-conflict planning and governance,
and enhancing their capacity to contribute to economic
recovery and overall social stability are key issues in
post-conflict societies. We therefore consider that
increasing women’s confidence in the political process
not only requires action in the immediate post-conflict
period, but also influences the design of provisions on
power-sharing or justice. It is of vital importance to
enhance the funding that addresses the specific needs
of women and girls, the economic empowerment of
women and gender equality.

10-57830

S/PV.6396

The gender perspective needs to be filtered
through country-specific situations. It should also be an
integral part of every aspect of peacebuilding on the
ground. To that end, the role of women in
peacebuilding needs to move from a niche concern to
the mainstream. Enhancing women’s capacity to
engage in peacebuilding needs to include, inter alia,
supporting peace processes through independent
diplomatic initiatives, providing bilateral assistance to
post-conflict countries and participating within United
Nations intergovernmental bodies. We would like to
underline the importance of enhancing the mobilization
of resources for initiatives that address women’s
specific peacebuilding needs, advance their equality
and empower them. We urge Member States and other
partners to render their support.
We welcome the fact that there is overwhelming
support in the international community for vigorous
action to ensure women’s full participation in
peacebuilding, and we urge Member States to make
substantial long-term investments in women’s security
and productive potential. We also welcome the
establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women and
encourage its close work and cooperation with relevant
United Nations agencies and other stakeholders in that
direction.
Much has been achieved in the area of
peacebuilding, but there is still much work ahead of us.
Nevertheless, we cannot lose the momentum towards
starting to revise procedures and design programmes,
with careful deliberations on actions to be taken
without delay. It is important to point out that longterm investment provides the potential for economic
recovery, a more stable society and lasting peace.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our readiness
to share our knowledge, experience and lessons learned
on post-conflict peacebuilding in every situation where
our first-hand experience may be seen as relevant,
reliable and useful.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for your kind words about
the Turkish presidency of the Council in September. I
congratulate you on your presidency this month and
wish you and the Ugandan mission all the best for the
month of October.
I would like to commend your presidency for
organizing this meeting. I would also like to express

10-57830

our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
thorough and analytical reports on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and on
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
Let me also thank Ambassador Wittig for his valuable
contribution and the active work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
I would like to briefly highlight some of the
important conclusions that we have drawn from those
reports.
First, we are glad to see that the interlinkages and
interactions among peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are now better appreciated. In that
regard, the report of the Secretary-General makes an
important contribution by laying down an integrated
strategic framework for peace operations, in which
these processes complement and mutually reinforce
each other from the very outset. That is also precisely
what the presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/18)
adopted at the Security Council summit held on
23 September 2010 called for (see S/PV.6389), and we
believe that the United Nations is on the right track.
Secondly, the report of the Secretary-General
points to the numerous short-term challenges in the
immediate aftermath of conflicts and provides
guidance on how those challenges, if addressed in a
proper and timely way, could be turned into
opportunities to sustain peace. An important corollary
is that short-term peacebuilding efforts need to be
integrated into longer-term strategies.
In that regard, the Secretary-General’s report
rightly makes a strong case for more effective United
Nations leadership on the ground, backed up by
effective strategic planning capabilities at United
Nations Headquarters. Thus, we welcome the steps
taken towards providing improved guidance and
support to field missions and also support the
Secretary-General’s initiative to deploy integrated and
effective leadership teams in those field missions.
Thirdly, we also concur with the SecretaryGeneral that peacebuilding is primarily a national
responsibility and that the principal role of the
international community should be to support national
peacebuilding efforts. The emphasis of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on nationally owned planning
processes and national capacity-building is therefore
well placed. Thus, we believe that the international
community should assist in building or rebuilding

11

S/PV.6396

national capacities in a sustainable way, instead of
simply substituting for those capacities. That will
prevent a culture of dependency from taking root in
those societies and provide credible transition and exit
strategies.
In that regard, while there is certain merit in
trying to generalize about the steps to be taken, we
should also not lose sight of the fact that every country
is unique. Local conditions, needs, opportunities and
limitations may differ considerably from one country
to another, which means that there is no single
blueprint for dealing with the challenges facing
peacebuilding activities across the board. Rather, the
strategic planning of peacebuilding activities should be
sufficiently flexible to take into account countryspecific capacities and other idiosyncrasies.
Fourthly, the diversity of challenges and
complexities associated with peacebuilding efforts
today suggests that we will continue to need the
support and contribution of a myriad of actors,
including international financial institutions, regional
and subregional organizations, civil society and the
private sector. Indeed, various actors, such as the
African Union, the European Union, NATO and the
World Bank, have become established players in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and the United
Nations should support and make use of the capacities
of those organizations. Of course, coordination among
those stakeholders is also critical, and the role of the
United Nations in that regard is simply essential.
Related to that, we also support the efforts aimed
at strengthening the international civilian capacity to
be deployed in countries emerging from conflict. We
hope that the review process, which is presently under
way under the auspices of the Secretary-General, will
lead to a broadening and deepening of the pool of
civilian experts available for deployment in a
coordinated and coherent way.
Last but not least, we wish to underline the
importance of mainstreaming women’s participation in
peacebuilding efforts and of increasing opportunities
for women to engage in decision-making and economic
recovery. In that context, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s
action
plan
for
gender-responsive
peacebuilding, which aims to address women’s postconflict needs and remove the constraints on their full
participation in peacebuilding processes.

12

The draft presidential statement before us today
contains important elements on all the issues I have
just touched upon, and we fully support it. However,
allow me to conclude by reiterating the SecretaryGeneral’s call on all United Nations Member States to
play their part in the collective efforts, not only
through the commitment of resources, but also through
coherent, consistent and sustained participation in
peacebuilding activities. Longer-term commitment, an
integrated approach and capacity-building are indeed
the key words. For our part, Turkey will continue to be
guided by those key principles and will actively engage
in all peacebuilding efforts.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Permanent
Representative of Germany, for their respective
briefings on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict and on women’s participation in
peacebuilding. Japan also appreciates the President’s
initiative to convene this very important debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding following the ministeriallevel discussion in April and the Security Council
summit held last month (see S/PV.6389).
Japan welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/386) on the implementation of the
agenda outlined in his 2009 report (S/2009/304). His
observations are all certainly relevant. We look forward
to further progress on all priority items set forth.
Among other things, Japan would like to
highlight the following three points, with a view to
filling in gaps in the process of transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
First, in the light of the utmost importance of
national capacity development, more robust action is
needed in mainstreaming it as a system-wide priority
and in integrating short-term interventions into longerterm strategies for peacebuilding. As shown in dire
cases such as Timor-Leste and Liberia, exit strategies
rely on national security capabilities.
Secondly, Japan stresses the need for the United
Nations system as a whole to clarify the division of
roles for engaging in post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that regard, Japan calls upon the Secretariat to
complete the reviews in the remaining sectors of the
six key peacebuilding sectors, in particular the areas of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, as early as possible. Based on

10-57830

S/PV.6396

the outcome of the reviews, we should embark upon
establishing a better coordinated system to increase the
effectiveness of United Nations support on the ground.
Thirdly, since its establishment in 2005, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has made steady
progress, but we believe the Commission should
further develop its functions. First and foremost, it is
essential that the PBC identify peacebuilding priorities
in a timely manner through consultation with
post-conflict countries and facilitate the necessary
support from the international community, as
appropriate. Japan is ready to take an active part in the
discussion of the PBC review, taking into account the
report submitted by the three co-facilitators, from
Mexico, Ireland and South Africa (S/2010/393, annex).
Finally, with regard to the transition process, I
would like to stress the importance of strengthening the
PBC’s advisory function vis-à-vis the Security Council.
In a recent note by the Council President on working
methods (S/2010/507), the Council expressed its
intention to invite, as appropriate, the Chairs of the
country-specific configurations of the PBC to
participate in formal meetings of the Council at which
the situation concerning the country in question is
considered, or on a case-by-case basis, for an exchange
of views in an informal dialogue. Japan hopes that
deepened substantive discussions between the two
organs will lead to a better United Nations impact on
the ground. In that regard, Japan proposes to explore
the possibility of holding such an informal dialogue
before the end of this year in an appropriate manner.
Japan welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
on
women’s
participation
in
peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). We expect that the Secretary-General
will steadfastly implement the action plan for genderresponsive peacebuilding to which he committed in the
report, as part of his comprehensive agenda to improve
United Nations peacebuilding efforts. The Security
Council will commemorate the tenth anniversary of its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) later this month. In
that connection, the Council should conduct a
substantive review of the implementation of the action
plan and its peacebuilding agenda in order to further
mainstream the issue of women and peace and security
in the Council’s overall agenda over the next decade.
Japan very much expects that the newly
established United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) will

10-57830

play an important role through the implementation of
both policies and programmes. The agenda regarding
women and peace and security, including women’s
participation in peacebuilding, should be addressed by
coordinating the relevant United Nations activities
effectively and efficiently. Japan will actively
contribute to the activities of UN Women while
continuing to support the enhancement of women’s
participation in peacebuilding, including, inter alia,
through the economic empowerment of women in
post-conflict situations from the perspective of human
security.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General and to Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings today.
The progress report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) is encouraging for two main reasons.
First, it puts the right emphasis on the multifaceted
nature of sustainable peace, and therefore that of
peacebuilding. Gone are the days when peace could be
seen as the mere absence of armed conflict. The report
is also encouraging because it makes clear that the
senior management of the Organization is engaged in a
serious effort to adjust institutional practices and
mechanisms to that concept of peace. We thank the
Secretary-General for leading that process within the
system.
Among the initiatives now under way, I wish to
single out two of particular importance, namely,
integrated planning, which is critical to ensure that a
truly holistic approach to peacebuilding prevails, and
the establishment of unified teams of civilian experts to
assist the heads of missions. Such units must
themselves be comprehensive in scope. They must
include experts not only in the rule of law, human
rights and security sector reform, but also in public
administration and socio-economic development.
Without staff in those latter areas, our support for
United Nations action in them will tend to be merely
rhetorical.
My delegation could not agree more with the
Secretary-General when he emphasizes national
capacity development as the cornerstone of
peacebuilding efforts. Several of the protracted crises
that the United Nations faces today are, to a large

13

S/PV.6396

extent, fuelled, if not caused, precisely by weak
governance and the lack of institutional capacity. We
also concur with the view that support for capacity
development must be a system-wide priority. The
ultimate goal of several parts of the United Nations
system should be to work themselves out of business.
Member States are also a key piece of that puzzle. We
must once and for all move away from supply-driven
cooperation and focus on finding the right way to
support partners without stifling ownership. In so
doing, we will be serving our own long-term interests.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for
ongoing efforts aimed at establishing pools of civilian
capacity to be expeditiously deployed in the field.
Needless to say, such pools should not replace existing
local capacity. They ought to resort to experts from
developing countries as much as possible, especially
from the region of the country concerned, and must
help to develop national capacity in post-conflict
countries, even in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
The current review of civilian capacities should also be
consistent with the holistic approach to peacebuilding
and put forth recommendations on all the areas set out
in the report of Secretary-General of last year
(S/2009/304), including the provision of basic services
and economic revitalization.
Another key issue is the interaction of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The emerging
consensus that they are not sequential forms of
engagement must now be made operational. In those
cases where peacekeepers can be early peacebuilders, it
is illogical not to use some of their existing capacities
to start laying the groundwork for peacebuilding. That
is especially true for civil affairs components of
peacekeeping operations, in particular with respect to
the consolidation of State authority.
The area of job creation, which is key to stability,
is also potentially relevant for the interaction between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As indicated by the
Secretary-General,
greater
synergies
between
peacekeeping operations and the activities financed by
the PBF may contribute to broadening the reach of
projects.
As we near the anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), the importance of involving and empowering
women in all stages of the conflict is very much on our
minds. In that area, as in others, our main concern is

14

sustainability. Our ultimate goal must be to help
permanently improve women’s place in society.
It is with that in mind that we are studying the
Secretary-General’s report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466), for which we are grateful.
Today, I wish to make a few preliminary comments on
one of the plan’s key commitments, namely, women’s
participation in economic recovery.
Although Brazil is not a post-conflict country, our
experience suggests there are significant long-term
social and economic benefits in steering social
programmes towards women. A similar approach may
be fruitful in peacebuilding. It is not merely a question
of distributive justice, but of inducing meaningful
change. Ensuring women’s economic inclusion has the
potential to permanently transform their role in society,
regardless of cultural and historical particularities. That
should be our collective ultimate goal.
Finally, I wish to say a few words on the report of
the co-facilitators of the Peacebuilding Commission
review process (S/2010/393, annex). We thank them
for their work. The document is quite comprehensive,
although more could have been said about the work of
the country-specific configurations. The report also
sets out recommendations that deserve careful
consideration in the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Among such recommendations, I would single
out those concerning support to national capacitybuilding, the developmental aspects of peacebuilding,
the emphasis on youth employment, coordination and
coherence, and the strengthening of the relationship
with the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council.
Our peacebuilding efforts are a key element of
our strategy, both as an Organization and as individual
Governments, to move from a simplistic and
fragmented approach to peace to a more complex and
integrated way of consolidating peace — one that fully
understands that peace, security, development and
human rights are closely linked and that peace will not
be sustainable without simultaneous and coordinated
action in all four aspects. The challenge is to translate
that concept into practice and above all in a new
mentality — in capitals, in New York and in the field.

10-57830

S/PV.6396

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. William Habib, Acting Secretary of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Lebanon.
Mr. Habib (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having organized
this debate. I convey our gratitude to His Excellency
the Secretary-General and to the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
Permanent
Representative of Germany for their statements, which
were invaluable.
A great many regions throughout the world
continue to be devastated by conflict, which is proof of
the need, on the one hand, to strive to contain tensions
and, on the other, to assist States emerging from
conflict to move to the phase of lasting peace and to
achieve development. Here we wish to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/386), and we agree with him that the main
challenge facing the international community is
peacebuilding.
We support the plan of action drawn up by the
Secretary-General to bolster the United Nations
response to post-crisis situations. We welcome the
positive measures adopted and implemented thus far,
and we consider that in future we should focus on a
faster response, more in line with the needs of
peacebuilding. We wish to make some comments in
that context.
First, we welcome the measures adopted to back
the role of the leadership on the ground and to
strengthen cooperation between United Nations
Headquarters and country teams through systematic
communications, offering expertise and strengthening
accountability.
Secondly, we should establish an integrated
strategy for rapid peacebuilding, a strategy that would
incorporate a great many priorities in various fields —
political, security and development. That strategy
should be based on an impartial analysis of the root
causes of conflict and its dynamics. It should also build
bridges between short-term results and preparation for
structural, long-term objectives. The strategy should be
implemented through dialogue and coordination with
stakeholders at the local level. It should be based on an
assessment of existing local capacities and potential in
order to utilize them as successfully as possible.

10-57830

Thirdly, national ownership is critical to ensuring
the success of peace efforts. Therefore national
authorities
should
discharge
their
primary
responsibility, which is to rebuild institutions for
security, governance and economic revival, with the
assistance of the United Nations and international
partners.
Fourthly, the United Nations should bolster
relations with all partners to provide the necessary
financing in a timely way, in accordance with national
priorities for peacebuilding. In that regard, increased
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund since 2009,
the Fund’s undertaking the process of accurately
assessing the results of its actions, and the
confirmation of its impact are positive contributions.
Lebanon believes that a number of local infrastructure
projects are insufficiently financed, despite their
positive impact in changing the course of the conflict.
All of that impedes the peacebuilding process.
Fifthly, we believe that peacebuilding is an effort
that is collective in nature, one in which a great many
United Nations agencies and international partners
participate. To ensure greater effectiveness, it is
imperative that roles be clearly defined and the
division of labour in the area of peacebuilding clearly
mapped out, based on technical expertise and the
direction that the peacebuilding process takes on the
ground.
Sixthly, women and children are the main victims
of conflict. In the post-conflict period, women should
be given the opportunity to participate in
reconstruction and peacebuilding, as well as in peace
negotiations. Those factors serve to promote the
agreements that the parties are working to reach.
Furthermore, including women in positions of power
reduces the likelihood of a resumption of conflict. That
is why we concur with the Secretary-General’s
statement that greater efforts should be made to meet
women’s needs in post-conflict situations and to
increase their participation in the peacebuilding
process.
Lastly, we welcome the ongoing review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and we hope it will lead to
increased coordination between the Commission and
the Security Council.
It is often said that the end of a conflict does not
always mean that peace has been achieved. Quite often,
building genuine, lasting peace after a conflict is a

15

S/PV.6396

complex and arduous road. It is, however, one that
should be taken, because it is the only one that will
lead to the stability and development of societies.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Ugandan delegation
for organizing this Council meeting on the topic of
post-conflict peacebuilding. The complex nature of the
tasks that face States going through the “hot” phase of
a crisis requires a balanced strategy for carrying them
out, one based on the interconnectedness of security,
social and economic development and human rightsrelated issues. A holistic approach is needed, based on
united, objective and predictable logistical and
financial sources, effectively pooled stabilizing action,
close coordination, taking regional contexts into
consideration and the maximum possible use of the
potential of regional organizations.
That is how we view the Secretary-General’s
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2010/386). Many of its ideas and proposals
are rational, in our view.
It is clear that peacebuilding activity must be
based on the principle of national responsibility for
approaches to implementing it. The success of
peacebuilding efforts in the Middle East, Afghanistan,
Africa, Haiti and Timor-Leste results from taking into
account the interests and priorities of the host
countries. Any assistance from the international
community, regardless of the form it takes, should be at
the consent of national Governments, with respect for
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
It is important to be mindful of the specifics that
apply to each individual State. A key component of
successful post-conflict peacebuilding is strengthening
national and social potentials.
Undoubtedly, the United Nations has a special
role in coordinating international post-conflict
rehabilitation efforts. We understand well that such
action implies a great many difficulties and requires
coordinated efforts on the part of the United Nations
Secretariat, programmes and funds, from Member
States, regional organizations and international
financial institutions. Such difficulties include, as the
report discusses, fragmented and insufficient
coordination, irrational division of labour among
peacebuilding stakeholders and shortcomings in
financing mechanisms.

16

That is why we support the Secretary-General’s
efforts to bolster, in accordance with the existing
mandate, the coordinating role of the United Nations in
key peacebuilding areas. They include combating
organized crime and drug trafficking, incorporating
post-conflict needs-assessment practices, international
civil capacity reviews and the creation and training of
United Nations teams of experts, while observing the
most equitable possible geographical representation.
Many early peacebuilding tasks now fall to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. While
carrying out their main mission — the advancement of
the peace process — United Nations peacekeepers play
a critical role in establishing conditions conducive to
the provision of larger-scale peacebuilding assistance.
We should bear in mind, however, that peacebuilding is
a lengthy and multifaceted process, far exceeding the
time taken by peacekeeping operations.
We attach great importance to the Peacebuilding
Fund as an emergency financing mechanism that
promotes the involvement of long-term reconstruction
and development mechanisms. We support our position
with an annual contribution to the Fund of $2 million.
We continue to study the Secretary-General’s
report on women and peacebuilding (S/2010/466). A
number of its ideas and proposals are of clear interest
and can be put into practice. Excessive haste, however,
is not a good idea here. As the report indicates, the
implementation of its proposals will require a review
of a whole range of procedures as well as changes to
programme planning. We stand ready to continue to
work on the Secretary-General’s proposals.
We endorse the adoption of the presidential
statement prepared by the Ugandan delegation.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. I welcome the statements by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Ambassador Wittig, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Post-conflict peacebuilding is an important
component of the work of the United Nations and is of
great significance in helping countries that have just
emerged from conflict to achieve lasting peace. Over
the past decade or so, the United Nations has taken an
active part in peacebuilding in various post-conflict
countries and regions and has achieved remarkable
results. At the same time, the promotion of post-

10-57830

S/PV.6396

conflict peacebuilding is still faced with many
challenges. I would like to make the five points in that
regard.
First, the political will of the international
community is a strong guarantee for helping postconflict countries succeed in peacebuilding. The
international community should not only be well aware
of the importance of post-conflict peacebuilding, but
should also display firm resolve and take decisive and
quick action. Peacebuilding efforts should be
undertaken in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
Peacebuilding and peacekeeping complement and
reinforce each other and can function in harmony.
Peacebuilding operations should also have an exit
strategy to facilitate a smooth transition to sustainable
development.
Secondly, ownership by the countries concerned
is a prerequisite for a successful peacebuilding process.
Peacebuilding countries and administrations shoulder
primary responsibility. The international community’s
efforts in the area of peacebuilding should fully respect
the will of the countries concerned and give free rein to
country ownership. For countries in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the international community
should give priority to helping them with capacitybuilding and improving governance. Donors should
treat post-conflict countries not as mere recipients but
as equal partners in cooperation.
The United Nations and the relevant national
agencies, while helping post-conflict countries to
prepare their international development strategies for
peacebuilding, should fully respect the priorities
independently identified by the countries concerned, as
well as the diversity of circumstances in individual
countries, and adopt an integrated approach in order to
spare the countries concerned additional and
unnecessary administrative burdens.
Thirdly, identifying priorities is important to
ensuring the successful implementation of post-conflict
peacebuilding. We concur with the view of the
Secretary-General that post-conflict peacebuilding
should focus on the five areas of ensuring basic
security, building the political process, providing basic
services, supporting core Government functions and
revitalizing economic development.
A strong political process and national
reconciliation are prerequisite foundations for
peacebuilding. Only by achieving speedy and early

10-57830

recovery and promoting socio-economic development
can we win the confidence of the peoples of postconflict countries in the peace process. It is critical to
address the issue of youth employment and the
reintegration of ex-combatants in order to eliminate
hidden threats to social stability and to prevent relapse
into conflict, and these matters should receive
heightened attention.
Fourthly, the PBC and regional commissions
must be enabled to play a more important role in postconflict peacebuilding. China welcomes the PBC’s
five-year review of its work and hopes that Member
States can reach an early consensus on the proposals
for improving the Commission’s work. With a view to
complying with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, we should give full play
to the unique strengths of the African Union and other
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peacebuilding. China supports the efforts of the United
Nations and the PBC to deepen peacebuilding
cooperation with such international organizations as
the World Bank.
Fifthly, China pays close attention to the
financing of the development of pools of experts and
calls on the international community to continue to
provide resources to post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
and to unite in tapping new and additional sources of
financing. The multi-donor trust fund should undertake
appropriate reforms of its operations in order to
enhance its accountability and efficiency.
China has always supported the countries
concerned in their peacebuilding efforts and stands
ready, together with the international community, to
make its own contribution to achieving peace and
stability and promoting sustainable socio-economic
development in the countries concerned.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes the
thorough briefing provided by the Secretary-General
and the presentation by Ambassador Wittig on behalf
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The need for
increased cooperation with the Peacebuilding
Commission has consistently been stressed by the
Council. This debate is an opportunity to deepen our
cooperation with the PBC in order to capitalize on its
capacity to marshal the actors and resources necessary
to realizing the objectives of peace articulated here in
the Security Council.

17

S/PV.6396

The reports before us today mark a critical
turning point in the United Nations strategy for peace
and security. The in-depth analysis contained in the
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2010/386) dovetails with the proposals in
the report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). Nigeria welcomes the renewed emphasis
on the nexus between peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
security and development, and we understand the
challenges faced by women in relation to conflict, as
well as the invaluable contribution they can make to
the establishment of peace.

case of a number of United Nations missions and
peacebuilding offices, the lack of pre-mandate funding
slows progress and is detrimental to the
implementation of critical transitional mandates. In a
number of countries, including Somalia, we have
witnessed the social and political costs of not matching
the expressed will of the international community with
adequate resources. While recognizing that this issue is
not within the specific purview of the Security Council,
we look forward to the proposals to be submitted by
the Secretary-General to the General Assembly on this
issue.

The Secretary-General’s report sets out a detailed
model for cementing peace in fragile States in a
manner that reaffirms the key role that women can play
in re-establishing the fabric of recovering societies. His
proposals for a more gender-responsive approach to
peacebuilding, encompassing access to justice and
participation in post-conflict planning and governance,
duly prioritize the needs and capabilities of women in
the peacebuilding context.

The question of funding and resourcing in general
is also critical from the perspective of women in
peacebuilding. In order to have a real impact on the
lives of women and the post-conflict societies they live
in, United Nations agencies should be adequately
resourced. In that way, we might provide women and
girls with effective resources and protections as victims
of violent conflict. Our work can also empower and
engage women as protagonists of peace within the
United Nations system and as political and civil society
participants.

It is encouraging to note that, as set out in
document
S/2010/386,
the
Secretary-General’s
perspective on peacebuilding encompasses the breadth
and depth of its component parts. Nigeria agrees that
peacebuilding efforts must address peace and security,
human rights, development and the humanitarian
pillars of the United Nations. It will add a broader
dimension to that list of priorities, within which respect
for the rule of law; combating the illicit arms trade,
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime; and
the restoration of core Government functions must also
be supported.
The steady embedding of system-wide coherence
and positive steps towards reliable funding are sure to
benefit the peacebuilding work of the United Nations
and its partners. The work that has gone into
harnessing the right calibre of human capital within the
United Nations system is commendable, and we are
encouraged by the new measures to strengthen
leadership and accountability. Yet there are so many
interconnected parts to this process that we must
remember that a chain is only as strong as its weakest
link. Therefore, it is important to enhance our
capabilities at every point of need in the system.
Resource allocation is a difficult issue at the best
of times, requiring careful and thoughtful prioritysetting. Document S/2010/386 observes that, in the

18

There is clearly a need to enhance the
mobilization of resources for initiatives to mainstream
women in peacebuilding activities in order to address
their peacebuilding needs, advance gender equality and
empower them in peacebuilding contexts. Nigeria
pledges its support for the newly created United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. In this regard, we look
forward to its full engagement in promoting the role of
women in peacebuilding and in advocating for the
active participation of women at all levels of decisionmaking and post-conflict planning.
Nigeria takes comfort in the recognition that
national ownership of peacebuilding processes is vital,
and welcomes the reports’ recognition of the United
Nations as facilitator in an explicitly supporting role.
In situations of crisis, most States in conflict lack
national capacities. Efforts should therefore be made to
ensure that, as we strengthen national ownership, the
same is done for national capacity development.
Against this background of support, national
Governments should be given predictable assistance by
the international community.
Given the complexity of the threats to peace we
now face, there is an even greater imperative for the

10-57830

S/PV.6396

coordination of responses. A clear division of labour
and accountability must be agreed on, buttressed by a
common strategic framework and aligned with the
objectives of each peacebuilding exercise. The
Secretary-General’s proposal for focal points for each
thematic area of peacebuilding is a solid starting point
in this regard.

Meeting the challenge of peacebuilding requires a
collective endeavour that rests upon the pillars of the
United Nations: peace and security, human rights,
development and humanitarian affairs, while
guaranteeing respect for international law and always
focusing our efforts on generating and strengthening
national capacity.

In addition, I wish to emphasize the critical need
for collaboration and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations within the geographical
zones of the countries on the PBC agenda. The
contributions of the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union in peacebuilding
in their various regions are legion.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report (S/2010/386) on the action plan to strengthen
capacities and mechanisms to ensure an effective,
systematic, planned and consistent response by the
Organization in matters relating to peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict. We consider it relevant to
establish new guidelines for the integrated planning
process for peacekeeping missions in order to bolster
the collective and coordinated work of United Nations
agents in the field and to achieve a greater
complementary effect in the sectors of peace, security,
humanitarian assistance and development.

We welcome the seven action points identified
the report of the Secretary-General on the participation
of women in peacebuilding (S/2010.466). They capture
the core gaps in our efforts to promote the full and
equal participation of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding, as envisaged in resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009). Nigeria commends the SecretaryGeneral for homing in on the required actions in such
considered detail. We feel strongly that, if correctly
implemented, this action plan will go a long way
towards actualizing the aims of resolution 1889 (2009).
The two reports before us today give the Security
Council an opportunity to lead the way in inclusive
peacebuilding measures that address the needs of all
segments of society, thereby laying the foundation for
enduring peace. We welcome the adoption of the
presidential statement and express the hope that,
together, we can enhance the United Nations capacity
to make peace a prominent feature in the lives of all
those we serve.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
having organized this meeting. We welcome the
statements by the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Wittig, Permanent Representative of Germany, in his
capacity as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
My delegation acknowledges the value of the
reports we have before us (S/2010/386 and
S/2010/466) and shares the view that we must place
peacebuilding at the very centre of the work of the
United Nations in various areas, including the
participation of women and the strengthening of the
Organization’s peacebuilding capacity.

10-57830

We reiterate the importance of deploying an
increased international civilian capacity in a prompt
and coordinated manner in countries emerging from
conflict, in particular taking advantage of the
capacities of the southern hemisphere and of women,
taking into account their important contribution in
generating national capacity, in particular in spheres
such as the strengthening of the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reforms, mediation and electoral
assistance.
We await the study by the Peacebuilding Support
Office of ways to extend and improve the list of
available civilian experts, including the role of the
United Nations Volunteers programme. Likewise, we
acknowledge the importance of developing strategic
relations between the United Nations and the World
Bank with a view to articulating effective responses
and improving coordination and the collective impact
on the ground on the basis of accountability and the
delimitation of functions and responsibilities.
With regard to the report on the participation of
women in peacebuilding (S/2010/466), we welcome
the plan of action aimed at implementing resolution
1325 (2000) through concrete peacebuilding measures.
Over the past 10 years, the Security Council has made
progress and has put in place a solid framework for its
gender agenda. But the time has now come for it to
adopt concrete measures that enjoy the full support and

19

S/PV.6396

political backing of the Security Council, as well as the
political will of States, the United Nations system and
strategic partners.
We support the plan of action for the participation
of women and its seven commitments. We are aware
that it is an ambitious plan, but it can be achieved by
joining the efforts of all of us who make up the United
Nations. Likewise, it will be crucially important to
ensure that all the relevant agencies, including the
recently established United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, participate
actively to ensure women’s contributions in conflict
resolution and decision-making processes and that their
particular needs are taken into account in the very
design of security and justice strategies.
In discussing positive actions that should be
undertaken by States at this stage of the peace process,
countries have an unparalleled opportunity to ensure
respect for the human rights of women and to
contribute to their involvement in the civilian, political,
social, cultural and economic spheres.
Last December, the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council named Mexico,
together with Ireland and South Africa, as
co-facilitators of the Peacebuilding Commission
review process. During the first semester of this year,
we held informal, open consultations with Member
States, wide-ranging debates with key agents in the
United Nations system, and meetings to consult with a
broad range of interested parties and associates. On
21 July 2010, we submitted a report (S/2010/393,
annex) that reflects the opinions that Member States
transmitted to us in the context of a broad-ranging,
open, transparent and inclusive process.
Subject to the views of our colleagues from
Ireland and South Africa, we believe it important to
draw attention to the specificity of this dual process.
That is, both the General Assembly and the Security
Council should continue to work on the basis of the
recommendations contained in the report, in the
interest of strengthening and raising the profile of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
I conclude by expressing the support of my
delegation for the presidential statement that we will be
adopting at the end of this meeting.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
wish to start by extending to you, Mr. President, the

20

most heartfelt congratulations of my delegation upon
Uganda’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We all know Uganda’s consistent interest in
the issues of international peace and security. The
choice of subject for today’s debate on peacebuilding,
Sir, clearly shows your country’s commitment.
I should also like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General at this debate and to convey to him
my gratitude for his two reports — on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
I would also like to convey my gratitude to
Ambassador Peter Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for all the information he
provided to us. I pay tribute to the outstanding work
which he has carried out at the head of the
Commission.
Our debate takes place at a time when we are
assessing peacebuilding experiences in Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau, the Central African Republic and Sierra
Leone, within the framework of the Peacebuilding
Commission. This exercise affords us an opportunity to
re-examine the missions entrusted to this body and to
rethink our overall peacebuilding strategy on the basis
of a cohesive, coordinated and integrated approach
which gives pride of place to mechanisms of national
and regional ownership in the reconstruction process.
That is the thrust of the new United Nations
peacebuilding agenda for action proposed to us by the
Secretary-General in the report submitted for our
consideration, and my country fully backs it.
This new agenda, in our view, meets the need, on
the one hand, to tailor peacekeeping operations to
needs on the ground and, on the other, to take into
account all aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Here, my country welcomes the efforts undertaken to
those ends in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Chad, Timor-Leste and Afghanistan, to limit myself to
these few examples. The same applies to post-disaster
Haiti, following the horrible disaster that struck that
country at the beginning of this year.
The comprehensive and integrated approach with
a view to lasting peace does not end at guaranteeing
political and security stability. It must also be
supported by measures aimed at laying the foundations
for sustainable development and lasting democracy,
while strengthening, in particular, the political, judicial

10-57830

S/PV.6396

and institutional architecture as well as the economic
and social fabric in a post-conflict country.
A number of examples illustrate the effectiveness
of this approach. It is true of the elections held in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and,
recently, Burundi. It is also true of the strengthening of
judicial and police institutions in Liberia and Sierra
Leone, as well as the creation of development poles in
the Central African Republic.
The statements we have just heard illustrate the
extent to which peacebuilding is a complex and
multifaceted endeavour. It demands the constant effort
of the international community in collaboration with
national authorities and, of course, an intensive
mobilization of significant human and financial
resources. To this end, the Peacebuilding Commission
will have to continue to bolster its action on the ground
and strengthen its partnerships with international
financial institutions and regional organizations. The
contribution of bilateral and multilateral donors is vital
in this regard.
Accordingly, we can only encourage the steppedup action by the European Union and the World Bank
in favour of peacebuilding undertaken by our
Organization. We call for greater cooperation with the
African Union and the various regional economic
communities in Africa.
The Council will agree that there can be no
lasting peace in post-conflict countries unless women
are effectively involved in the stabilization and
development processes of these countries. This is
addressed in resolution 1325 (2000), whose tenth
anniversary we mark this month. To date, the success
of this resolution is reflected in the increased
participation of women in peace processes. Today, one
notes the increased number of women heading peace
missions and civilian components of peacekeeping
operations. We are gratified by the fact that the
Secretary-General’s action plan for gender-responsible
peacebuilding is part and parcel of the Council’s
approach aimed at bolstering the involvement of
women in post-conflict peace and reconstruction
efforts.
This plan provides Member States with a solid
and credible foundation for meeting their commitments
on implementing relevant Security Council resolutions.

10-57830

This is the right time and place to pay tribute to
the role played by civil society organizations in making
States more aware of the importance of involving
women in peacebuilding activities.
I cherish the hope that the setting up this year of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, better known as “UN
Women”, headed by Ms. Michelle Bachelet, will,
amongst its other missions, back this very important
development. I wish to reaffirm Gabon’s readiness to
work side by side with UN Women in developing this
approach.
I should like to conclude by voicing my
delegation’s backing for the presidential statement
which we will adopt following this debate.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
for his briefing. We welcome the increasing emphasis
on ensuring that peacebuilding activities, especially in
post-conflict situations, are nationally owned and
carried out in a more coordinated, more coherent and
more effective way. Peacebuilding is premised on the
need to address the root causes of conflict as well as
developing national institutions and conditions that are
conducive to sustainable peace and development.
The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) has highlighted a number of areas in
which progress is being made towards improving
United Nations peacebuilding efforts. We particularly
welcome the increasing engagement with national
authorities on peacebuilding priorities, support for
national capacity and development, and improving the
mobilization of resources for peacebuilding.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
there is still a lot of work to be done. It is therefore
essential that the United Nations and the wider
international community intensify efforts towards a
more effective and coherent approach to peacebuilding,
with an emphasis on delivering an impact on the
ground. There is a need for focusing more on
delivering tangible dividends, including provision of
basic services and improvement of the standard of
living of the population. It is also important to
strengthen partnerships amongst Member States,

21

S/PV.6396

regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions and other actors, since
peacebuilding is a collective effort.
My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on women’s participation in
peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).
The
report
is
comprehensive, and its action plan contains very useful
recommendations
whose
implementation,
as
appropriate, will reinforce the overall agenda for action
to improve United Nations peacebuilding efforts.
Uganda reiterates the importance of women’s
equal participation and full involvement in
peacebuilding, including in the development and
implementation of post-conflict strategies. The
engagement of all relevant United Nations agencies,
including the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN Women), as well as other actors, in the
consideration and implementation of the action plan
will be critical.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. João
Gomes Cravinho, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Portugal. On behalf of the Council,
I wish to extend a warm welcome to Mr. Cravinho.
Mr.
Cravinho
(Portugal):
Post-conflict
peacebuilding is at the core of our efforts to improve
United Nations efficiency and capacity. We now have
to take stock of the work that has been done since the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), five years ago, and to identify — as clearly as
possible — what we want to achieve in the near future.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the
progress report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386), as well as the report of the SecretaryGeneral on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). The substantive contribution of the
co-facilitators of the 2010 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex)
deserves to be commended. In line with what the
European Union delegation will state, Portugal fully
endorses the co-facilitators’ report.
We are now at a crossroads, and I want to assure
the Council of Portugal’s commitment to contribute
towards a more effective and coherent international

22

response to post-conflict peacebuilding. We share the
perception that there is a risk of fragmentation of the
PBC process, on account of its complexity and on
account of the multiplicity of actors and institutions
involved. We must avoid artificial divisions and ensure
integration between different levels of engagement.
To that end, allow me to stress some elements
that in our opinion deserve careful and urgent attention.
First, the relationship between the Security Council
and the PBC needs to be improved. To date, even if
some progress has been achieved, the interaction is still
limited, and we should take advantage of the potential
that now exists to create a new dynamic that will allow
for better performance — in particular in the early
stages, when the setting up of peacekeeping mandates
takes place.
Secondly, we also believe that transparency and
inclusiveness should be increased, in order to build up
a firm involvement from the Member States, the United
Nations as a whole and other stakeholders and partners.
In particular, allow me to underline the importance of
regional and subregional bodies in that regard.
Thirdly, it is now broadly understood that
peacebuilding must not follow peacekeeping
operations, but rather that it should be simultaneously
present from the start and as soon as the situation on
the ground permits — that is, when the phase of open
conflict is over. We agree with the notion that the PBC
should also have a preventive role and should stand
ready to respond to any possible deterioration of the
situation on the ground.
Fourthly, concerning the chairmanship of the
country-specific configurations, we share the view that
there is still room for improvement, namely by the
nomination of vice-chairs as well as the establishment
of liaison committees in the field.
Portugal welcomes the recent creation of the
Liberia country-specific configuration, of which we are
a member. This is a great opportunity to ensure that
peacebuilding
and
peacekeeping
efforts
are
complementary and mutually supportive, as it is the
first time that a country-specific configuration has been
created during the effective lifetime of a peacekeeping
mission. Coming after the co-facilitators’ report on the
2010 review of the PBC, it will provide an excellent
opportunity to start to implement some of the
recommendations in that report.

10-57830

S/PV.6396

I also wish to make a reference to the importance
of women’s contribution to this process, which was
clearly underlined in the Secretary-General’s report on
women’s participation in peacebuilding. The
instrumental role that women play in economic
recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy —
thus expanding the scope of national ownership and
national capacity — makes it imperative to fully
integrate the gender perspective into our goals. To
relegate consideration of gender issues to later phases
of peacebuilding would be to ignore the centrality of
those issues in everything from institutional design to
funding allocations to programme execution. Portugal
is fully committed to a gender-responsive approach to
each of the five peacebuilding priorities that have been
outlined in the 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304).
Finally, it is always important to underline the
inherent connection between peace and development,
and, in this context, we consider that it is of paramount
importance to make more coherent and integrated
peacebuilding efforts, including by fostering stronger
partnerships with the World Bank and other
international financial institutions. Portugal is strongly
committed to an active contribution to United Nations
endeavours and to helping pave the way for a
revitalized peacebuilding process that will promote
peace and security in all parts of the world.
We are honoured to have been elected to serve on
the Security Council for the period 2011-2012, and we
wish to assure the Council that we shall accord the
highest importance to this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank you, Sir, for convening this debate and for the
opportunity it provides to continue to contribute to the
objective of achieving an Organization that is better
prepared to meet its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace. My delegation
endorses what was said by Mr. Peter Wittig, Permanent
Representative of Germany and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), of which Peru is
honoured to be a member. Likewise, my delegation
endorses the statement to be made by Mr. Abulkalam
Abdul Momen, Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

10-57830

Allow me to focus now on a few points. The
Secretary-General’s plan of action and his subsequent
reports give us a clear guide as to where we should
direct our efforts in order to achieve sustainable peace
in a more prompt and efficient manner. We are aware
that we must enhance our efforts and use our available
resources more efficiently, which calls for better
planning and response capacity.
Therefore, in each case we must ascertain
priorities and needs for peacebuilding in the five
priority areas set out by the Secretary-General, and act
upon them in parallel. Those areas are basic safety and
security, including justice and respect for the rule of
law; confidence in the political process so as to restore
essential governmental functions and institutions;
support for the provision of basic services; support for
the functioning of public administration; and support
for economic revitalization. That analysis must be
undertaken with the direct and early involvement of
national actors along with the Peacebuilding
Commission. As the Secretary-General has stated in his
reports, peacebuilding is first and foremost a national
responsibility and a process of national empowerment,
and the response of the international community must
be channelled through a strategic, coordinated and
integrated approach, on the basis of national priorities.
That highlights two factors: the development or
strengthening of national capacity and the preventive
dimension. It is essential that from the initial
deployment of a United Nations mission in a postconflict situation, national capacity be developed or
strengthened. In this regard, it is important to
remember that strengthening or developing national
capacity — as is true of international civilian capacity —
should follow the need-driven approach, as was
pointed out by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Chair of the
Secretary-General’s Senior Advisory Group for the
Review of International Civilian Capacities, when it
met last week with the PBC.
As the co-facilitators noted in their report on the
review of the PBC (S/2010/393, annex), the national
empowerment process is closely linked to the
horizontal and multidisciplinary reinforcement of the
national capacity for full involvement in peacebuilding
efforts.
The empowerment of women and the gender
perspective are a key element in generating capacity
and in the peacebuilding process, as the report of the

23

S/PV.6396

Secretary-General notes. It is no coincidence that, as
the Secretary-General points out, women’s postconflict needs resemble the five recurring priorities
that we have just mentioned. An analysis of women’s
needs and the strengthening of their overall
participation in peacebuilding processes will also
facilitate clearer awareness of the causes of the
conflict, which is significant in planning the response
strategy, mobilizing resources and identifying measures
to enhance the confidence of the local people to the
peace process and their commitment to it.
Hence, national capacity is important not only in
order to ensure the transition towards peace, but also as
a measure to prevent the recurrence of conflict. In that
context, particular attention should also be paid to
creating jobs and training the unemployed or underemployed young people, who constitute a high risk
factor for disrupting the peace process.
We must also mention the links that exist between
the Millennium Development Goals and peacebuilding
processes, particularly with regard to the role of
women in peace processes and in priority areas. That is
because, as previously stated in this Chamber, progress
in implementing the Development Goals clearly
contributes to, and lays the basis for, lasting and
comprehensive peace, as well as avoiding resumption
of conflict.
In any peacebuilding process, I would like to
reiterate the fundamental role of the PBC in drafting
comprehensive
regional
strategies,
including
prevention strategies. The PBC must retain its role as
an advisory and catalyzing body within the system, a
body that ensures the coherence, flexibility and
effectiveness of the work of the United Nations in
peacebuilding processes and in the implementation of
the Secretary-General’s plan of action.
Finally, I would like to state that my country very
strongly supports the draft presidential statement that
you, Sir, intend to issue on this subject as a statement
of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): The reports before us
demonstrate that the United Nations is prepared to
move forward with the concrete implementation of an
effective peacebuilding agenda. The ultimate test will
be whether the United Nations system deploys

24

resources and technical expertise in a timely and
targeted manner. In that light, I would like to make a
few brief comments about each report in turn.
First, Canada supports the seven-point action plan
contained in the Secretary-General’s report on
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
At a time when the United Nations is reviewing its
efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, the action plan’s pragmatic,
coordinated and sustained approach to addressing
women’s and girls’ post-conflict needs and the
constraints on women’s participation in peacebuilding
is most welcome. It encourages troop- and policecontributing countries to address the participation of
women in peace operations and in training for those
operations. It also provides concrete targets for
enhancing women’s participation in all aspects of the
peacebuilding continuum and the availability of
relevant expertise.
Canada also agrees that monitoring of the action
plan can be facilitated by the global indicators on
resolution 1325 (2000), which we call on the Security
Council to endorse on 26 October. In that spirit,
Canada was pleased to announce earlier this month the
launch of its new Action Plan for the Implementation
of United Nations Security Council Resolutions on
Women, Peace and Security. Canada’s Plan is intended
to guide the Government in its implementation of those
resolutions and to improve Canada’s capacity to
safeguard and support affected populations in fragile
States and conflict-affected situations.
Canada is also pleased to note the progress made
since the publication of the Secretary-General’s report
on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2010/386). Advances in supporting senior
leaders in the field and in existing planning and
assessment processes are particularly welcome. Canada
also concurs that capacity remains a critical issue and
looks forward to the important recommendations
emerging from the review of international civilian
capacities, which we have been pleased to support
financially.
Yet enduring challenges also remain. Despite
much discussion, roles and responsibilities in critical
sectors such as the rule of law, security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration still
require clarification. The relationship between the

10-57830

S/PV.6396

United Nations and the World Bank should also be
deepened if broader progress is to be made.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.

(spoke in French)

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM).

Member States still need to consider modalities
for delivering rapid, responsive and risk-permissive
post-conflict financing. In order to meet that objective,
the United Nations and Member States must invest in
monitoring and measuring the outcomes of our
peacebuilding initiatives. In that way we can better
determine the areas where our efforts most effectively
advance the interests of sustainable peace.
Finally, I would also like to raise an issue related
to this debate. Canada welcomes the co-facilitators’
report on the 2010 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex). The
review proved very useful, for it reaffirmed the
importance of the Peacebuilding Commission. It also
brought out the need to see that its action produces
more tangible results the countries on its agenda.
While
full
implementation
of
the
recommendations is a longer-term task, Canada agrees
with the report’s assessment that the Commission
needs to maintain a flexible approach and align closely
with national priorities. Likewise, there is also a need
to reduce administrative burdens. The outcome of that
thinking will largely be put into practice in countryspecific configurations.
In that regard, Canada is of the view that a closer
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission is advisable. Such a
relationship would better define what the Council
expects on specific peacebuilding issues and clarify
what the Commission can contribute.
Capacity-building as a key concept is only in its
infancy. Peacebuilding is a work in progress, and that
evolution has significant implications for peacekeeping,
peacemaking and early recovery. It also affects how the
United Nations system organizes itself to deliver
results in the field that benefit all those affected by a
conflict and to ensure the sustainability of efforts to
prevent relapse into violence.
Finally, the reports considered today give us a
look at the state of affairs and at the work remains to
be done. As always, Canada stands ready to play its
part.

10-57830

Let me begin by thanking the presidency of
Uganda for organizing this debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) and his report on women’s participation
in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
We are now passing through a very challenging
period. We are about to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security at a time when such initiatives as
review of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
women’s participation in peacebuilding, review of
civilian capacity and others are being debated and
developed. The Movement deems it a privilege to take
note of the endeavours of different actors in these
processes who have been contributing positively to
restoring sustainable peace by preventing relapse into
conflict and addressing the genuine needs of the people
emerging from conflict. Furthermore, the Movement
feels it necessary that such processes be considered by
the principal bodies of the United Nations, in particular
the General Assembly.
The 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) outlined how the United Nations and the
international community could support national efforts
to secure sustainable peace more rapidly and
effectively. Since then, the Movement has continued to
follow up on those actions on different occasions by
sharing inputs and feedback to reflect the views of the
Movement on the process.
The Movement reiterates its principled position
that all peacebuilding initiatives and planning should
be based on the principles of national ownership and
predictable financing and should include as priorities
the goals of gender equality and empowerment of
women. The Movement subscribes to the general
consensus views of the Peacebuilding Commission that
economic reconstruction and rehabilitation should be at
the forefront of all efforts aimed at sustaining peace,
initiating development and promoting post-conflict
recovery. This process, however, entails the concerted
efforts of all relevant actors both at Headquarters and

25

S/PV.6396

in the field with adequate mechanisms for ensuring
accountability.

of existing relevant expertise within the police and
troop-contributing countries.

The Movement believes that the PBC provides an
appropriate platform for a coordinated, coherent and
integrated institutional mechanism to address the
special needs of countries emerging from conflict and
to promote their recovery, reintegration and
reconstruction. The PBC should therefore play the
central role in providing the United Nations system
with policy guidance and strategies in the area of postconflict peacebuilding activities. The broader
membership of the Organization should play principal
roles within the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council in relevant areas of peacebuilding
activities, without prejudice to the functions and
powers of the other principal organs as stipulated in the
United Nations Charter.

We note with appreciation the efforts made so far
to build national capacities in countries emerging from
conflict. Much more needs to be done to create
sustainable peace. The Movement believes strongly
that these initiatives must be complementary. A roster
for such complementary capacity-building efforts must
represent the broader membership with specific
emphasis on representation of the global South, SouthSouth cooperation and trilateral cooperation. Civil
society members and women actors with experience in
similar State-building activities should be incorporated,
as they will understand the ground reality from the
perspective of their life experience and lessons learned.

It is the view of the Movement that peacebuilding
activities should not be considered substitutes for
peacekeeping; rather, complementarities between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be used
innovatively in order to prevent a relapse into conflict.
Therefore, peacebuilding and peacekeeping planning
and assessment processes should unfold in a more
coordinated and concerted manner among all
stakeholders to ensure the best use of our capacities to
maintain sustainable peace and security and launch a
sustainable development process in post-conflict
countries.
The Movement maintains its position that there
can be no lasting peace without development and job
creation and no sustainable development without
stability. Therefore, the importance of partnership and
early investment in economic recovery cannot be
overemphasized. The international community must
establish and ensure coherent and predictable resource
deployment for capacity-building and development
activities in countries emerging from conflict, based on
the principle of national ownership.
We have noted the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to address rapid resource deployment in
certain emergency situations, such as in Haiti, by
forming multidisciplinary teams with expertise in
planning and mission support. The Movement urges the
Secretary-General to explore, through an open,
transparent and all-inclusive process, opportunities for
the wider membership to contribute to the formation of
such multidisciplinary teams, due account being taken

26

In this regard, the Movement has noted with
appreciation and duly recognized the fact that
peacekeeping missions and United Nations country
teams have worked together in Cote d’Ivoire, Haiti,
Liberia and elsewhere to support early employment
generation. This has provided job opportunities and
thus helped to build confidence in the peace process.
The Movement urges that similar lessons be replicated
appropriately in other peacebuilding activities and
emphasizes the central role of the PBC during the early
stages of peacebuilding.
Now, turning to the report of the Secretary
General on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466), the Movement reiterates its view that it
is women and girls who suffer the most as victims of
conflict and benefit the least from the dividends of the
peace process. Therefore, the onus is on us to alleviate
the challenges faced by women and girls in postconflict situations and to strengthen their effective
participation in the peacebuilding process.
The Movement appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to create specific action plans for
ensuring women’s participation in the peacebuilding
process and emphasizes that women are crucial
partners in shoring up the three pillars of lasting peace:
economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Thus, the Movement stresses the necessity
of reviewing and evaluating the recommendations and
proposed action plan in this regard in an open,
transparent and all-inclusive manner in the General
Assembly and in the Economic and Social Council in
accordance with their relevant mandates as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as in

10-57830

S/PV.6396

relevant United Nations structures including the PBC
and UN Women.

therefore, is an opportunity to highlight aspects of
particular relevance to the Security Council.

The Movement is well aware that all these
initiatives are taking place concurrently with the
ongoing 2010 review of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The Movement has taken note of the
co-facilitators
report
(S/2010/393).
The
recommendation that issues be discussed in an open,
transparent and inclusive manner in all relevant bodies
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission is a reflection of the views of the
Movement. The Movement reiterates its commitment
to full cooperation and constructive engagement in
future discussion of this report.

In establishing a context for my remarks on these
specific aspects, it is important to underline the
approach followed in preparing our report. As
emphasized by my colleague from Mexico, the process
was a very open and consultative one, with a real sense
of common purpose among all who contributed. That
common purpose is simply stated: to help the United
Nations peacebuilding machinery to fulfil its potential
so as to better carry out the role envisaged by world
leaders when they came together at the 2005 World
Summit.

The President: I
representative of Ireland.

give

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Anderson (Ireland): Thank you for giving
me the opportunity to speak today. I asked to do so
because of my co-facilitation, together with my
colleagues from Mexico and South Africa, of the 2010
review of the United Nations peacebuilding machinery
(S/2010/393). I understand that the Security Council
would hope to adopt a resolution on the review later
this month to coincide with adoption of an identical
resolution in the General Assembly. Since a further
debate on peacebuilding is not envisaged by the
Council in the course of the month, this seems likely to
be the only opportunity for the co-facilitators to
address the Council on the subject of the review.
Before turning to the review, I will avail myself
of the occasion to underline my country’s strong
endorsement of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/466)
on
women’s
participation
in
peacebuilding, and particularly the seven-point action
plan which is at the core of the report. Each of the
seven commitments is individually important; their
collective impact promises to be truly significant. The
analysis in which the commitments are grounded is of
impressive quality and the report as a whole is clear
and compelling.
As I said, my specific reason to take the floor
relates to the report on the review of peacebuilding,
which was presented by the co-facilitators some
12 weeks ago, on 19 July. The report runs to around
40 pages. In an Organization struggling with paper
overload, not everyone around this table may have had
the time to read the whole report. Today’s discussion,

10-57830

As co-facilitators, we tried throughout to keep
faith with the spirit of the process: to analyse the issues
with
honesty
and
propose
implementable
recommendations. Where perspectives differed among
those providing inputs, we sought to define approaches
that could keep the membership together while meeting
the basic test of strengthening the peacebuilding
architecture. And indeed, these two objectives should
not be seen in juxtaposition to each other: the
peacebuilding machinery will work most effectively
when it has the goodwill and active support of the
breadth of the membership behind it.
This is obviously not the occasion to cover the
detail across the various chapters of the report.
Although
the
co-facilitators
believe
the
recommendations need to operate alongside one
another and that they form a coherent whole, it is the
chapter on key relationships that I think it most useful
to comment on in today’s setting.
We all know that institutional relationships within
the United Nations can be very sensitive. Since its birth
five years ago, the PBC has been trying to make its
way in this sensitive landscape. The two co-parents,
the General Assembly and the Security Council, have a
relationship with each other that is not always an easy
one. Nevertheless, as we point out in our report, both
bodies have the nurturing responsibilities inherent in
the parenting role. No honest analysis of the
peacebuilding machinery could have shied away from a
discussion as to how these responsibilities have been
met.
In Chapter IV of our report, which addresses key
relationships, there are specific paragraphs which focus
on the PBC’s relationship with the Security Council.
The co-facilitators underline the dual requirement of

27

S/PV.6396

making space and earning space. We set out recent
positive steps but nevertheless express concern about
limited interaction and missed opportunities. We go on,
however, to state our belief that
“the benefits of an enhanced and more organic
relationship between the Security Council and the
Commission are increasingly being recognized,
and the potential now exists to create a new
dynamic between a more forthcoming Security
Council and a better performing Peacebuilding
Commission”. (S/2010/393, annex, para. 107)
I suggest that the passages on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in the same chapter, also bear careful
reading. The co-facilitators explicitly acknowledge the
prerogatives which the Charter confers on the Security
Council in relation to peacekeeping mandates.
Consistent with these prerogatives, we point to the
added value which a better performing PBC would
bring to Council deliberations in the successive phases
of mandate framing and renewal, and in approaching
the drawdown of operations. In that section too, our
emphasis is on cutting though any kind of disabling
circularity. We seek a situation whereby the PBC
provides more focused advice and the Security Council
understands that its deliberations will be enhanced by
tapping into that advice in a structured way.
As in other parts of the report, our brief
recommendations at the conclusion of chapter IV
reflect the earlier analysis.
The task for us as co-facilitators was to produce
an honest, balanced and implementable report on the
basis of our consultations. It is of course for the
membership to decide on implementation of our
recommendations, and for the General Assembly and
the Security Council, acting simultaneously, to adopt a
resolution in terms they deem most appropriate. The
co-facilitators are not demandeurs; our role at this
point is to elucidate and encourage.
I have focused my remarks as I have because,
amidst generally very positive reactions to the report,
there is discernible sensitivity in some quarters about
what the report states concerning the relationship
between the Security Council and the PBC. It would be
deeply regrettable if there were to be a narrowing of
vision and if the sense of common
purpose which
has so characterized the process were to falter now.
What unites us all is the objective of strengthening
peacebuilding. It is a huge and complex task, and

28

collectively we have not been doing well enough.
There is now the opportunity to take real and concrete
steps.
It is my hope that constructive instincts will
prevail, and that the follow-up to the Peacebuilding
Review will be committed, purposeful, and largeminded.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation wants to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission for his briefing. My delegation, of course,
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Bangladesh on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, but I would nonetheless like
to add a number of specific comments.
Transforming conflict situations requires the
United Nations to continuously review its working
methods with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security in the light of the
complexity and multifaceted nature of peacekeeping
operations. The Kingdom of Morocco stresses the
importance of enhancing the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), which is an important body, to
enable it to ensure its structural, organizational and
operational effectiveness, including with respect to the
financing of the Peacebuilding Fund.
My country takes note with interest of the
co-facilitators’ review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex). Its
recommendations merit sustained attention, including
those on coordination among local and international
actors, strengthening the quality and staffing of the
Secretariat’s Peacebuilding Support Office, and on
generating fresh momentum in the cooperation between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Peacebuilding will not yield the success we desire
without the active involvement of the host State from
the very moment that a peacekeeping operation is
deployed. Moreover, the experience gained by the
Peacebuilding
Commission
shows
that
no
peacebuilding activity can be successful without
including social and economic activities, such as

10-57830

S/PV.6396

economic revitalization, youth employment, the
development of infrastructure and the provision of
essential services. Along with previous speakers, I
want to underscore the need for a partnership approach
to peacebuilding involving host countries, the United
Nations, troop-contributing countries and donors.
Here, we welcome the Secretariat’s steps to forge
an active peacebuilding partnership with the World
Bank. However, we believe that regular consultations
among the World Bank, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations would enable
the United Nations to fine-tune the strategies for postconflict States.
Peacebuilding is by its very nature more a
civilian than a military exercise. Therefore, it is
essential, as underscored by the Secretary-General in
his report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (S/2010/386), to create necessary civilian
capacity in specialized and specific areas such as
mediation and justice and security sector reform.
In addition, peacebuilding will be effective only
if women are actively and effectively involved in their
societies. In this regard, we support the seven
commitments of the action plan proposed in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/466). We believe,
furthermore, that greater involvement by women in
political life, the mediation process and the planning of
sensitive activities would promote lasting peace. We
are convinced that the new gender entity, led by
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, will also make a substantial
and valuable contribution to this goal.
We can never say it too often: The challenges
related to peacebuilding are insignificant when
compared to the costs of conflict and cannot be met
without the political, moral and financial support of
States, in particular that of neighbouring States, which
must, first and foremost, abide by the requirements of
good-neighbourliness and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, a prerequisite for the promotion of friendly
relations, peacemaking, peacebuilding and the
establishment of regional security.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.

10-57830

Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the floor to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.
The Secretary-General’s progress report on
peacebuilding (S/2010/386) and his report on women’s
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) show the
important steps which have been taken to improve the
international community’s response in post-conflict
situations in order to achieve enduring peace. We are
here today to consider how to pursue further progress.
Predictable and timely funding aligned with
national peacebuilding priorities, swift deployment of
high-quality civilian experts to help build national
capacity and strong partnerships with international
financial institutions and regional players represent
some of the areas where much more remains to be
done.
The United Nations cannot achieve these goals in
isolation. The European Union is more than ready to
lend its assistance and work hand in hand with the
United Nations system. The deployment of
international civilian expertise is one of the areas
where the European Union is already strongly
involved. Over the past 10 years, civilian aspects of
European security and defence policy and crisis
management have seen exponential growth. The
European Union now has nine civilian missions with
around 2,000 seconded personnel currently deployed in
eight different theatres of operations. We look forward
to the outcome of the review of international civilian
capacities early next year and, in particular, to seeing
how we can broaden and deepen the pool of experts
involving the global South.
In a similar way, common assessments, planning
and strategies are also of paramount importance. Since
early 2007, the European Commission, the United
Nations and the World Bank have worked together in
setting up a platform for cooperation on post-crisis
needs assessments for natural disasters and conflict
scenarios. This tripartite partnership has played a key
role in recent difficult scenarios, such as those in Haiti
and Pakistan.

29

S/PV.6396

The European Union warmly welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466). As we mark this month
the tenth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), we need to redouble efforts to increase
women’s participation at all stages and all levels of
peace processes and peacebuilding efforts. The three
pillars of lasting peace — economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy — cannot be
achieved without the active engagement of women.
According to United Nations figures, nevertheless,
women accounted for less than 6 per cent of formal
peace negotiators. The action plan presented in the
Secretary-General’s report offers useful and practical
suggestions on how to address the present challenges,
and we look forward to these being taken forward in an
appropriate manner.
The European Union has developed a
comprehensive strategy to implement Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), and the European Union
Council adopted in July this year indicators to measure
progress in achieving our commitments. The
comprehensive strategy is complemented by the action
plan to promote gender equality in development
cooperation, which, inter alia, commits the European
Union to promoting capacity-building in fragile States
for the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
Let me turn now to the final step of the 2010
review of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). From
the outset, the European Union has been a strong
supporter of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and has worked tirelessly within the
country-specific configurations. During the past
months, the European Union has also been strongly
committed to making the 2010 PBC review a success.
The European Union would like to commend the
extraordinary work done by the three co-facilitators,
and we look forward to the adoption of an appropriate
resolution at a later date.
The most recent inclusion of Liberia on the
PBC’s agenda, with a sizeable peacekeeping mission in
the country, is a good opportunity to implement several
of the recommendations contained in the report
(S/2010/393, annex). It is also a good case to prove the
PBC’s added value by fostering earlier linkages and
coherence between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities. In this regard, we welcome the Council’s
resolve to enhance interaction with the PBC and to

30

make greater use of its advisory role, as reaffirmed in
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today.
The European Union also firmly believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role in
helping to champion the two reports brought to our
attention today and, in doing so, to enhance the
effectiveness of United Nation’s peacebuilding efforts.
In conclusion, the latest reports of the SecretaryGeneral, on peacebuilding and on the participation of
women in peacebuilding, as well as the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, have all generated
renewed political momentum to collectively engage in
improving assistance to countries emerging from
conflict.
Our duty now is to make a difference on the
ground. The European Union is ready to assume its
responsibilities and to assist the United Nations in
these tasks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Cervenka (Czech Republic): My delegation
fully associates itself with the statement just delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having organized this important
debate. We highly appreciate the efforts of your
country to promote the post-conflict peacebuilding.
The July 2009 ministerial debate held on your initiative
(see S/PV.6165) and today’s follow-up constitute the
best proof of Uganda’s commitment to peacebuilding.
Let me take this opportunity to stress that the
Czech Republic fully shares your appreciation of the
importance of the early post-conflict peacebuilding.
Experience over the past decade clearly shows that
United Nations peacekeeping operations alone are not
sufficient for breaking the vicious circle of countries
relapsing into new conflicts. Peacekeeping must be
accompanied by peacebuilding efforts from the early
stages of the deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers. The character of recent conflicts has
changed, and the United Nations has to adapt
accordingly. The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and his July progress report (S/2010/386)
clearly demonstrate the general acknowledgment of
this fact.

10-57830

S/PV.6396

The Czech Republic devotes great attention to the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), a body
within the United Nations system which helps
countries with their peacebuilding efforts. This year’s
PBC review process gave us an opportunity to take
stock of achieved results and to formulate
recommendations for the improvement of the
Commission’s future work.
We welcome the fact that during the four years of
its existence the Peacebuilding Commission has
established very fruitful working relations with the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. But there is still room for improvement.
Looking at the PBC working methods laid down in the
founding resolutions, we can see that the Commission
has not yet started to formulate the exit criteria for
disengagements.
Also, cooperation with the Security Council
could be further developed. According to its mandate,
the PBC should advise the Security Council not only
on the countries on its agenda, but also on those in the
process of becoming a subject of a future peacekeeping
operation, as well as those finding themselves in the
phase of an operation withdrawal.
In that vein, we welcome the decision to include
Liberia in the PBC’s agenda. For the first time, a
country where a robust peacekeeping operation is still
deployed has been placed on the agenda. That will
create new challenges for the PBC and new experience
will be gained.
Everything is seen as a priority in a country that
is emerging from a conflict. Helping such a country in
its vast peacebuilding efforts requires the availability
of a broad range of experts from different fields,
covering areas from security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
restoration of core Government functions and the
building of national administration, education and
health to the revitalization of the economy. In those
circumstances, it is impossible to provide the required
expertise without civilian capacity. We must therefore
improve the process of identifying, deploying and
employing civilian experts. Close cooperation with
non-governmental organizations is indispensable.
In welcoming the second report of the SecretaryGeneral before us today, that is, women’s participation
in peacebuilding, my delegation would like to
underline the attention given to the role of women in

10-57830

peacebuilding. Women represent more than half of the
active population and bear an important part of the
peacebuilding
activities.
Without
the
active
participation of women, it would not be possible to
succeed in peacebuilding efforts, as many delegations
have outlined. We therefore support the seven-point
action plan contained in the Secretary-General’s report.
In closing, I would like to stress the importance
of ensuring that all actors involved in peacekeeping,
including all parts of the United Nations system,
financial institutions, regional and subregional
organizations and donors, forge close cooperation. We
are convinced that the United Nations should play a
leading role in that process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to join
others in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
thank you for organizing this important debate and the
Secretary-General for his reports on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
We also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Kimoon, and the Chairperson of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Wittig, for their briefings. This debate
comes at a critical time for peacebuilding, as evidenced
by the centre stage that peacebuilding has taken in
international discourse, including the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2010/393, annex).
Despite the multiplicity of peacebuilding efforts
by the United Nations and other role players, it would
seem that, as shown by the Secretary-General in his
report, we are making good progress. But there is still
much work that needs to be done. Countries emerging
from conflict face a multitude of challenges and need
international assistance. However, such countries
should be given space to identify priorities that could
anchor peace and show dividends. In short, national
ownership should remain the foundation upon which
all peacebuilding endeavours are predicated.
The Secretary-General’s report reveals that some
ground has been covered in the areas of leadership and
accountability as they relate to post-conflict
peacebuilding. We are pleased to note progress in the
efforts to bridge leadership gaps in field missions,

31

S/PV.6396

especially in Haiti, Somalia, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire and
Afghanistan.

generated considerable political momentum, which
must be maintained and sustained.

Development cannot take place without peace
and vice versa. They are mutually reinforcing and
should be pursued simultaneously. In that regard, we
believe that integrated strategic frameworks should be
holistic, coherent and, most important, organic to the
context in which they are to be applied.

We welcome the progress made by the PBC in
strengthening its partnership with international
financial institutions and regional organizations, in
particular its efforts to institutionalize its relationship
with the African Union. The United Nations will stand
to benefit from closer interaction with regional
organizations, such as the African Union, with regard
to preventive, peacemaking and peacebuilding
activities. In fact, it is an established view that
countries that are closer to the countries emerging from
conflict have better knowledge of the situation in those
countries.

South Africa strongly supports the call for greater
collaboration, coordination and interaction among the
various role players, such as international financial
institutions, the private sector, local communities,
regional organizations, the United Nations, donors and
national authorities, in addressing national priorities in
post-conflict situations. In that regard, the development
of civilian capacities should play a major role in
supporting and developing critical areas for postconflict peace consolidation, such as strengthening the
rule of law and security sector reform. We call on the
donor community to align their funding and
programmes with the economic and social recovery
programmes of the national Governments so as to
ensure sustainability and greater coordination and
effectiveness.
We continue to underscore the importance of
building local capacities and providing training in
order to enhance the capacities already existing at the
national level, as in most instances, they are ready,
available and willing to participate actively in the
reconstruction of their countries.
In that respect, timely and predictable financing
remains crucial in realizing the objectives of
peacebuilding. That will indeed require resources
beyond the funding capacity of the Peacebuilding
Fund. The United Nations must therefore look at
innovative ways of funding peacebuilding programmes
and activities. We should continue to explore assessed
contributions as a means of kick-starting peacebuilding
activities as missions transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding.
Additionally, in the light of the ongoing debate on
the nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
South Africa reiterates the view that peacebuilding
elements should be integrated into peacekeeping
mandates. We welcome the Council’s expressed
willingness “to make greater use of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s advisory role”, as stated in the draft
presidential statement before us. The PBC review has

32

My delegation has noted the report of the
Secretary-General on women’s participation in
peacebuilding. Women can play an important role as
agents of change, and South Africa has always viewed
the participation of women in post-conflict situations
as critical to the attainment of peace. To that end, the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which we are
about to commemorate later this month, was a response
to the need to fully involve women in promoting peace
and in playing a pivotal role in the post-conflict
reconstruction and development of their countries. We
remain convinced that women should be provided with
the necessary support to be able to play an effective
and visible role in providing leadership for
peacebuilding and full participation in the development
processes of their countries.
In conclusion, we welcome the adoption of the
draft
presidential
statement
on
post-conflict
peacebuilding and further emphasize that South Africa
remains committed to the United Nations efforts
towards sustainable peace. South Africa will continue
to work in unison with the international community in
its quest to prevent conflict where it has not yet
occurred, find lasting solutions where conflict still
persists, and consolidate peace where open conflict has
ceased.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan): I am privileged to make
this statement on behalf of my Permanent
Representative. Pakistan’s delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for arranging today’s debate
and to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We also thank the Secretary-

10-57830

S/PV.6396

General and Ambassador Peter Wittig of Germany for
their important briefings. We express our appreciation
of the Secretary-General’s reports under discussion
today (S/2010/386 and S/2010/466). The reports enrich
the evolving discourse on peacebuilding and ameliorate
our collective response to addressing the challenge of
peacebuilding.
The Secretary-General’s progress report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict is a
substantive addition to its prequel of July 2009
(S/2009/304). In the earlier report, the SecretaryGeneral outlined an agenda for coherent, efficient and
predictable responses to the peacebuilding needs of
countries emerging from conflict. The present report
notes the progress achieved in implementing that
agenda. In that context, we note the positive role
played by the Integration Steering Group, which
includes peace and security, humanitarian and
development actors across the United Nations. The
Group can enhance the Secretariat’s responsiveness to
peacebuilding needs.
Parallel improvement in cooperation between
Headquarters and the country team, along with
strengthening the office of the resident coordinator, are
also vital. At the same time, it would also be important
to clarify the linkages between peacebuilding and the
socio-economic development strategies put forth by the
United Nations Development Programme and other
multilateral donors.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the core
priority areas of peacebuilding are basic safety and
security, support to political processes, the provision of
basic services, restoring core Government functions
and economic revitalization. We believe that national
capacity development will remain a cornerstone of all
peacebuilding efforts. Security sector reforms, together
with strengthening national capacity to manage intercommunity conflicts, fill the gap in a country’s ability
to build sustainable peace. However, in order to
succeed, all peacebuilding initiatives must be peoplecentric in terms of the specific needs or circumstances
endemic in a post-conflict situation.
In the context of the human dimension of
peacebuilding, the Secretary-General’s report on
women and peacebuilding is both candid and objective.
The report puts forth a seven-point action plan that
factors the gender perspective into peacebuilding
endeavours.

10-57830

We believe that lasting peace after a conflict will
remain elusive without improving the conditions of
women and other vulnerable segments of society. For
long-term economic recovery and social cohesion,
women’s
access
to
health,
education
and
entrepreneurship is essential. Women’s participation in
mediation and the formulation of policy in various
peacebuilding efforts can be a force multiplier.
However, adherence to merit, cross-board institutional
contexts and strict professionalism should not be
compromised.
The challenge of peacebuilding is complicated by
the proven risk of the relapse into conflict. Such
challenges can be tackled by more coordinated
assessment and planning for peacebuilding and
peacekeeping activities, where both processes must be
explicitly defined in a complementary relationship.
That is especially important in view of the fact that
long-term peacebuilding objectives are now enshrined
in at least 10 out of 16 peacekeeping missions. This
overlap should not obviate the specificity of
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding
disciplines.
Peacebuilding and peacekeeping can work together
only through the dynamic interplay of the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, international financial institutions,
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the relevant
departments of the Secretariat.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), with its
unique composition and specific mandate, holds a
pivotal role in the peacebuilding architecture. The
achievements of the PBC in the first five years of its
existence should not be downplayed. The operation of
the PBC will improve as the global narrative on
peacebuilding further evolves and as our collective
response becomes more resource-rich. It is therefore
important not to tamper with the composition and
structure of the PBC. Any alteration in the composition
of the PBC, particularly with reference to the
representation of TCCs, should not be accepted, as it
would only weaken the institutional and other
important linkages between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that there
is no silver bullet that can precipitate conditions
conducive to peacebuilding. Such conditions —
namely, security and political stability — can be
sustained only if the aim of our collective

33

S/PV.6396

peacebuilding endeavour is to win peace, and not to
earn or impose it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Ms. Gendi (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the
sisterly country of Uganda for organizing this
important debate on peacebuilding in post-conflict
situations. I would also like to welcome the report
(S/2010/386) of the Secretary-General on United
Nations efforts in peacebuilding, including its
important recommendations and proposals.
The United Nations has in recent years developed
and improved its peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict
situations through an integrated system established by
the General Assembly for that purpose. In the
meantime, the international community has come to
realize the significance of the decision made at the
2005 World Summit to establish the Peacebuilding
Commission, which, through its achievements over the
five years of its operations, has contributed
significantly to peacebuilding, along with the efforts of
the Secretary-General to solicit international support.
In that connection, Egypt has supported United
Nations peacebuilding efforts through the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The activities of the Commission are becoming
increasingly important as a result of the expertise it has
acquired and the lessons it has learned over the years.
It also has a vital role to play in coordinating
international efforts to prevent post-conflict countries
from relapsing into conflict.
Peacebuilding has become a multidimensional
process, with varied priorities that complement each
other in order to reinforce stability, peace, security and
overall sustainable development. That requires
achieving balanced, simultaneous progress on all tracks
and priorities on a case-by-case basis. The maintenance
of international peace and security requires dual
emphasis on the military and social dimensions of
security sector reform and on ensuring the success of
disarmament and demobilization programmes for
former combatants through the establishment of a
development framework to deliver the basic security,
social and economic requirements essential to the
successful reintegration of ex-combatants into their
communities. It also requires the presence of many

34

factors for ensuring the sustainability of peace,
including a comprehensive national dialogue, social
justice, the impartiality and independence of the
judiciary and the rule of law, along with the launching
of a comprehensive process for economic and social
development.
Recently, certain voices have increasingly
advocated the need to start the processes of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding simultaneously. Egypt
believes that such views merit detailed and very careful
consideration. We recognize the importance of
strengthening, within a nationally owned framework,
the national capacities of Governments in post-conflict
countries, thereby laying the foundations for the launch
of a peacebuilding process that empowers a national
Government with the necessary prerequisites to assume
its responsibilities in the security and defence sectors
and launch an overall development process.
Similarly, due consideration must be given to the
overlap between the peacebuilding process and the
launch of a sustainable development framework in
post-conflict countries. Merely talking about efforts to
establish the foundations of good governance, the rule
of law and the application of the principles of
democracy and justice will not enable them to be
realized in communities plagued with poverty, disease,
hunger and an absence of decent standards of living, as
targeted in internationally agreed development goals.
It is thus of the utmost importance to launch a
peacebuilding process at the right time, to ensure the
successful establishment, during the early stages of
conflict resolution — which may coincide with
peacekeeping operations — of the central political,
economic and social pillars needed for comprehensive
development
strategies
supported
by
timely,
predictable and sustainable financial resources. It is
also essential to fully cooperate with national
stakeholders in creating an appropriate environment
and incentives that will help start a comprehensive
peacebuilding process within the country in question,
and in this way creating the conditions necessary for a
peacekeeping operation to draw down.
In this context, we look forward to the
completion of the international civilian capacity
review, which should take into account the need to
provide the necessary funding for the recruitment of
international civilian officials without jeopardizing
existing
financial
resources
earmarked
for

10-57830

S/PV.6396

peacebuilding operations. It should also take account
of the specific needs and characteristics of the States
and communities where such personnel will be
deployed to back up efforts to build institutional and
human resources capacity. The review should also take
into account the need to further develop cooperation
frameworks between United Nations entities, regional
and subregional organizations and institutions in
countries of the South that have accumulated needed
peacebuilding expertise, either within the country
concerned or within a specific region, in order to
promote South-South and triangular cooperation in this
area.
Furthermore, the success of any peacebuilding
process also rests on its ability to ensure gender
equality and the empowerment of women in the socioeconomic and political spheres. It is important for the
General Assembly and the Security Council to study
and
evaluate
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2010/466)
on
women’s
participation
in
peacebuilding, and the seven commitments underlying
the proposed action plan. We should work to provide
expertise to the countries of the South, with a view to
maximizing the use of relevant human and institutional
capacities to ensure that the action plan is implemented
and fully promoted by the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN
Women), recently established by the General
Assembly.
In this respect, the capacity of the Peacebuilding
Commission must be strengthened so that it can carry
out its mission ably and effectively. We are confident
that this can be achieved through consideration by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council of the means for
implementing the recommendations and proposals
contained in the report of the co-facilitators of the
Commission review process, in coordination with top
contributors of troops and financial resources.
Successful peacebuilding requires the speedy
establishment of a monitoring and follow-up
mechanism to ensure that national and international
players meet their financial commitments, which is
needed to realize peacebuilding priorities and to ensure
consistent priorities among international funding
mechanisms — first and foremost, ensuring that the
work of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is aligned with
the national peacebuilding priorities of the countries
involved. We also need innovative financial methods to

10-57830

strengthen the resources of these mechanisms, in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund. In this regard, Egypt
suggested during the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly the holding of an annual donors
conference for the Peacebuilding Fund, similar to the
annual donors conference for the Central Emergency
Response Fund. This is aimed at ensuring increased
funding for future peacebuilding activities. We hope
that this proposal will enjoy the full support of the
general membership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Rose (Australia): There has been much
discussion about the importance of peacebuilding in
different forums throughout the course of this year.
Member States have been engaged in the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and we commend Ireland,
Mexico and South Africa on their leadership of our
efforts in that regard. The Peacebuilding Commission
has been actively engaged not only in consideration of
the peacebuilding challenges in the countries on its
agenda but also of broader, cross-cutting questions,
including its relationship with the international
financial institutions and regional organizations.
The g7+ group of fragile States and the
International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding have been active, including in the margins of
last month’s General Assembly summit on the
Millennium
Development
Goals
(MDGs),
in
highlighting the negative impact that conflict, fragility
and armed violence have on the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals — a point we expect
to be reiterated with the release of the World Bank’s
World Development Report in 2011.
Importantly, the Security Council has also been
actively considering these issues, with its consideration
of transition and exit strategies from peacekeeping
operations in February (see S/PV.6270); the debate
convened by Japan on post-conflict peacebuilding in
April (see S/PV.6299); and most recently, in a more
holistic fashion, through the summit convened by the
Turkish presidency last month (see S/PV.6389).
Today’s debate is a timely continuation of those
discussions. It brings together important strands of
work, which, collectively, should put the United
Nations in a better place to address the needs of
conflict-affected communities.

35

S/PV.6396

The first of these strands is the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386). We welcome the
progress that has been made in implementing the
ambitious agenda for action set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s 2009 report (S/2009/304), and we appreciate
the honesty in this year’s report in acknowledging that
there remain areas in which further work needs to be
done.
We urge the continuation of this work as a matter
of priority, especially in relation to clarifying the roles
and responsibilities of relevant actors in relation to
security sector reform and the rule of law, and in
strengthening the relationship with the World Bank.
The report’s central message, as we read it, is that
peacebuilding is a collective effort that requires a
coherent, consistent and integrated approach not only
from the United Nations, but from the broader
international community. This is a message we
endorse.
The second strand of work under consideration
today is the recently released report of the SecretaryGeneral on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). Not only must women’s rights be
protected in conflict-related situations; women must
also be able to fully and effectively participate in all
aspects of conflict prevention, resolution and
peacebuilding activities if we are to build a durable
peace. We welcome the detailed action plan set out in
the Secretary-General’s report, which, if implemented,
will make a substantial contribution towards that end.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
discuss a related strand of work which is under
consideration by this Council, namely, the report of the
co-facilitators on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex). To
paraphrase the co-facilitators, the report proposes a
series of recommendations addressed to a range of
actors that, if implemented, would lead to a more
relevant, flexible, empowered and better understood
Peacebuilding Commission. Such an outcome is in the
interests of all Member States.
Of particular interest to the work of the Council,
the report notes, unsurprisingly, that peacebuilding
needs to be considered at the inception of a
peacekeeping mission. This point has been repeatedly
made by the Council, most recently at the end of its
summit-level meeting in September (see SPV/6389).

36

This demands a multitude of voices — political,
humanitarian, development and security — in the
mission mandating and review processes. A closer and
more organic relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission throughout
the Council’s consideration of a situation could provide
a forum within which these voices could be heard. It
could also help to affect the mind-shift that is called
for in the report, away from the current, predominately
peacekeeping one. Peacekeeping should be seen as a
part of a broader peacebuilding and stabilization effort
rather than as an end in itself.
These three reports demand our attention.
Together with the eagerly anticipated report on the
review of civilian capacities, they have the potential to
transform the way in which the United Nations
conducts peace operations. The Council is to be
commended for placing a spotlight on this issue and for
driving many of these processes forward. It is equally
beholden now on the Council to sustain its focus on
these issues in order to ensure that the good ideas
reflected in these reports are translated into action.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
I would like to begin by thanking the Ugandan
presidency and the Council for taking these issues into
consideration together and for the briefings we have
heard this morning. This gives the Council an excellent
opportunity to discuss peacebuilding comprehensively.
In his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386), the SecretaryGeneral outlines ambitious but vital goals for the
United Nations in becoming more effective in its
support for post-conflict countries. We welcome his
progress report, and the steps taken so far in its
implementation. We also congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on having delivered a strategic action plan on
the participation of women in peacebuilding. The
Nordic
countries
fully
support
its
clear
recommendations and comprehensive approach, and
stand ready to do their part in fulfilling these measures.
The Nordic countries believe that the following
recommendations deserve particular attention: first,
inclusive participation as a key to legitimate and

10-57830

S/PV.6396

sustainable peace; secondly, adequate and timely
financing of the post-conflict needs of men and women
alike; and thirdly, improving the response of the system
as a whole in the immediate aftermath of a conflict.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
rebuilding after a conflict offers an opportunity to
create a virtuous cycle, starting from more inclusive
peace processes. The report also draws an important
link between women’s participation and the wider
question of gender equality. Women need to be
included in all phases of peace processes and in postconflict governance institutions. Outside actors cannot
dictate the composition of the negotiating delegations,
but there is a lot that can be done. Peace mediators and
their supporting teams can ensure that sufficient gender
expertise is provided to the parties; they can also
organize parallel consultations with women’s groups if
they do not have a seat at the table.
Special measures might also be needed to support
women’s representation in the governance institutions
that emerge after a conflict. The United Nations often
acts as the adviser in crucial decisions, such as the
composition of constituent assemblies or the choice of
electoral system, including possibilities for quotas or
preferential treatment. We believe that such measures
can be effective and justified in ensuring more
legitimate State institutions, thus leading to a more
durable peace.
Timely, flexible and predictable funding is
necessary to successful post-conflict State-building.
Steps have been taken during the past 12 months to
shape the Peacebuilding Fund based on the new terms
of reference. Considerable work has also been
undertaken in the context of the International Network
on Conflict and Fragility of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development. The success
of this challenging work, however, will largely depend
on the cooperation of donors, partner countries, the
United Nations and other international organizations
and funds.
We congratulate the Secretary-General on
committing the United Nations system to ensuring that
at least 15 per cent of United Nations-managed funds
in support of peacebuilding are dedicated to projects
whose principal objective is to address women’s
specific needs, advance gender equality or empower
women. As donors, we are happy that the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is already employing a

10-57830

gender marker and that Bureau for Crisis Prevention
and Recovery of the United Nations Development
Programme is already exceeding the target of 15 per
cent. However, in all United Nations post-conflict
multi-donor trust funds, the proportion is far behind the
target. We encourage the United Nations to work
towards the target of 15 per cent.
A coherent early response requires clearly
defined roles and strong partnerships from the United
Nations and other international actors. A lot has been
achieved in the field of leadership and accountability
and in developing tools for integrated strategic
frameworks. Nevertheless, further efforts are needed,
especially regarding partnerships with international
financial institutions.
The ongoing review of civilian capacities is a key
component of reforming United Nations support to
countries emerging from conflict. We are encouraged
by the breadth and depth of the review, and look
forward to the upcoming report. Its recommendations
are needed to make sure that the international
community can deploy the right type of support and
expertise at the right time. The Nordic countries remain
committed to making the review a success.
The Secretary-General’s action plan on ensuring
the participation of women in peacebuilding offers a
good example of a system-wide strategy. We welcome
the establishment of UN Women and congratulate
Michelle Bachelet on her appointment as UnderSecretary-General and Executive Director. We pledge
our full support to Ms. Bachelet and hope that UN
Women will have a leading role in the area of women,
peace and security. The full collaboration of all
relevant United Nations actors — such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Development
Operations Coordination Office — will be fundamental
to ensuring the implementation of a system-wide
approach.
Finally, I would like to conclude by commending
the excellent work of the three facilitators of this year’s
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. The consultations showed that we may not
have come as far as we had hoped. Nevertheless, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the PBF and the
Peacebuilding Support Office have to some extent
helped to fill what the Secretary-General in 2005 called
a “gaping hole” in the United Nations machinery. We

37

S/PV.6396

welcome the facilitators’ report (S/2010/393, annex)
and look forward to seeing continued strong leadership
from the Secretary-General in taking the peacebuilding
reform processes forward.
Speaking here in the Security Council, the Nordic
countries would like to highlight the report’s
observations that there is potential to create a new
dynamic between a more forthcoming Security Council
and a better performing PBC. In particular, we support
the recommendations that the Council benefit from
PBC advice at an early stage in the framing of
peacekeeping mandates, when mandates are renewed,
and as drawdown approaches.
We look forward to discussing the report in more
detail at a future date and guarantee that the Nordic
countries will remain committed partners in making the
PBC and the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
a success.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bairagi (Nepal): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to you for organizing this timely meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General for presenting his
comprehensive report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and on
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
Building peace is far more than just making and
keeping the peace. It is a multifaceted and long-term
task that requires national commitment, ownership and
coordinated, coherent and integrated international
support. Building national capacity to take charge of
governance and development activities is fundamental
to the peacebuilding task. Peacebuilding interposes
itself between security and development, and it takes
the two aspects together to ensure the sustainability of
peace in countries emerging from conflict. It is
therefore important that we look at both aspects clearly
and coherently.
A one-size-fits-all approach does not work in
peacebuilding. The international community has to
look into the socio-cultural, economic and political
aspects with deep insight in order to ensure the success
of the mission.

38

Continued political dialogues among stakeholders,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reforms, legislative reform and
institution-building for governance are part of the
transformation process.
The working group on lessons learned of the
Peacebuilding Commission has come out with a
recommendation that the implementation of quickimpact projects is critically important. This is
necessary to deliver something concrete for conflictstricken people in the form of peace dividends.
Unemployed youth in the immediate aftermath of
conflict are a great source of trouble and violence.
Youth employment, income-generating rural work and
essential services must receive the highest priority.
This will greatly contribute to creating an environment
for sustained peace and economic growth.
The efforts of the national and international
community in the early post-conflict period should
ensure predictable support in the core areas of
peacebuilding, namely, basic safety and security,
support to the political process, the provision of basic
services, restoring core government functions and
economic revitalization. A fair balance between them is
necessary to quickly stabilize the situation.
The United Nations is not a lone player in the
field of peacebuilding. International financial
institutions, particularly the World Bank, regional
organizations and civil society organizations have
important roles to play on their respective fields. To
strengthen the coordination between the United
Nations and the World Bank, my delegation supports
the call for creating a mechanism for regular,
headquarters-level consultations on crisis and postcrisis countries of common concern on the basis of the
2008 Partnership Framework Agreement.
Women should not be on the receiving end of the
pains of conflict, with all the psycho-social trauma and
stigmatization that entails. They are peacemakers and
they are the very foundation of social cohesion and the
long-term sustainability of peace. They are an inherent
part of the reconstruction and rebuilding of any
country. The adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) have not only drawn the attention of all
Member States to act concertedly for protecting women
and children from violence during conflicts, but also
emphasized the role of women as peacemakers and
peacebuilders.

10-57830

S/PV.6396

The report of the Secretary-General rightly
identified women’s role as partners in shoring up the
three pillars of lasting peace: economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy. We support a greater
role for women in peacebuilding, including the
promotion of gender equality within the work of the
United Nations. The legal provision for ensuring
women’s representation in political bodies, gender
mainstreaming, empowerment, affirmative action and
targeted programmes are some of the essential
measures to bring women to the forefront of every
walk of life.
The 2010 review process of the Peacebuilding
Commission has provided an excellent opportunity to
engage all Member States and other interested
stakeholders in seriously taking stock of the
achievements and constraints of the United Nations
involvement in peacebuilding. The time has come to
redouble our efforts to make the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture more effective and efficient
in order to meet the aspirations of conflict-stricken
people for peace, stability and sustained economic
growth. They need constant attention here and an
enhanced level of support to stabilize the situation and
make peace sustainable.
We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
needs to be fully consulted by the Security Council
whenever the country in question is discussed here. As
the Peacebuilding Commission’s co-parents, we have
also asked for stronger coordination with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
Similarly, we call for the integration of peacebuilding
work in peacekeeping operations early on, so that early
efforts at peacebuilding-related work will help stabilize
the situation sooner rather than later.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this debate on the
Secretary-General’s progress report on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386)
and his report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466). We also thank the
Secretary-General for his statement this morning and
the valuable statement deliver by the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Wittig.

10-57830

This debate is especially timely, in part because
of the review of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
is expected to conclude shortly after the excellent work
by the facilitators appointed by this Council and by the
President of the General Assembly. In addition, this is
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which lays the basis for the SecretaryGeneral’s report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding.
I would like to highlight the Secretary-General’s
report on women’s participation in peacebuilding and
his seven-point plan, which places women on truly
equal footing with men and emphasizes their full
participation in the peacebuilding process from the
outset. As stated in the report, women’s participation is
crucial in shoring up the three pillars of lasting peace:
economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Coordinated work between the PBC and
UN Women seems to us to be essential.
As the Secretary-General has said, the
peacebuilding process is an opportunity to better
rebuild a country in all its aspects, with one of the most
important aspects being the status of women, their
legal position, and access to jobs and to justice, among
others. This last aspect — access to justice — is of
crucial importance, since women are among the main
victims of conflicts. Their access to justice is crucial,
since it will enhance their confidence in the State and
in the country’s political processes.
Chile supports the fact that the proposed sevenpoint peacebuilding plan embodies a gender approach.
In order for it to succeed, there must be proper
coordination among the various United Nations
agencies and coordination between them and other
external partners, in particular international financial
institutions, that participate in the peacebuilding
process. Particular attention should be paid to ensuring
the presence of women in leadership positions either
by direct appointment or by popular election.
Lastly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
proposal of specific measures to ensure that the
recommendations contained in the report are
implemented on the ground through the inclusion of
women in development, infrastructure, employment,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.
With respect to the progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,

39

S/PV.6396

Chile welcomes the progress made since the
submission of the 2009 report (S/2009/304). Chile
agrees with the Secretary-General that, although the
peacebuilding process is a national challenge and
responsibility, the international community and the
United Nations have a major role to play in supporting
the national agenda. This is proof not only of solidarity
but also of the need for mutual support created by the
global village.

Mrs. Chaimongkol (Thailand): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for having organized this timely
debate. Thailand would like to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his excellent reports on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
The Thai delegation would also like to align itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The progress noted by the Secretary-General in
his report in the areas of effective leadership,
coordination and accountability is important, as is the
United Nations experience in Haiti through its
Stabilization Mission, in which Chile participates.

On this occasion, Thailand would like to
emphasize a few aspects of peacebuilding that we
believe to be crucial to its success and conducive to
women’s participation in the process.

Chile welcomes the establishment of the
comprehensive Integration Steering Group to support
field missions with a holistic approach. It also
underscores the importance of coordination with
regional organizations, which we view as fundamental
and which allows for greater efficiency in the use of
international resources. I also underscore the emphasis
placed on national capacity-building in post-conflict
States. This is crucial to establishing national
leadership and strengthening democratic institutions
and socio-economic development.
With regard to the international review of civilian
capacity currently under way, based on the potential
deployment of teams of international experts, Chile
looks forward to the publication of the report and
emphasizes that it has been an important aspect of its
participation as a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We trust that there Member States will
participate broadly in these teams.
Here, I should like to emphasize the importance
of regional and South-South cooperation. However, we
often encounter difficulties in financing such
cooperation in its entirety. To that end, the participation
of developed countries is essential, and Chile is
therefore in favour of triangular cooperation.
Lastly, Chile shares the concerns of the
Secretary-General with regard to adequate financing
for the Peacebuilding Fund, especially in times that are
difficult for us all. In this connection, Chile reaffirms
its commitment to peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.

40

While post-conflict societies, at least initially,
may require and rely on assistance from the
international community, fostering national ownership
is of paramount importance to the success of
peacebuilding. Institutions of governance and
operational mechanisms must be developed not only to
conform to international standards, but also to reflect
local needs and conditions. Moreover, national
capacity must be developed in the early stages to
ensure prosperity and the sustainability of peace and
security.
If peace and security are to be sustainable, it is
necessary to address the root causes of conflict. Often,
this means creating a new sense of shared purpose and
common values for post-conflict societies. This is a
task best left to the national leadership, but should be
encouraged where possible by the international
community.
Predictable, timely and sufficient national and
international support is also essential to the success of
the peacebuilding process. In this connection, Thailand
welcomes the ongoing international review of civilian
capacity. The review should contribute considerably to
narrowing the serious gap in national and international
capacities, and thus to ensuring a smooth transition
from conflict to peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. Thailand also
appreciates the Secretary-General’s efforts to
strengthen civilian capacities in the global South and
among women.
Thailand
firmly
believes
that
women’s
participation in all aspects of peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development will
contribute significantly to long-term and sustainable
peace and security in post-conflict societies. Since it is

10-57830

S/PV.6396

mostly men who participate in conflict, it is important
to encourage the role of women in order to help
stabilize post-conflict environments and restore the
fabric of society. In this regard, Thailand takes note
with appreciation of the Secretary-General’s action
plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding as a concrete
step to women’s empowerment in post-conflict
societies.
Peacebuilding is a complex and multifaceted task.
As we approach the end of our period of membership
of the Peacebuilding Commission Organizational
Committee, Thailand hopes that we have contributed in
some small way to the work of the Commission, and
that it will lead towards a more efficient, flexible and
comprehensive approach to peacebuilding challenges
in post-conflict situations around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union, which we
strongly support. However, in the light of the particular
importance of this timely and exceptionally relevant
debate, allow me to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.
The contemporary world is increasingly faced
with a rapidly changing international environment that
constantly adds new challenges to the international
peace and security agenda. In that context,
peacebuilding, as an effort to strengthen and
consolidate peace in countries immediately after they
emerge from conflict, represents an important tool at
the disposal of the United Nations to confront those
challenges and, at the same time, one of its core
functions. It is obvious, and not only from this debate,
that broad cross-regional support for stronger
peacebuilding is growing, encompassing not only
Governments,
but
also
many
international
organizations, as well as civil society.
We are grateful for the Secretary-General’s
detailed overview of the progress achieved in the
implementation of his agenda for action set out in the
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
the conflict he issued a year ago (S/2009/304). In
particular, we find valuable the many diverse examples
from the field used to further clarify and support the
report. Equally, we appreciate the Secretary-General’s
report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466) and the strategic, seven-point action plan

10-57830

introducing necessary practical suggestions for
women’s more active engagement in peacebuilding
processes, which we wholeheartedly support.
At the same time, Croatia welcomes the excellent
report on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex),
presented by the three co-facilitators. The report adds
substantially to our comprehension of the complex
issue of peacebuilding and further confirms our
perception that urgent action in this field is necessary.
On that basis, Croatia strongly supports further
strengthening peacebuilding operations through further
implementation of the Secretary-General’s ambitious
agenda for action and careful consideration of the
requests, proposals and recommendations contained in
his recent reports. Simultaneously, we call for
appropriate consideration and adequate implementation
of the many valuable recommendations contained in
the report of the three co-facilitators (S/2010/393,
annex). We believe that the time for a new balance
within the United Nations peace architecture has
definitely arrived.
If I were to identify just two of the most
important features that we perceive as imperative
preconditions for any successful peacebuilding
exercise, they would certainly be, first, national
ownership and, secondly, predictable and sustainable
multidimensional
action
by
the
international
community,
encompassing
imperative
regional
considerations.
We strongly believe that peacebuilding should be
built on clearly established national priorities, but,
equally, that it should lead to full reconstruction and
further improvement of national institutions, capacities
and capabilities. In that context, we particularly
welcome ongoing efforts within the United Nations to
further strengthen and mainstream national capacities,
including conflict management capacities.
Peacebuilding is a complex long-term effort that
unites development, peace and security and human
rights, reflecting their interlinked and mutually
reinforcing nature. As has been said many times
before, there can be no development without genuine
security and vice versa, or, as we are reminded in the
co-facilitators’ report, “conflict remains the single most
important impediment to development” (S/2010/393,
annex, para. 3). Likewise, in harsh, insecure and brutal
conditions in the underdeveloped world there can be no

41

S/PV.6396

real respect for or protection of human rights and
human dignity.
Bearing all this in mind, it is obvious that only
coordinated,
coherent,
sustainable,
mutually
accountable national and international efforts,
adequately encompassing security, human rights and
development, will bear fruit. In that regard, Croatia
particularly welcomes the new United Nations systemwide guidelines for the integrated missions planning
process, which set standards for field-based integrated
strategies and planning. We also welcome the postconflict needs assessment adopted by United Nations
Development Group, the World Bank and the European
Union.
Starting from the premise that building local
capacity is the ultimate priority of peacebuilding, we
strongly support the establishment of the Senior
Advisory Group tasked to undertake a review of
international civilian capacity in order to strengthen the
availability,
deployability,
coherence
and
appropriateness of civilian capacities based on an
assessment of existing capacities.
The interdependence of today’s world — in
which, on the one hand, national crises easily evolve
into global problems and in which, on the other, global
problems inevitably prowl within national borders —
requires enhanced sensitivity to regional considerations
and their successful integration into overall
peacebuilding efforts. In that context, Croatia considers
the further improvement and deepening of cooperation
between the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
and subregional organizations, as well as the
appropriate engagement of various United Nations
entities active in particular regions, to be crucially
important.
Croatia’s transition from recipient to donor
country has been fairly short and effective. Today we
are sharing our knowledge and experiences with
countries in the region, as well as with other countries
in crisis, where our post-conflict experience in nationbuilding is particularly relevant. Accordingly, Croatia

assists in the development of civil society,
reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction, as well
as in building functioning administrative capacities in
the social realm.
Finally, let me mention that as a co-founder of the
Peacebuilding Fund, Croatia fully recognizes the
critical role that timely and sustainable peacebuilding
funding plays as an early investment towards peace and
development, and in that regard strongly supports the
Fund’s new simpler structures and its efforts to
introduce predictable, flexible and sufficient funding
schemes through revisited terms of reference and
guidelines. In that context, we welcome the
strengthening of a strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the World Bank and expect with
special interest the World Bank Conflict, Security and
Development Report 2011.
Let me conclude by saying that Croatia —
working together with other Member States and the
United Nations as a whole, and acting with the same
enthusiasm and spirit that clearly accompanied our
ambitions some five years ago — stands ready to play
its due part in the revival of the peacebuilding
architecture and the thorough implementation of its
core functions.
The President: The Council has before it the text
of a statement by the President on behalf of the
Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank
Council members for their valuable contributions to
this statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among the members of the Council, I shall
take it that the members of the Security Council agree
to the statement, which will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2010/20.
It is so decided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.55 p.m.

42

10-57830
