A/65/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records
:

Sixty-fifth session

78

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 15 March 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Earthquake and tsunami in Japan
The President (spoke in French): I should like,
on behalf of the General Assembly, to express our
sincere compassion and deep sympathy to the
Government and people of Japan, which were
profoundly affected last Friday by one of the gravest
natural disasters in the country’s history.
A month ago, the General Assembly held a
thematic debate on risk prevention. Since then,
reality — in the form of the earthquake in New
Zealand and now the disaster affecting Japan — has
reminded us of the importance of prevention and of the
difficulty of predicting every danger. Even Japan, one
of the best prepared countries, can be devastated.
We do not yet know the extent of the human
losses and material damage caused by the major
earthquake and the ensuing tsunami that struck Japan.
Nevertheless, we are all shocked and concerned,
because through Japan, the whole region and the entire
world are affected.
The international community must therefore show
solidarity and provide assistance to the Japanese people
and Government so as to help them to overcome this
very difficult ordeal as quickly as possible. Our efforts
should also extend to the other countries of the region
that were affected by the catastrophe.

now invite the Assembly to stand and observe a minute
of silence.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly concluded its
consideration of agenda item 27 at its 71st plenary
meeting, on 21 December 2010. In order to enable the
General Assembly to consider draft resolution
A/65/L.63, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 27.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 27?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): Representatives
will also recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on
17 September 2010, the General Assembly allocated
sub-item (b) of agenda item 27 to the Third Committee.
In order for the Assembly to proceed expeditiously on
this sub-item, may I take it that the Assembly agrees to
consider it directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.

In memory of the victims and as a sign of
solidarity with the people and Government of Japan, I
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-26321 (E)

*1126321*

A/65/PV.78

The President (spoke in French): May I further
take it that the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately
to the consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 27?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 27 (continued)
Social development
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
Draft resolution A/65/L.63
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Hungary, who wishes to speak
in explanation of position before the Assembly takes
action on the draft resolution.
Ms. Kovács (Hungary): I have the honour to
deliver this statement in explanation of position on
behalf of the European Union (EU).
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Norway; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.
Allow me to start by thanking Mr. Jean-Francis
Régis Zinsou, Ambassador of Benin, for his efforts in
facilitating the draft resolution entitled “Organization
of the High-level Meeting on Youth” (A/65/L.63).
The EU firmly believes that the United Nations
High-level Meeting should be a forum in which
adequate youth participation is guaranteed, including
non-governmental
organizations
and
youth-led
organizations. The EU appeals to Governments to
include in their delegations youth representatives who
are transparently selected and suitably entitled to
represent the young people of their countries.
In that regard, the European Union regrets that
agreed language in the Commission for Social
Development resolution entitled “Policies and
programmes involving youth”, adopted just three
weeks ago, could not be incorporated into today’s text.

2

The EU once again wishes to underline the
importance of a High-level Meeting that includes
rather than excludes youth representatives, whose
inputs are to be taken into consideration. Therefore, we
are convinced that young people should be given
adequate time and sufficient opportunities to speak and
to draw our attention to the concerns, problems and
challenges that they face. We should also be able to
discuss how to develop new opportunities for young
people. It is impossible to ignore, for example, the role
that new technologies can play in ensuring employment
and in fighting poverty and underdevelopment. The EU
was surprised that its proposal to reflect that element in
the theme for round table 2 was met with opposition.
Our position on this issue has been further
reinforced by the latest developments in North Africa
and the Middle East, which demonstrate that we
actually have to listen to the wishes and demands of
youth. In that context, we deem it essential that young
people be empowered and given the opportunity to
become active citizens who participate in decisionmaking, especially on those issues that concern them.
The European Union attaches great importance to
the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year
2000 and Beyond (resolution 50/81, annex) as the most
relevant United Nations document dealing with youth
issues. That document should guide us in our
discussions during the negotiations of the Meeting’s
outcome, as well as during the High-level Meeting
itself. We firmly believe that the World Programme of
Action for Youth should be fully implemented and
viewed as the main point of reference, not in the least
because it was adopted by the General Assembly by
consensus in 1995 and supplemented, also by
consensus, in 2007 (see resolution 62/126). We think
that creating a framework for our discussions,
comprising the World Programme of Action on Youth,
other
relevant
programmes
of
action
and
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals, would help us to
prioritize the various issues.
While the European Union did not wish to break
consensus on this important draft resolution, we regret
that the issues to which I have referred could not be
more clearly reflected in document A/65/L.63.
Before I conclude, allow me to draw the kind
attention of all representatives to our basic position.
The conference should be not only a meeting about

11-26321

A/65/PV.78

youth issues, but also a meeting with young people
and, above all, for them and for their future. We must
ensure that their voices are heard before, during and
after the conference. The EU will endeavour to
continue to work actively to promote such a process
and outcome and we encourage other delegations to do
likewise. It is easily said that young people are our
future; now, it is time to act upon that.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution A/65/L.63,
entitled “Organization of the High-level Meeting on
Youth”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.63?
Draft resolution A/65/L.63 was adopted (resolution
65/267).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to speakers who wish to explain their position on
the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the facilitator of the negotiating
process for having reached a hard-won consensus on
this resolution on the organization of the High-level
Meeting on Youth, which is of special importance
given the role played by young people in events of
recent weeks in several countries around the world.
Two representatives of the Swiss National Youth
Council figured in our delegation during the
negotiations.
Together
with
other
youth
representatives, they voiced their opinions on
modalities of organization of the High-level Meeting in
a letter sent to you, Mr. President, with a copy to the
facilitator of our negotiating process.
For Switzerland, it is therefore important that
youth representatives in the official delegations at the
High-level Meeting be included following a transparent
selection process, ensuring that they truly represent the
mass of young people in their countries without any
political
considerations.
Moreover,
the
free
participation of youth organizations, civil society
organizations,
including
non-governmental
organizations, and the private sector is vital if the
meeting is to have added value.
During the negotiations, we declared our clear
preference at the outset for the outcome of the
conference to be recorded in a summary by the

11-26321

President of the General Assembly. We accepted the
drafting of an outcome document of the Meeting on the
sole condition that it take into account the opinions of
youth organizations and agree with the World
Programme of Action for Youth and the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of vote.
I should like to express here my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Jean-Francis Régis Zinsou of Benin, who
so effectively and patiently conducted the discussions
and complex negotiations in the informal consultations
in order to bring them to a successful conclusion. I am
sure that members of the Assembly join me in
extending to him our sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 27.
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in French): I invite the
attention of the General Assembly to the draft decision
contained in document A/65/L.61, issued under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 74, “Oceans and the law of
the sea”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 74 at its
59th plenary meeting on 7 December 2010. In order to
enable the General Assembly to consider the draft
decision, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 74.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): May I further
take it that the Assembly agrees to proceed
immediately to the consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 74?
It was so decided.

3

A/65/PV.78

Agenda item 74 (continued)

Agenda item 113 (continued)

Oceans and the law of the sea

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments

(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/65/L.61)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take action on draft decision A/65/L.61.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/65/L.61?
Draft decision A/65/L.61 was adopted.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 74.
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has before it a report of the Fifth Committee
on sub-item (b) of agenda item 113, entitled
“Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions”,
contained
in
document
A/65/563/Add.1.
In order for the Assembly to consider the report
of the Fifth Committee, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 113.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): To enable the
General Assembly to take up expeditiously the report
of the Fifth Committee, may I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.

4

(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/65/563/Add.1)
The President (spoke in French): If there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Fifth Committee that is before it
today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): Before we
begin to take action on the recommendation contained
in the report of the Fifth Committee, I should like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take a decision in the same manner as was done in the
Fifth Committee.
The Fifth Committee recommends in paragraph 3
of its report that the General Assembly appoint
Mr. Patrick Haughey of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and Mr. Sun Xudong of
China as members of the Committee on Contributions
for a term of office beginning today, 15 March 2011,
and ending on 31 December 2011.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Patrick Haughey of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Mr. Sun
Xudong of China as members of the Committee on
Contributions for a term of office beginning on
15 March 2011 and ending on 31 December 2011?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

11-26321
