S/PV.7690

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7690th meeting

Wednesday, 11 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Selim/ Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Sugiyama
Mr. Merican
Mr. McCully
Mr. Churkin/ Mr. Musikhin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Ybáñez
Mr. Yelchenko/ Mr. Lisuchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism
Letter dated 4 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/416)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-13286 (E)
*1613286*

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Countering the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism
Letter dated 4 May 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/416)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Denmark, Djibouti, Georgia, Germany, Haiti, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Maldives, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, the
Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey and the United
Arab Emirates to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mohi El-Din
Afifi, Secretary-General of Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy; and Mr. Steven A. Crown, Vice-President
and Deputy General Counsel at Microsoft Corporation.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Secretary-General of the European External
Action Service of the European Union; His Excellency
Mr. Nakseu-Nguefang, Director of Political Affairs
of the International Organization of la Francophonie;
and His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations.
2/94

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

11/05/2016

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/416, which contains a letter dated
4 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Egyptian presidency for convening today’s open debate.
This is an opportunity to discuss how we can best
counter terrorist narratives and ideologies, as well as to
recall the fundamental interests and values connected
to that pursuit.
The Council is all too aware of the volatile mix of
protracted conflicts, terrorism and violent extremism
in today’s world. It has mourned fallen soldiers,
police and peacekeepers, as well as the tragically high
numbers of civilian victims of atrocities committed by
terrorists. It has used sanctions and other measures to
stop their activities. It has understood the serious threat
posed by terrorist groups, which control territories and
population centres and attempt to blur borders between
sovereign States.
We all know that terrorist groups are exploiting
religious beliefs in order to incite hatred and violence
and to cause division and polarization in our societies.
We see that happening all over the world today. They
blatantly challenge the values enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and our shared pursuit of peace, justice
and human dignity.
We must be aware that terrorist bombs are aimed
at devastating more than human lives. They target our
common values. They aim to spread fear. We therefore
have a responsibility to shield people from harm and
fear and to protect universal values from erosion. When
we fulfil this responsibility, we gain both a moral and
strategic advantage. Faith in fundamental human rights
and in the dignity and worth of the human person, and
the primacy of global solidarity represent the greatest
force in our hands to counter terrorist narratives
and ideologies.
There is around the world a great deal of legitimate
concern about young people falling prey to terrorist
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

narratives and ideologies. We know that youths
may be vulnerable to the lure of terrorists who offer
them a sense of belonging, a salary and a promise of
glory — even paradise. We all know that their promises
are patently false, but we also know that young people
are capable of discerning the truth and recognizing
siren songs. I believe, in fact, that the vast majority of
young people are naturally inclined towards building a
good life for themselves and others. I am confident that
they are eager to make contributions to peaceful and
thriving societies for all.
The Security Council recognized the value and role
of young people and young peacebuilders in its historic
resolution 2250 (2015) of December last year. That
resolution will, I am sure, turn out to be the equivalent
for young people of what resolution 1325 (2000) is for
women and security.
I dare say that if young people are considered good
enough to fight wars, they certainly deserve the chance
to make peace. I call on Council members and all
Member States to translate the resolution into practice.
We must do more than repeat general statements about
young people being the leaders of the future, as we
often say. We must invest in youth today with material
resources and meaningful political empowerment.
We must not only work for youth; we must work with
youth. Instead of viewing young people as part of the
problem, we must harness their immense potential to
forge solutions.
In today’s world, young people have superior
communications skills, extensive social media networks
and often more influential voices than their elders. We
need only check with our children and grandchildren.
If we are to counter terrorist narratives, we have to
motivate and mobilize this generation of youth — the
largest in history — to amplify our messages of common
humanity. Young people are thirsty for visionary ideas.
Good governance and respect for human rights and
the rule of law should therefore be central components
of any inspiring vision. When we give young people
avenues and arenas for engagement and action, they
will see hope and be ready to build peaceful societies
to the benefit of generations to come.
The Secretary-General has often stressed that
terrorism and violent extremism are not related to any
single ethnic group, nationality or religion. Terrorists
are united in their nihilistic and anti-humanistic beliefs.
We must respond by uniting as one human family that

S/PV.7690

defends our shared values and embraces diversity.
The United Nations is a wonderful platform for such
mobilization. The incitement and recruitment of
terrorists, as well as conditions conducive to terrorism,
have been addressed in several Security Council
resolutions, the General Assembly’s Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
The Secretary-General has called for a
comprehensive approach to respond to the complex
factors that drive people to violent extremism. It is
necessary to counter and refute false and nefarious
narratives. Such narratives must be replaced with
compelling alternative visions, backed by tangible
opportunities for meaningful and constructive
engagement, including jobs, as youth unemployment is
a scourge around the world.
When we are to address terrorist threats, security
and military responses remain important — let us state
that clearly — but they are not enough. The SecretaryGeneral strongly focuses on a preventive approach in
his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. We
need to spread positive messages and take pre-emptive
actions. Such messages and actions should address
conditions that are conducive to terrorism and
violent extremism.
We also need to listen carefully to affected
communities. We need to engage at the grass-roots
level. We need to partner with faith leaders, women
and young people. They are the ones on the front lines,
facing and standing up to violent extremists, and they
know best how to respond at the local and individual
levels. The Internet is a powerful tool that violent
extremists have used to spread their messages of hate.
We should encourage more study and research on how
violent extremists are using the Internet and social
media.
At the same time, it is important to uphold the
freedoms of speech, expression and assembly. Efforts
should be redoubled to protect pluralism and diversity,
including in the media. The protection of free media
can be a defence against terrorist narratives. There
must be no arbitrary or excessive punishment against
people who are simply expressing their opinions. Space
for civil society and non-governmental organizations to
operate freely is essential. And journalists and human
rights defenders deserve safety and support.

16-132863/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorists are aiming to create a climate of fear and
hysteria where human rights are suppressed. We must
answer by adamantly preserving our common values,
amplifying moderate voices and enabling individual
freedom. The fight against terrorism must not be
carried out in such a way that we infringe upon basic
freedoms. Violations of human rights in the name of
countering violent extremism will give terrorists their
best recruitment tools. Marginalizing or demonizing
certain groups, whoever they may be, fuel the usagainst-them menality, which is one of the gravest
threats in our world today.
In a deeper sense, the best narrative to counter
violent extremism may perhaps not be a narrative.
This whole discussion is not about a story; it is about
action to build peace, development and human rights. It
is about standing together in global solidarity against
forces that want to divide and scare us, which want us to
forget the beauty of diversity and the tremendous power
of fundamental and universal values and principles.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Afifi.
Mr. Afifi (spoke in Arabic): The world is today
experiencing disturbances and instability as a result of
the constant violence and the intolerance, extremism
and excess that have brought harm so many nations, in
particular in the Arab and Muslim worlds, where security
and stability are threatened and strife and killing have
become widespread. That has led to the destruction of
homes and infrastructure in acts of barbarity unseen in
history. This phenomenon has surpassed all religious
and moral limits and human traditions. It is extremely
painful that those crimes are being perpetrated in the
name of Islam. That has been exploited by the media
in the worst way possible to distort the image of Islam
and to present it to the world as if it were a barbaric
religion thirsty for the blood of the innocent. In reality
we do not need to defend or refute the fact that these
crimes have no relation whatever to religions or human
traditions.
The Koran states that God only sent Mohammed
the Prophet as a blessing unto all beings and unto the
world, which is much broader than the word “Muslims”.
In Islamic philosophy it is even broader than the world
of humans, to include the world of plants and animals,
as well as objects. The Koran includes a verse directed
at the Prophet Mohammed:
4/94

11/05/2016

“We sent thee not but as a mercy for all
creatures.” (The Holy Koran, XXI: 107)
Addressing all people, the Prophet Mohammed
stated that he was a gift of mercy from God. But he
was also merciful of animals, telling us that a woman
had entered the fires of hell because she had kept a cat
without feeding it or allowing it to eat from the land. He
also told us that a man had been forgiven and allowed
to enter paradise for giving water to a dog on a hot day.
Therefore, if Islam teaches mercy unto animals, then
mercy unto human beings is something that Islam of
course also calls for. The dignity of human beings in
Islam derives from their very humanity, regardless
of colour, religion or race. Islam views the world as
a single family with a global citizenship that enjoys
knowledge of one another and cooperation. God has
addressed humankind, stating:
“Oh, mankind! We created you from a single
(pair) of a male and a female and made you into
nations and tribes, that ye may know each other”
(ibid, XLIX:13).
The Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy has
worked to combat the ideology of these organizations
that practice violence and killing and threaten peace
in societies. It has demonstrated the relationship of
these groups to the Khawarij, who emerged in the early
history of Islam owing to a deviation in their theology,
which led to the takfiri ideology. While that group was
defeated in the past, the phenomenon has re-emerged
at the hands of young mean and women who are
not qualitied — by virtue of discipline, learning or
culture — to know Islam in its reality, except through
their excitement, passion and extreme reactions.
Accordingly, they fell victim to that ideology. As such,
their ideas are not based on genuine jurisprudence.
We have seen distorted ideologies and concepts that
run contrary to the religion spread through social
media, including the takfiri notion on governance and
the concepts of jihad, the caliphate, a Muslim State,
migration and the idea of a “home of war”.
Those themes are common to all terrorist
organizations like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), which have been based on the ideas of
Abi Allah Al-Maududi, Sayyid Qutb and other founders
of intolerant and extreme ideology that when combined
with violence becomes terrorism. However, extremism
exists not only in the area of intellectual discipline;
when it takes on violent behaviours to attack property
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and lives, they are then armed terrorist organizations
used to attack States and societies.
The Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy is
making strenuous efforts in the area of education in
order to highlight the real ideas and concepts of Islam.
That includes the many scholarships we provide for
students at our various institutes and colleges. There
are now 40,000 students at Al Azhar from 130 countries
throughout the world. As part of our global role to
spread Islam’s tolerant teachings, without excess or
extremism, Al Azhar is also providing training courses
for imams and preachers from various countries of
the world so as to provide a strong foundation for the
coexistence of Islam and to denounce extremism and
urge respect for national laws and religious pluralism.
At the regional level, Al Azhar is working with the
various factions in Syria, Iraq and to bring them together
to address the politicization of sectarian conflict and
reject the efforts of ISIL, which is exploiting sectarian
differences to gain ground.
Al Azhar is also working globally through the
Muslim Council of Elders, which is led by the Sheikh of
Al Azhar and includes members from different nations
of the Muslim world, to spread international peace. The
Council, in cooperation with Al Azhar, has launched
peace convoys to 15 nations throughout the world. Al
Azhar has also established a digital observatory to
monitor what ISIL publishes on social networks, where
we discuss extremist ideas and refute their fatwas, that
is, their religious rulings, in a number of languages,
including English, French, Italian, German, Spanish
and Chinese, in order to warn young men and women
about the danger of ISIL’s ideology and prevent them
from falling victim to that organization.
Al Azhar views the confrontation between ISIL
and other terrorist organizations in the world as a cause
that requires a number actions, the most important of
which are the following.
Due concern must be given to discussing extremist
ideas and refuting them. Young men and women
must be encouraged, through social networks and
international cooperation, to counteract the ability
of these organizations to exploit the virtual world to
market terrorism. Common human values must be
valued and emphasized. We must avoid relating the
conduct of terrorism to religion. We must uphold the
role of religious leaders and foster dialogue among
them. We must work to spread the concepts of the

S/PV.7690

peaceful coexistence among peoples. We must focus on
the role of young people, support them and integrate
them in the economy and politics of different societies
by offering them job opportunities and protecting them
from extremist ideologies. We must support women,
respect their capabilities and include them in all
efforts to achieve justice among peoples. We must not
discriminate and we must respect the particularities of
all societies. We must focus on education and develop
curriculums that promote peaceful coexistence and
respect for the other, for global citizenship and for the
plurality of religions and societies. We must engage
all leaders of the world in a genuine confrontation
of terrorism, which is now threatening international
peace and security and stability and whose threat is
rapidly growing. We hope for a world that enjoys peace,
stability and coexistence and respects humankind
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Afifi
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Crown.
Mr. Crown: Microsoft welcomes this opportunity
to contribute to this important discussion. I should say
that others, such as Mr. Afifi, academics, educators
and civil society organizations across the globe, are
more expert on the precise narratives and ideologies of
modern terrorist groups. I do not presume to know what
constitutes the most effective messaging to change
minds or to keep minds from being bent towards
terrorism. But I do understand deeply the challenge that
Internet companies face in dealing with the phenomenon
of terrorism, and I hope that my comments will help us
find a principled way forward.
As a representative from the Internet and
communications technology sector, the question I will
address is: “As understanding of effective countermessaging evolves, how can we best work together?”
For the industry, those of us in the Internet business,
the scale of the terrorist challenge is daunting. Drawing
just from public sources, we know that there are
tens of thousands of terrorist Internet accounts that
refuse to die. As one is taken down, another quickly
springs up in its place. Account names and identifiers
change. Content is edited. But terrorist propaganda and
communication continue.
Within l5 minutes of the Paris attacks of
13 November, there were 7,500 tweets. Within two
weeks, there were 1 million views of videos on the
Internet praising the attacks. Another company in our

16-132865/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

sector has noted that every day their 1.6 billion users
across the globe submit 1 million reports of objectionable
postings across all their content categories. The point is
that there is no single elegant solution. If there were,
industry would have adopted it. There is no silver bullet
that will stop terrorist use of the Internet. Microsoft,
like others in the industry — but I can only speak for
Microsoft — approaches the challenge of terrorism and
violent extremism on the Internet from the perspective
of a technology company with global reach, and with
aspirations that are just as ambitious.
Terrorist abuse of Internet platforms is a
complicated topic. I think it is important to ground
any discussion about the future work together and the
future of the global Internet in a clear understanding of
the past and the present.
One comment on the past: it is an obvious, but easily
overlooked, historical fact that what we know today
as the Internet was conceived in trust. Initial sharing
technologies assumed well-intentioned people working
proactively together for good ends. It evolved from
connections among research facilities. Of course, the
Internet, once released to the world, quickly attracted
bad actors. Any technology can be used either for good
or for evil. That was true of fire — think of arson — of
gunpowder and of the printing press. It is true also of
our information technology products and platforms.
The industry is built on the idea that by enabling
communication, we can unleash human potential.
Microsoft’s mission is to empower every person and
every organization on the planet to achieve more.
Nothing could be more in conflict with the aspirations
of our industry than the misuse of our technologies to
spread violence, to destroy and to kill.
As we look at the challenge today, where do we find
ourselves? I think it is important to understand that
when we talk about what companies can do and should
do, we need to keep in mind that there is no monolithic
information and communication technologies (ICT)
industry. If you consider the big players on the global
stage, actually we are a collection of companies who
offer different technologies and different platforms.
Microsoft services and Microsoft the company
are different from Google, which is different from
Facebook, which is different from Twitter. All of us
differ in significant ways. We compete fiercely — at
times incredibly fiercely — but we have come together
before when we have seen our platforms abused. Perhaps
6/94

11/05/2016

the best example of our joint work as an industry is
cooperation on a global scale to combat child sex abuse
material.
As we think about addressing the challenge of
terrorist abuse of our services, the Internet technology
industry is similarly united. We unanimously condemn
terrorism. To respond more effectively, we need to find
better paths forward, paths that all stakeholders can
walk together.
In today’s discussion, I especially want to
underscore the potential of public-private partnerships.
Public-private partnerships can, and should, be a part
of our global response to this challenge. Once one
recognizes that terrorist use of the Internet is a global
challenge, it becomes clear that this problem will not be
solved by Internet technology companies alone, or by
States, or by non-governmental organizations, acting
alone. We must work in a coordinated way.
That realization is what led to the formation last
month of a new multi-stakeholder effort, under the
umbrella of the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. Meeting in Geneva,
in partnership with ICT for Peace, which will serve
as a coordinating function, and a range of Internet
companies, Government actors, academics and civil
society organizations, we came together to build a new
level of understanding. Our focus will be to develop
creative, cooperative efforts to address the challenge of
terrorist use of the Internet.
Of course, any effective and trustworthy publicprivate partnership must be grounded in transparency.
We will, therefore, seek maximum transparency in that
effort, and reports on the subject should be appearing
in the coming year. I would, however, like to telegraph
a couple of things to watch for. We have to embrace
certain unfortunate truths. There is no universally
accepted definition of terrorism or extremism, neither
at the international level nor at the regional level. It is
true that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights provide international standards that point to
appropriate and lawful regulation of the expression
and communication of ideas. But the United Nations
itself has noted that those principles have never been
reduced to an internationally binding instrument that
sets forth definitive norms. That is no surprise, since
defining lines in the area are very hard to draw. But we
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

can broadly agree on especially harmful actors, and we
can focus attention in a principled way.
So the goal of public-private partnerships for
addressing the terrorist use of the Internet, including
through the creation and use of counter-narratives
or other positive speech, should not be a search for
a single right solution. The path to success will be
through dialogue and learning. I have colleagues in
the law field in more than 50 countries, and just last
week in Redmond, Washington, Microsoft’s corporate
headquarters, we held the annual summit of our
corporate external and legal affairs department. As
Microsoft and as an industry, we uniquely appreciate
that we need to be open to alternative views and
solutions that work differently across the globe.
As we explore alternatives, including the use of
counter-narratives, whatever form they might take,
we must anchor ourselves in the rule of law, including
international law. We must protect timeless values,
including the freedom of expression, which includes
the right both to seek and to receive information, and
the rights to privacy. Our activities in that realm must
be principled, but they must push beyond what we
are doing today. Already there are some interesting
proposals that the new working group under the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) will explore. They include simplified, perhaps
common, models and processes that can make it easier
for stakeholders, including Governments, to bring to
companies’ attention Internet content that, on its face,
violates companies’ terms of use. Companies have
established terms of use in order to moderate what
happens in the communities that they have built, and
there are opportunities for principled collaboration on
the use of the terms that we have provided. There are also
opportunities to improve efficiency and transparency
measures, so that Governments, under the rule of law,
can work more effectively with companies to pursue
criminal investigations, including investigations of
terrorists and violent extremists.
The work with CTED presents an important new
forum for sharing practices across the industry and
beyond. We will share experiences, research and ideas
aimed at improving the effectiveness of responses to
terrorism on the Internet, while advancing the rule
of law and protecting and respecting human rights. I
would like to underscore that last point. The rule of
law and the protection and respect for human rights are
critical for Microsoft. I know through my work with

S/PV.7690

colleagues across the industry that the rule of law and
the protection and respect for human rights are critical
for all of the major Internet companies. Any plan for
coordinated action must be based on that foundation.
We at Microsoft have published a global human
rights statement that sets forth our philosophy. We
believe that active engagement in the more than 100
countries where we do business is the right approach.
We were an early signatory to the United Nations
Global Compact and, across the planet, we are a strong
advocate for the United Nations Guiding Principles
on Business and Human Rights. We are a founding
member of the Global Network Initiative, and I
represent Microsoft on the board of directors of that
organization, which brings together companies, civil
society, academics and investors. Our focus is one
of principled respect for freedom of expression and
privacy on the global Internet.
As we work together across sectors, we should
also act with a certain humility, acknowledging that
we do not have perfect knowledge. But we must not let
that stand in the way of principled action. So my key
message today is that we need more discussion, and we
need exploration of new and improved ways to address
the misuse of Internet communication platforms.
When it comes to combating terrorists’ misuse of the
global Internet — including when we work together
to improve the use of counter-narratives in the fight
against terrorists and their ideologies — as long as we
are anchored in the rule of law, as long as we protect
and respect human rights and as long as we cooperate
transparently in a way that enhances the public’s trust,
there is no discussion topic that should be off the table.
I look forward to that discussion and to deploying
new strategies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Crown
for his briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for
their valuable contributions to it. In accordance with
the understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that they agree to the statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/6.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.

16-132867/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

11/05/2016

I would like at the outset to express my gratitude to
everyone here for the assistance and support extended
to the Egyptian presidency of the Security Council this
month, and for their participation in today’s important
discussion on combating the messages and ideologies of
terrorist groups. The international community, and the
United Nations in particular, must make the issue a top
priority in the context of its counter-terrorism efforts. I
would also like to welcome our speakers today.

cruelties inflicted upon the innocent people of the
region. In that regard, I recall the Syrian tragedy, in
which terrorist organizations have proliferated and
prospered. I urgently stress the need to bring an end
to that tragedy as soon as possible through cooperation
between the States members of the International Syrian
Support Group and the Security Council, given the
Council’s authority to end the suffering of the fraternal
Syrian people.

The day before I left for New York, a dastardly
assassination took the lives of eight policemen in Cairo.
That serves as a reminder that terrorism is no longer
constrained by borders, since the twisted doctrine that
murdered those Egyptian officers who were defending
their citizens is the very same one that has claimed
victims among concertgoers in Paris and travellers
at the Brussels airport. Solidarity with every human
soul is an obligation, regardless of whether those souls
come from a European, an Arab or an African country.
Confronting the rising tide of terrorism, which we
believe is one of the major threats to international peace
and security today, is also an obligation. If we do not all
share that obligation, overcoming the challenge will be
very difficult. I would like to ask the Council to stand
for a moment in memory of the souls of the victims of
those dastardly attacks.

Africa, which Egypt has the honour of representing
in the Security Council, also suffers from the malaise
of terrorist organizations, such as Al-Qaida and
Boko Haram, that are present in various parts of the
continent, including North Africa, where Da’esh has for
some time controlled the strategic Libyan city of Sirte,
located on the shores of the Mediterranean, opposite
the coast of Europe.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
During his address at the April Summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, President Abdel
Fattah Al Sisi said that the international system has
become flawed. In order to address that issue, we must,
of course, examine the factors behind it. Internationally,
there is an imbalance in the international system, as
reflected in the dwindling adherence to the concept of
the State in the Middle East and the Arab region in the
wake of the Iraq war. In our region, which has been
negatively affected by the ambitions of forces in the
Middle East looking to expand their influence at the
expense of Arab States, and in the resulting increase in
regional tensions, as well as the emergence of extremist
and terrorist organizations seeking to fill the vacuum
of authority in large region within States in the region.
We also have to deal with the illusions of
regional and international Powers that aim to classify
such organizations to suit their political goals. The
ramifications of that state of affairs are evident and
clear, with all they entail with regard to the manifold
8/94

The passage of 70 years since the eruption of the
Arab-Israeli conflict does not make it irrelevant, as
it remains the most crucial issue in our region. The
decades-long failure to take action to resolve this
conflict has deepened and exacerbated the main factors
behind the region’s instability and the rise of terrorism.
It would be a mistake to believe that the passing of time
or the outbreak of other conflicts will overshadow this
one or result in the imposition of an unjust resolution
that does not grant the Palestinians their rights like all
other peoples. Those who claim that the occupation
of Arab lands will not give rise to popular reaction
that would prolong the crisis, to the benefit extremist
organizations in the region, are also sadly mistaken.
Egypt has always stressed that the fight against
international terrorism can succeed only if we adopt a
non-selective approach that seriously and objectively
addresses the roots of that phenomenon and all
its elements by decisively confronting all terrorist
organizations equally and combatting the extremist
ideologies that give rise to terrorism and violence
and those who propagate them. The international
community must also be firm and decisive in dealing
with the military, financial and political support that
some countries and partners provide to those terrorist
organizations. Such support constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions. All of us must increase our
coordination and cooperation in order to dry up those
sources of support.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

A thorough reading of the history and activities
of those organizations confirms the absence of core
ideological divergences among them. All of them
adhere to the same extremist ideologies espoused by
the thinkers of terrorism, the takfiri ideology and
violence, including Sayyid Qutb. They adopt such
ideologies as the basis for their activities, narrative
and media messages, which are based on animosity
and the rejection of society — distorted concepts that
contradict the spirit of Islam, which rejects isolationism
and extremism and embraces a magnanimous message
of acceptance and diversity. The message of Islam, in
fact, solidified the principles of tolerance, peaceful
coexistence and respect for human rights. Furthermore,
I would highlight the fact that the exploitation by
terrorist groups of the technological revolution
represented by online communication platforms and
social media is one of the major factors that has enabled
them to disseminate their messages and ideologies in
an unprecedented manner.
I must also stress the importance of confronting the
phenomenon of Islamophobia, which contributes to the
spread of extremist thought and increased recruitment
by terrorist organizations of young people from Muslim
minorities in Western countries. We must review many
integration policies and confront hate speech and insults
aimed at the symbols and sanctities of the Islamic faith
under the guise of free speech. We believe that, to be
successful, the action required of the Council and the
international community in general must incorporate
guidelines aimed, among other things, at the following.
First, we must take advantage of the active efforts
of moderate religious institutions and build upon such
efforts, both by refuting the messages and ideologies
used by terrorist groups and by highlighting and
explaining the interpretations of the true concepts
of religions. In that regard, I wish to underline the
substantial efforts undertaken in several countries
around the world by Al Azhar and the Egyptian Dar
Al-Ifta.
Secondly, it is important for countries and societies,
including in the West, to reaffirm that terrorism is not
linked to any religion, culture or people.
Thirdly, national legislation must be enacted
to criminalize the spread of terrorist messages and
ideologies without infringing on the principle of
freedom of expression. That includes stepping up

S/PV.7690

efforts to halt the financing that terrorist groups require
to disseminate their terrorist messages and ideologies.
Fourthly, we must promote the role that the media
can play in combating the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism groups.
Fifthly, we need to emphasize the role that civil
society can play in different countries in the context of
national laws in combating the narratives and ideologies
of terrorist groups.
Sixthly, we need to cooperate and harmonize our
ongoing efforts at the national, regional and international
levels to combat the messages and ideologies of
terrorist groups in order to avoid contradictions and
inconsistencies. We must also enhance cooperation
among countries in that regard and provide the
necessary technical assistance, capacity-building and
financial resources, upon request.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, adopted by
the Council today, and the tireless efforts of the General
Assembly are a crucial comprehensive framework
to implement those proposals and objectives. I thank
the members of the Council for cooperating with the
Egyptian initiative and invite them, along with all
Members of the Untied Nations, to immediately agree
on a specific framework of implementation based on
the provisions of the presidential statement. Our voice
in confronting terrorism must be firm. We must stand
united. The message of the entire world to terrorists
must be clear and resounding. It must affirm that
terrorists are the enemies of humankind, that they do
not represent any religion, that their downfall is at hand
and that their messages and ideologies run counter to
logic, human nature and any and all creeds. Let us
work together to elevate the voice of truth, justice and
tolerance above the voice of terrorism, extremism and
hate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I will now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand.
Mr. McCully (New Zealand): I would like to start
by thanking Minister Selim for convening this open
debate on countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. Today we are dealing with a threat whose

16-132869/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

scale and spread requires a global and collective
response and surely commands the attention of the
Security Council.
My country, New Zealand, once regarded itself
as largely removed from the threat of international
terrorism, protected by its geography. Sadly, we now
live in a world where terrorism is a global enterprise,
exported through modern technology and sophisticated
social media. Every society has its element of
disenchanted and disenfranchised people who provide
a ready market for extremist ideology. Every society
has its element of disturbed or criminal minds who find
international terrorist branding a convenient cloak.
New Zealand strongly supports the four pillars
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy — addressing the conditions that spread
terrorism, preventing and combating terrorism,
counter-terrorism capacity-building, and respecting
human rights and the rule of law. The Security Council
has a central role to play in guiding a comprehensive
international response to terrorism. I want to make
three brief points.
First, the most important contribution the Security
Council can make to combat terrorism is to improve
its capacity to prevent and resolve conflict. Unresolved
conflicts in Syria and Iraq are fertile breeding grounds
for terrorism and extremist ideology, a phenomenon we
have already witnessed in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
The unresolved conflict in Palestine has now fuelled
generations of hopelessness and extremism. Therefore,
my first message is that the Council must face up to its
core business of preventing and resolving conflicts if it
wants to eliminate the conditions under which extremist
narratives and ideologies will breed and spread.
Secondly, stronger, fairer and more inclusive
societies are the best long-term sustainable defence
against the spread of terrorism. Establishing unifying,
inclusive governance that respects human rights and
the rule of law and that does not succumb to the shortterm temptation to marginalize significant groups
is critical to the long-term fight against extremist
ideologies. That is true in Iraq and Afghanistan. It is
true in all countries.
Thirdly, Governments will need to be increasingly
active and innovative in their counter-terrorism
strategies and continue to improve cooperation across
national borders. That has to be done globally, in
particular through the full implementation of the
10/94

11/05/2016

Council’s sanctions regimes targeting the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, and regionally. For my country, enhanced
cooperation across the Asia-Pacific region is of great
importance, especially through the growing number
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations-based
counter-terrorism initiatives.
As we see greater success against ISIL in Iraq
and Syria, the return of foreign terrorist fighters will
become a challenge for many nations, my own included.
Cooperation across such areas as policing, border
control and aviation security will be increasingly
important. Policies relating to the detention and
reintegration of terrorist detainees present questions
that are both complex and challenging.
As I have already said, the Security Council has
a central role to play in guiding a comprehensive
international response to combating terrorist narratives
and ideologies. At home, in our region and further afield,
New Zealand is committed to playing its full part.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Secretary-General
Afifi and Deputy General Counsel Crown for taking
the time to brief us today on this very important topic. I
also want to single out Egypt for thanks, and Mr. Selim
specifically, for calling this meeting.
I would also like to offer my sympathies on behalf
of the American people to you, Mr President, and the
people of Egypt for the despicable attack that occurred
in Cairo on Sunday, which killed eight police officers.
That ambush underscores the continuing, deadly,
inhuman threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and, of course, by groups
that adopt similar tactics.
On a visit to Cameroon, Chad and Nigeria last
month, I met with some of the countless victims of
Boko Haram, which recently pledged allegiance to
Da’esh. One woman I spoke with had seen her husband
executed and had her three children ripped from her
grip and taken by Boko Haram. Now alone, displaced,
she does not know why she is still alive. As she says,
her life no longer has meaning. She just sits around all
day, every day, and pines for her children and wonders
if there is more that she can do to somehow bring
them back.
I met a 14-year-old girl who described having been
given a “choice” by the terrorists who had burned down
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

her home: be killed or become a Boko Haram bride.
She chose life, and after a year of sexual enslavement
by Boko Haram, she managed somehow to escape her
monstrous captor. But now in a refugee camp, she
blames herself for the stigma that she carries with her
from the time that she spent with Boko Haram. She feels
shame, while those who enslaved her appear incapable
of shame.
An 8-year-old boy told me that he was studying at
his madrasa when Boko Haram began shooting. He fled
alone into the bush and has not seen his parents since.
He does not know if they are alive.
Such horrors inject acute urgency into this meeting
as the Council seeks to strengthen its collective effort
to defeat ISIL, Al-Qaida and terrorist groups like them.
There could be no more urgent cause on Earth.
None of us are immune to the threat posed by
those groups. In Minneapolis on Monday, three young
American men went on trial charged with conspiring
to provide material support to ISIL and to commit
murder abroad. One of their mothers lamented what
had happened to her boy, saying,
“I told him to never even mention those names,
Al-Shabaab or ISIL, because the Koran says
nothing about the reasons to kill anyone in the ways
ISIL talks about.”
Six other Americans pleaded guilty to similar charges
earlier this year. Some of them told the judge that they
had been inspired by ISIL recruitment videos and
social media.
As we consider the task of countering violent
ideologies, we all must recognize that the common
goal of countering terrorist ideologies should never
be used as an excuse to suppress political dissent.
Many countries recognize narrow, clearly delineated
exceptions to the right of the freedom of expression,
such as incitement to imminent violence, which is an
exception to that right in the United States. But there
is a clear and vast difference between responding to
those legally prescribed exceptions and broad-based
attempts to silence Government critics. Legal action
is a critical tool in the campaign against ISIL, but it
must not be wielded like a cudgel against those who
voice unpopular speech or criticize authorities. Such
behaviour does not prevent violent extremism, it fuels it.
I would offer three principles upon which to ground our

S/PV.7690

common strategy to counter the poisonous ideologies
and narratives propagated by groups like ISIL.
First, such a strategy should focus on exposing the
lies, distortions and falsehoods that underpin terrorist
narratives. The most influential and effective actors in
this effort will always be religious leaders, civil society
organizations, community groups and individual
citizens. Independent voices can spread the truth about
what life is really like under ISIL control. Religious
leaders can reject ISIL’s perverse distortions of faith by
spreading Islam’s message of peace, love and tolerance.
ISIL clearly fears this threat. Just this part weekend,
the group called for the murder of 11 imams and scholars
living in the United States and elsewhere who have
actively worked to rebut its narratives and discredit its
ideology. Governments can play a supporting role by
convening and amplifying independent voices, as the
United States has done in partnership with the United
Arab Emirates in the establishment of the Sawab
Centre, which has provided training to civil society
organizations and other groups.
Secondly, an effective strategy will facilitate the
free flow of information. Such openness expands public
access to the truth, and in this battle, the truth is clearly
on our side. We have nothing to be afraid of. The Internet
itself is not a threat, though it can host ISIL lies and
propaganda. It also makes possible the flow of counternarratives, the exchange of new ideas and the voices
of tolerance, which vastly outnumber the exceptions. A
free press might criticize its Government — certainly
the free press in my country does that — but that is
precisely what makes those voices credible and ensures
that they are seen as independent by the public. A
reputation for impartiality and reliability is what makes
their reporting on the atrocities and perversions of ISIL
and others so powerfully important.
By contrast, arresting journalists, sentencing
reporters to death and treating the media as an
enemy of the State — such actions are thoroughly
counterproductive. The media are an ally when it comes
to showing the truth about terrorists groups. Attacking
the media will not produce a more compliant citizenry;
instead, it will produce a more alienated, suspicious
and disenfranchised public, one more likely to chafe
under a Government’s attempts at control — all to the
benefit of terrorist groups.
It is telling that one authority that recently sought
to curtail the flow of information to the people under

16-1328611/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

its control is ISIL itself. Last year, it banned private
Internet access in Raqqa in an attempt to prevent
disaffected fighters from reaching their families and to
stop locals from telling the outside world about life under
ISIL rule. It also banned satellite dishes and receivers,
railing against what it called “the news channels that
spread false lies and defamation”. ISIL is right that
the Internet and free media threaten its adherents. It is
critically important that no State Member of the United
Nations follow its lead and adopt the same view.
That brings me to the third principle that should
undergird our approach. We have to better understand
the factors that draw some people or communities to
terrorist narratives, so that we can better spot them and
counter them. The motivation of those who become
radicalized is extremely varied. To give one example,
after extensive online conversations, one lonely
23-year-old Sunday-school teacher and babysitter in
Washington State was prepared to marry a stranger
and move to Syria. She was stopped only after her
grandparents intervened. Recalling the gifts and
attention that her new online contacts lavished upon
her, she told a reporter later, “I felt like I was betraying
God and Christianity, but I also felt excited because I
had made a lot of new friends”.
An imam in central Mali recently told a researcher
from Human Rights Watch that an extremist group’s
local appeal had nothing to do with religion but simply
that, in a region where the Government is unable to
provide security or basic social services, ”the jihadists
provide a better alternative to the State”. Identifying
those dynamics enables us to seek to address them, and
the strategy that we develop today to combat terrorist
narratives must be grounded in broader efforts to
counter and prevent violent extremism. Endorsing the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674) when it is raised next month will
represent an important step in that direction.
In conclusion, I mentioned earlier that ISIL
recently called for the murder of 11 imams and scholars
in response to their efforts to counter ISIL’s messaging.
What are they doing that makes them so dangerous to
ISIL? They are not just rejecting the terrorists’ perverted
views. They are actively promoting alternative ideas
and advancing a more positive narrative. They are
doing so not only through the older tools that traditional
social-media platforms like Twitter, YouTube, Instagram
and Facebook offer, they are discussing religion over
SnapChat. Counter-messaging, social media and an
12/94

11/05/2016

open Internet that enables young people to access such
content is how we defeat the narratives and ideologies
of ISIL in the modern era. That is the antidote — not
restrictions on the media, filters on the Internet or
attacks on political opponents. In the development of
our common framework and in our approaches based
on our individual systems of governance, it is essential
that we see political freedom as the enemy of terrorism
that it is.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Malaysia
Mr. Merican (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
debate on such a critically important topic. The concept
note (S/2016/416, annex) that you shared in advance
also provided useful guidance. I also wish to thank the
briefers, whose respective briefings have brought keen
insights and added much value to the discussion today.
At this stage, my delegation aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Thailand and Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
For the past quarter century or so, the United
Nations and the Security Council have been at the
forefront of international efforts to counter the scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism. Besides the
necessary targeted military actions and intelligence
operations on the ground, we have established norms,
networks, structures, strategies and action plans to
counter the spreading influence of terrorists, fighting
them on a number of critical fronts, notably their
movement, financing and recruitment.
Those efforts have shown varying degrees of
success. However, we can do more. And we must do
more. That is why today’s discussion has particular
resonance for us, as it seeks to address the narrative
or ideological aspect of terrorism, and one of the main
drivers of the phenomenon. Accordingly, we are pleased
to join the consensus on the presidential statement just
adopted (S/PRST/2016/6), which we fully support, and
we thank the Egyptian delegation for initiating it.
Terrorism and violent extremism are global threats
that transcend cultures, religions and geopolitical
boundaries. They have no religion. In the past few
decades, the international community has engaged in
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

long-standing struggles against various terrorist groups
worldwide, from the Irish Republican Army to the
Tamil Tigers and Aum Shinrikyo. We thus reject any
association of terrorism and violent extremism with
any one religion, nationality or ethnic group.
However, as Muslims, we should not be in denial.
We should be honest with ourselves and acknowledge
that, whether we like it or not, there is a critical need
for us to address the exploitation of Islam by terrorist
groups, which has led to the perceived link between
terrorism and Islam or Muslims. As all of us are aware,
among the most heinous and nefarious perpetrators of
terrorism and violent extremism today are Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and Da’esh. They all have one thing in
common — they rely on Islam, or more accurately,
their twisted interpretation of Islam, to legitimize
their causes, justify their criminal actions and attract
their followers. Therefore, for the purpose of today’s
debate, I wish to focus my statement on that disturbing
phenomenon, notwithstanding our long-held position
that terrorism must be dissociated from any particular
religion.
It has been said that in order to understand a
religion, one must study its scriptures. In our Koran,
the holy scripture for Muslims, a message of peace,
justice and honourable conduct is featured prominently
and constitutes the very essence of Islam. Indeed, the
very definition of Islam itself is peace. To illustrate
that, the Koran states:
(spoke in Arabic)
“And make not Allah’s name an excuse in
your oaths against doing good, or acting rightly, or
making peace between persons; for Allah is One
Who heareth and knoweth all things.” (The Holy
Koran, II: 224)
(spoke in English)
Meanwhile, on justice, Allah says, in verse 8 of
Surah Al-Maidah:
(spoke in Arabic)
“O you who have believed, be persistently
standing firm for Allah, witnesses in justice, and
do not let the hatred of a people prevent you from
being just. Be just; that is nearer to righteousness.
And fear Allah; indeed, Allah is acquainted with
what you do.”

S/PV.7690

In light of such clear commands in the Koran,
we strongly denounce the terrorists’ claims that their
barbarity is sanctioned by Islam. The concept of “the
end justifies the means” has no place in Islam. So
even if you have good intentions or you are fighting
a just cause, you are still not allowed to achieve it via
wrongful means or to commit transgressions against
others.
Long before the Geneva Conventions existed,
Prophet Muhammad and subsequent scholars instituted
a just-war doctrine. Among other things, during the
conduct of war, Muslims are forbidden from harming
non-combatants, particularly women, children, the
elderly and the sick, as well as envoys, diplomats and
those praying in houses of worship. They are even
prohibited from harming civilian objects, including
water wells, trees, crops and livestock. That is the
true and right teaching of Islam. True Muslims do not
accept ideologies that espouse hatred, wanton violence
and destruction. We must make absolutely clear that the
extremists are the blasphemers. It is they who insult and
pervert the teaching of the Holy Koran and the Sunnah.
It is abundantly clear to my delegation that if we
are to successfully counter the terrorist narrative, we
cannot limit the response to merely denouncing violence
or stating why their approach is wrong; we must cut
through their rhetoric and seductive approaches. An
ideology does not exist in a vacuum. To those who are
marginalized, disenchanted or frustrated, an ideology
can be a powerful thing. It provides a sense of purpose,
a sense of direction and a sense of belonging, especially
when faced with deep underlying sociopolitical
grievances.
Based on investigations of the motivations of
foreign terrorist fighters in Malaysia, their main
motivation has been found to be political in nature, be
it prolonged and grievous injustice, gross violations
of human rights, foreign occupation, or systematic
discrimination against people whom they identify with
due to shared religion, values or ethnicity. Beyond
this motivation, they share little similarities in terms
of academic background, social status or geographical
origin. Thus, in countering the terrorists’ narrative, it is
also crucial to remove these underlying root causes in
order to expose the fallacy of their arguments. This will
diminish the soft power of the terrorists in manipulating
sociopolitical grievances to gain sympathy among
impressionable youths and to recruit foreign terrorist
fighters worldwide.

16-1328613/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Part of Malaysia’s efforts in countering the
extremist narrative is also to engage with religious and
community leaders to spread accurate messages about
Islam. We believe that there is a need to encourage
more IT and media-savvy Muslim public figures and
scholars to reach out to youths via social media to
provide a counter-narrative, including to clarify the
concept of jihad, which has been twisted to serve the
terrorists’ agenda.
At times, the promise of heavenly reward and
spiritual salvation has led some to become misguided
and fall for the terrorists’ narrative. Thus, in our response
we have incorporated a rehabilitation programme
as part of our counter-terrorism measures. This is
consistent with our belief in long-term rehabilitation
and not just punitive action in dealing with terrorists.
Under this programme, experts from various religious
departments, clerics and police counsellors actively
engage with detainees and provide guidance with the
aim of eventually restoring them as useful members of
society.
Malaysia remains steadfast in its belief that
terrorism and violent extremism are twin cancers that
require our collective and concerted effort to address.
We therefore reaffirm our commitment to continuing
our close cooperation with the United Nations and
relevant international organizations towards that end.
On a final note, I wish to stress that terrorist
attacks do not discriminate among women or children;
they do not discriminate between old or young; black
or white; Muslims, Jews or Christians; rich or poor.
All of us are potential victims of terrorism. In our
response to this threat, let us not allow the terrorists to
divide us. Hysterical responses to terrorism, including
by discriminating against a group of people for their
peaceful religious beliefs or branding an entire group of
people as terrorists, will merely perpetuate terror and
paranoia and further serve the terrorists’ narrative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now giove the
floor to the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Spain.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by thanking Minister Selim and Egypt, as
president of the Security Council for this month, for
their initiative to organize this meeting devoted to the
action of the international community to counter the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
14/94

11/05/2016

As occurred on Sunday with Cairo, Today we woke
up to the news of new attacks in Baghdad, which have
caused more than 70 fatalities. Most of the victims were
women who were going to do their daily shopping. Once
again, the daily lives of citizens have been tragically
cut short. I offer my most heartfelt condolences to the
people and the authorities of Iraq, and its Ambassador
here present.
Throughout history, it is has been noted that for
evil to triumph it is sufficient for good men to do
nothing. That is not an option. We have acted and
will continue to do so. And we will act together. I
therefore wish to congratulate the Egyptian Presidency
for presidential statement S/ /PRST/2016/6, which we
have just adopted. With it, we move from words to
deeds.Today we are taking a step forward to address
the perverse narrative of terror. Today we also begin
to take concerted measures that will allow us, as we
agreed a few moments ago, to present a proposal by
30 April 2017 for a “comprehensive international
framework”, with recommended guidelines and good
practices that will endow the international community
wth an effective tool for presenting a common front. As
skilful as terrorists have shown themselves to be, we
cannot send a more attractive message than if we act
together. To that end, we need to act on several fronts,
First, with respect to terrorism, States have an
obligation to prevent their propaganda and selfaggrandizement, starting by criminalizing justifications
of incitement to terrorism. In that context, it is
necessary to monitor and prevent the action of those
engaged in justifying and inciting terrorism within
social organizations, schools or religious centres. We
must also prevent such action in the new information
technologies, the Internet and social networks. To do
so, we will need both appropriate legislation and the
decisive action and support of social partners. In the
case of new information technologies, it is essential
to ensure the cooperation of suppliers of services in
removing contents of a criminal nature. Today, we have
made specific commitments to that end.
Secondly, it is clear that the international
community must also engage and win the battle of ideas.
In this context, we must address both the dissemination
of proposals that directly serve and support terrorism
and the narratives of violent extremism that, at least
sometimes, do not qualify in themselves as criminal.
In this case, the action that we must undertake is of
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a different character; we need to challenge ideas and
counter them with a positive narrative.
It is necessary to counteract and destroy the image
that terrorists seek to depict of themselves and their
sympathizers. In the case of terrorists and violent
extremists who cite religious belief as the foundation
of their activities, it is necessary to counter them
with the testimony of true religious leaders. The aim
is to point out the falsity of the arguments of those
terrorist groups, their lack of a genuine religious basis
and the fact that they distort the messages of religion
to serve their purposes and objectives of totalitarian
political domination.
Along with this, the international community must
promote the positive values that underpin it: peaceful
coexistence, pluralism, the freedom of each person to
choose the ideas and principles that to guide his or her
life, the freedom of belief and ideas, and the freedom
of opinion. These are the values that most humans
cherish. It is important to put them on the front line
of the defence of our societies and to set them against
the intolerance and hate propaganda of terrorists and
violent extremist groups.
In that respect, our task remains mainly in the
context of combating and preventing violent extremism.
The question is to counter false ideas with the concepts
of coexistence and pluralism championed by our
citizens and our societies. This is therefore a long-term
objective whose results will be seen after a lengthy
process, but we need to start today. in undertaking
this task, we need to rely on the support of community
leaders, religious leaders, teachers and educators,
opinion-makers, human rights activists and the media,
as well as families.
We know that in society itself — in civil
society — there are moral forces and authoritative
voices that rise against terrorism and violent extremism,
and we must identify those voices. Besides having
leaders and credible and authoritative voices, it is
important to integrate the groups and communities that
undertstand the problems and wish to contribute their
proposals: young people, women, students and civil
society organizations. Governments should not only
consult each other, but also provide to social agents that
promote peace and understanding with the support and
platforms they need.
Here I wish to make special mention of the
important role that victims of terrorism can play in

S/PV.7690

the development and implementation of an effective
counter-narrative through a threefold approach:
ending the suffering; stopping the cycle of hatred by
renouncing revenge; and giving moral force to the rule
of law and its institutions, in which they place their
trust for justice. On the basis of the national experience
of my own country, Spain, I would like to present some
concrete proposals towards that end.
In the field of prevention, Spain as sponsor of
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and a
founding member of the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue, attaches great importance to intercultural
and interfaith dialogue as a tool for the prevention of
violent radicalization and for countering the narrative
of extremism violence and terrorism. In this sense, the
recent Global Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations,
held in Baku, the Foreign Minister of Spain presented
several proposals in this area, of which I would
highlight three.
The first is The creation of a committee for tolerance
and positive messages on the Internet as a publicprivate supranational collegiate body of the major
Internet companies, which would serve for the effective
and rapid dissemination of images, videos and games
promoting tolerance and respect between cultures and
religions. The voices of peace must be heard louder than
hatred. The second is the development of guidelines
for good practices in education and diversity for social
integration so that they can be known and developed by
all countries. The third is a platform of religious leaders
for peace, especially in conflict zones.
There is also great potential for actions within
the framework of United Nations and various regional
structures. In this regard, I stress that it would be
very valuable to proceed to strengthening the United
Nations Victims of Terrorism Support Portal, which is
already widely known and, with the necessary support,
could be a useful tool in the fields of education,
schools and teaching academies for the purpose we are
discussing today.
I believe that this debate cannot be completely
separated from initiatives being promoted and
negotiated almost in parallel, such as the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
and the forthcoming review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Moreover, this goal is also
being sought in the efforts resulting from the White

16-1328615/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

House Summit on Countering Violent Extremism and
the Global Leaders’ Summit on Countering the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Violent Extremism.
In this process, the international community has
come together forcefully on the goals we must achieve
and the most important measures we must take. Those
proposals for the fight against violent extremism also
have direct relevance to the development of narratives
to counter the narratives and ideologies of terrorism
and violent extremism. It is true that there have been
differences over the interpretation of the phenomenon
of violent extremism and the conditions that may fuel
and drive its development driving, but I believe that
even as we continue discussing these differences of
interpretation, it is also important that we focus on the
points of agreement on practical actions. In that regard,
I think it would be important to pursue this joint effort
of reflection through regional conferences, which may
be more fruitful in finding a way to agree on action
programmes on the basis of the broad agreement within
the international community .
It would also be important to convene a dialogue
among neighbouring regions that share the problem of
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism — a
dialogue to exchange views on common challenges. In
that regard, as a representative of a European country
and a member of the European Union, I think that
Europe would have a great interest in holding such a
dialogue and serious exchange of proposals with our
neighbours in the southern Mediterranean and other
regions, such as the Sahel, the countries of sub-Saharan
Africa or Asia.
At the same time, similar dialogues and exchanges
in this field could be launched in other regional and
interregional spaces. In Spain, and through our Casa
Arabe, we have begun a special experiment, inviting
Arab countries to present their strategies against violent
radicalism. The first such case was that of Mauritania,
which informed us of the experience of that country,
which has been especially successful in reintegrating
former terrorists through its prison programmes.
Other cases will follow. This process would benefit
from United Nations participation to unify proposals
and follow up on the agreements reached. As noted
in similar contexts, the appointment of a special
rrepresentative of the Secretary-General to counter
and prevent violent extremism would strengthen the
international community’s reponse capacities.
16/94

11/05/2016

I believed that this procedural approach — based
on a simple agreement of the international community,
as reflected in today’s meeting, to launch a practical
discussion aimed at developing effective programmes
in a broader regional context — could be the basis
for drafting a comprehensive international strategy
with which to counter the narratives and ideologies of
terrorist groups. In this sense, if the desired results are
obtained, the Security Council could meet again within
a year to finalize and adopt such a strategy.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Sugiyama (Japan): I would first like to express
my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for taking up
this timely and important topic. My appreciation also
goes to Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and other
speakers for their insightful briefings at a time when
the topic before us is the most important item on the
common international agenda.
My Government is sincerely and firmly supportive
of the presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, which we
have just adopted.
This year alone we have witnessed numerous
terrorist attacks all over the world. Facing the sobering
reality of an increase in and the spread of terrorist
attacks in recent years, Japan has reconfirmed its
determination to fight against terrorism in cooperation
with the international community. The importance of
utilizing all tools at our disposal in the fight against
terrorism cannot be overstated. We would particularly
like to emphasize that the international community
should put more efforts and resources into the prevention
of terrorism, as well as countering factors conducive
to terrorism, most critical of all violent extremism. We
firmly believe that violent extremism has nothing to do
with any religion, nationality or civilization. However,
terrorist organizations use narratives and ideologies
based on their distorted interpretation of those factors,
not only to justify their ideas but also to mobilize
resources and garner support.
There is therefore urgent need to prevent violent
extremism throughout the world. In that regard, we
strongly welcome the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and call for its
rapid implementation under United Nations leadership.
In particular, the Security Council has made enormous
efforts to eradicate these imminent threats against
international peace and security, namely, terrorism and
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

violent extremism. I would like to emphasize that it
must make further efforts for that purpose.
Japan has been supporting efforts by United Nations
entities in countering violent extremism. I would
like to briefly touch on one example that, although it
may appear small, substantively is quite imporant.
A workshop held for Iraqi officials in February 2015
under the sponsorship of my Government brought
together victims of terrorism and family members of
late fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da’esh) and offered them an opportunity to
engage in dialogue about their personal experiences
and thoughts. The participants came to a common
understanding about the fighters’ irrational decisions
to join ISIL (Da’esh). It was then shared with the local
community as part of the effort to counter ISIL (Da’esh)
narratives.
Japan also supports a whole-of-society approach to
preventing violent extremism. Japan recently provided
$1.5 million to the Global Community Engagement and
Resilience Fund in order to support local communitybased
initiatives
against
violent
extremism.
Furthermore, Japan has conducted a number of projects
related to countering violent extremism in cooperation
with countries of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations. Last February, Japan hosted a panel discussion
on the role of civil society in preventing violent
extremism, with the participation of representatives
from Governments and civil society from South-East
Asian countries. There emerged a general consensus
among the participants that we should be more vocal in
promoting moderate ideas against violent extremism.
Again, those may be small efforts, but they are
important ones.
It is now time for the international community
to unite against the threat of violent extremism even
further and to take advantage of our strengths and
cooperate to create synergies among our efforts. We
would also reiterate the importance of empowering
moderate voices in society by promoting pluralism and
tolerance. Prime Minister Abe mentioned in Cairo last
year the importance of moderation, a notion shared by
different civilizations, cultures and religious beliefs.
He did so stating,
(spoke in Arabic)
“the best way to go is in the middle.”

S/PV.7690

(spoke in English)
At the same time, we believe that such efforts must
be conducted in full accordance with all the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the peaceful resolution of disputes, the rule
of law and respect for human rights.
In about a fortnight, Japan will host the Group of
Seven (G-7) Summit. As this year’s Chair, we are taking
the lead in preparing the G-7 action plan on countering
terrorism and violent extremism, hopefully to be
adopted by the G-7 leaders at Ise-Shima, Japan. Our
aim is to create an action-oriented plan that could be a
valuable addition by the G-7 leaders to existing global
efforts to tackle terrorism and violent extremism. At the
moment, we are working very hard and wholeheartedly
with our G-7 colleagues so that we can share something
with the entire international community in that regard.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize once
again our deep conviction that we will not be idle in
eradicating violent extremism and will redouble our
efforts against it. Let us unite to address this common
threat. On behalf fo the Government of Japan, I can
assure the Assembly that we Japanese continue to stand
firmly with the entire international community in this
important endeavor.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Egypt’s initiative to convene this open
Security Council debate on countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism. China also welcomes
Foreign Minister Selim’s presiding over this meeting.
I thank the Foreign Ministers and Deputy Foreign
Ministers who have come here today to participate
in the meeting. Thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing. I also listened carefully to
the statements made by Secretary-General Afifi and
Vice-President Crown.
Terrorism constitutes a grave threat to international
peace and security and is a common challenge for
humankind. The international community should
resolutely combat terrorism, wherever and whenever
it occurs and whatever form or manifestation it may
take. A unified standard should be adhered to and no
link should be made to any particular ethnic group
or religion. Efforts should be made to abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, build consensus among Member States, take
coordinated and concerted actions, integrate political,

16-1328617/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

economic, legal, cultural and educational measures and
commit to eliminating breeding grounds for terrorism.
At present, terrorist and extremist forces are taking
advantage of new technologies, such as the Internet and
social media, to deliberately distort religious doctrines,
propagate terrrorist ideology and extremism and incite
hatred, discrimination and violence. A portion of the
population in some countries, youth in particular, are
swayed by terrorist ideology and extremism to commit
extreme and terrorist acts that inflict severe harm.
That has become a prominent trend in the current fight
against terrorism. The international community should
pay close attention to that and join hands to address it.
First, it is imperative to eradicate the foundations
of terrorist ideology. Terrorism is rooted in terrorist
ideology and violent extremism. All countries should
incorporate counter-terrorism into their national
security and development strategies; oppose the use
of distorted religious doctrines or any other means
to incite hatred, discrimination, violence and other
extremist behaviour; and resolutely combat such
narratives and behaviour. Efforts must be made to
follow the law and close down places used to spread
and disseminate terrorist ideologies and extremism,
while offenders must be held accountable. We should
launch anti-terrorist publicity campaigns to increase
public awareness about counter-terrorism.
Secondly, we must cut off the channels used for
spreading terrorist ideologies. New technologies, such
as the Internet and social media, have been used by
terrorists as a new platform to spread terrorist ideologies
and extremism. The international community must take
effective measures to prevent terrorist organizations
from using the Internet to disseminate audiovisual
materials to incite violence; spread terrorist ideologies
and extremism; and recruit for, finance, plan and carry
out terrorist activities. All countries must strengthen
their relevant legislation and law enforcement, step
up their Internet surveillance and control and prohibit
the transmission of and effectively delete information
containing terrorist and extremist content. Internet
providers must increase their self-discipline and raise
their legal awareness and sense of responsibility by
taking the initiative to take down the relevant content
in a timely manner.
Thirdly, we must enhance cooperation and
strengthen the international counter-terrorism network.
In combating the spread of terrorist ideologies and
18/94

11/05/2016

extremism, the primary responsibility of national
Governments should be clarified and the leading and
coordinating role of the United Nations and the Security
Council must be brought into full play. All parties
should fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions and enhance information exchanges, border
control and law-enforcement cooperation; combat
terrorist organizations’ cross-border training and their
export and spread of terrorist ideologies and extremism
to other countries; and thwart the cross-border
movement of terrorists.
Fourthly, it is essential to promote dialogue among
civilizations and build a new type of international
relations. Dialogue and exchanges are an effective means
to promote understanding among different civilizations,
religions and cultures, bolster mutual inclusiveness and
achieve common development. The United Nations
and the international community should vigorously
promote dialogue among civilizations characterized by
mutual respect, openness and inclusiveness; advocate
learning among the various civilizations; foster a social
environment favouring equal treatment and harmonious
coexistence among the different ethnic groups, cultures
and religions; construct a new type of international
relations centred on win-win cooperation and build a
common destiny for humankind.
China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism front. Not long ago, China promulgated
a counter-terrorism law and thereby committed itself to
stepping up the fight against terrorism and promoting
international cooperation in that field. As is clearly set
out in the counter-terrorism law, importance must be
attached to countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism and extremism, fighting against extremism
in all its forms and manifestations that seeks to incite
hatred and discrimination and advocate violence by
distorting religious doctrines or other means, thereby
removing the ideological foundation of terrorism.
In conformity with the provisions of that law, China
will prevent and fight against terrorism, maintain
State security and the safety of its people and their
properties, actively take part in and promote bilateral
and multilateral counter-terrorism corporation,
resolutely counter the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism and advance international counter-terrorism
cooperation to make continued progress in a common
effort to maintain world peace and stability.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to start by thanking Egypt for having undertaken
this initiative of organizing this very important
debate. I would also like to thank all the briefers for
their extremely enlightening presentations. Inviting
the Secretary-General of Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy and the Vice-President and Deputy General
Counsel of the Microsoft Corporation is an eloquent
illustration of the United Nations desire to strengthen
its partnership with civil society — some will say to
embrace a world that is increasingly post-Westphalian,
with its risks but also with the opportunities that flow
from it.
I assure the Foreign Minister of Egypt of France’s
sympathy and solidarity following the attack that
plunged Cairo into mourning last Sunday.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
While significant successes has been achieved in
recent months in the fight against Da’esh in Iraq and
Syria, that group’s propaganda unfortunately continues
to exert an important pull on our people. In France
more than 2,000 citizens or residents are involved in the
Iraqi-Syrian terrorist networks, and nearly 9,300 people
have been reported to the authorities for radicalization.
Globally, it is estimated that nearly 30,000 foreign
terrorist fighters from close to 100 countries have
joined the Iraqi-Syrian theatre.
The propaganda of terrorist groups, particularly
Da’esh, seeks to convince by painting an ideal, but
false, world. As French Prime Minister Manuel Valls
has stated,
“An ideology of chaos is afoot. It glorifies death
and corrupts the ideals at the very heart of our
societies.”
Its recruiters deceive young people by promising them
a future, an ideal or a cause to defend. But in fact they
end up experiencing only manipulation, cruelty and
death. Terrorist groups use mind control techniques to
get young people to reject their schools, their work and
even their families.
Despite the recent decline in the number of
messages and videos posted by Da’esh, the Internet
remains the recruitment channel favoured by terrorists.
They have refined their indoctrination techniques and
exploit its full potential: sites defending terrorism,
discussion forums, direct messaging services, videos

S/PV.7690

and social networks. For them, the Internet is the way to
massively spread their propaganda and present young
people with a message tailored to those they wish to
capture in their nets.
Faced with a threat of this magnitude, the
international community must take action to break this
large-scale recruitment and indoctrination exercise.
We must fight terrorism and resolutely counter its
propaganda of hatred with the greatest determination
and with the necessary means and always with the
weapons of the law and with respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. For it is precisely those
rights that terrorists want to destroy because they lie at
the heart of our democracies.
The French approach is based on two axes. The
first dimension is preventive and dissuasive. It is based
on countering influences and taking actions aimed at
delegitimizing Da’esh in the eyes of potential recruits
and the public. As an example, in January France
created the www.stop-djihadism.gouv.fr website,
aimed at the families and friends of those on the path of
radicalization, which was then supplemented by a Twitter
account and a Facebook page. It is not simply aimed at
the propaganda Da’esh, but also at that of Al-Qaida and
Boko Haram. Similarly, France has set up a free hot line,
which is accessible 24 hours a day, to enable families
and friends to report their concerns to the authorities.
France’s plan of action against radicalization and
terrorism, which was just updated on 9 May, provides
50 new concrete measures to improve its understanding
of the phenomenon and further strengthen its prevention
policies. For example, the cutting off of any source of
financing for those who join the ranks of terrorists.
We will intensify our strategic communications efforts
within the framework of the new action plan. At the
international level, France actively supports the work
of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, which has produced some highly
effective communications campaigns, particularly
through the Sawab Centre. But beyond Governments’
necessary stance and commitment, the effectiveness
of our action also depends on mobilizing civil society.
We must expose the contradictions of terrorist groups
on the ground, and that requires boldness, innovation
and the ability to mobilize society as whole — public
authorities, associations and the private sector.
The second aspect of France’s approach is punitive,
involving blocking websites and removing content
while respecting fundamental human rights and

16-1328619/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

freedoms. A law enacted on 13 November 2014 enables
the administrative authority to require Internet service
providers to block access to sites hosted in France that
advocate terrorism, and 60 have been blocked so far.
The PHAROS reporting platform enables Internet users
to report findings of illegal content, which are then
transmitted to police, gendarmerie or customs special
services.
Finally, since early 2015 France has had a
close and constant dialogue with the major Internet
players — Microsoft, whose presence here today I
welcome, but also Facebook, Twitter and Google. That
dialogue has been further strengthened in the wake of
the attacks of 13 November in order to urge all Internet
businesses to take responsibility. Those tragic events
have in fact enabled us to see where social networks can
play a catalytic role in mobilizing society.
Today’s debate enables us to send two main
messages. The first is that the United Nations has a
major part to play in combating terrorism in general and
Da’esh in particular. That is the message of resolution
2249 (2015), which the Council adopted unanimously,
at France’s initiative, on 20 November, exactly a week
after the Paris attacks, and which outlines the framework
for our shared fight against Da’esh in particular. The
second is that the United Nations has a unique role to
play in mobilizing the international community and
civil society against terrorist ideologies and narratives.
In that fight, our great diversity is our best asset for
bringing to bear the values that we hold in common and
that lie at the heart of the United Nations.
In urging the international community to redouble
its efforts to counter terrorist propaganda with the help
of the private sector, civil society and stakeholders
on the ground, the presidental statement we have just
adopted (S/PRST/2016/6) will enable us to further
deepen that mobilization and to usefully supplement
the Secretary-General’s call for developing a United
Nations communications strategy for preventing violent
extremism, as described in his January Plan of Action
(A/70/674). France will continue to play its full part in
those efforts.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset,
I would like to join you, Mr. President, and others in
expressing our condolences to the families of all those
killed in recent terrorist attacks. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the Secretary20/94

11/05/2016

General of Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy for
their briefings.
I often say that the Security Council needs to
hear more frequently from those working on the front
lines of the challenges we face, and it is a sign of the
sophistication of the threats that the Internet is now
one such front line. I therefore very much welcome
Mr. Crown to the Council and pay tribute to the
work he does at the Global Network Initiative and all
that it does to protect freedom of expression on the
Internet. Microsoft is a brand that we all recognize and
understand. The same could be said of our brand — the
United Nations — or the Security Council.
But, sadly, the same can also be said of Da’esh.
For the disaffected, the disillusioned, the vulnerable,
the Da’esh brand has a terrifying ability to connect and
persuade. It offers a false promise of empowerment,
identity and belonging. It claims to offer a new society,
mandated through a perverse interpretation of one of
the world’s great religions. It even has its own logo. The
black flag is globally recognized, revered by the few,
feared by the many.
The engine of that brand is, without doubt, the
Internet. It has been hijacked to spread the hateful
messages of Da’esh in ways previously thought
impossible, to reach audiences previously though
inaccessible. That is true in my country as much as it is
in any of those represented around this table. Take the
case of Adnan Mahmoud, a student from Lancashire
in the North of England. Through the Internet, he was
drawn to the Da’esh brand. He searched for graphic
videos of Da’esh’s brutality and shared them in an effort
to indoctrinate others. The Internet was just the start.
Spurred on by what he had seen online, he sought it out
in the real world and flew to Turkey in September 2014
to join Da’esh in Syria.
How can we respond to that horrific abuse of the
Internet? How can we show vulnerable people like
Mr. Mahmoud that there is an alternative to the Da’esh
brand? Our approach in response must involve the whole
of our societies. It is not just about Governments; it is
about harnessing the expertise of local communities,
civil society and religious leaders. Those groups
bring credibility and authenticity that can counter the
narratives of groups such as Da’esh. A whole-of-society
approach also means partnerships with technology
companies, to help us reclaim the space that Da’esh
has occupied on social media. To be clear, that does not
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

mean coercing or restricting tech companies; we cannot
beat Da’esh by censoring or restricting access to social
media. Instead, we must work together to amplify
voices that can persuade, inform and, ultimately,
undermine the Da’esh brand. To defeat a network, we
need a network.
The United Nations has a vital role to play in that
effort. Our Organization has a unique ability to convene
interested parties, as you have done today, Mr. President.
It has a unique ability to share emerging evidence of
what works, so that we can all learn from one another’s
best practices. And it is the ability of the United
Nations to build longer-term resilience at sub-national,
national and regional levels that will ensure that there
is a long-term solution to the threat posed by violent
extremism. That is why the United Kingdom firmly
endorses the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). We call on all
States to implement its vital recommendations, many of
which bolster the objectives outlined in the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/6) we have adopted today.
Outside the United Nations, the United Kingdom
will also play its part. As co-Chair of the Global
Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant in its efforts to tackle Da’esh propaganda, we
have invested more than $14 million in the Coalition’s
communications cell in London. We are not alone. Our
partners from Bahrain, Canada, Denmark, Germany
and the Netherlands are helping to run the cell, and we
are working extremely closely with the United States
and the United Arab Emirates. Together, we are taking
the propaganda fight to Da’esh, and we know that it is
working. Da’esh’s media output from Syria has dropped
considerably. For every Da’esh supporter on Twitter,
we now see at least six Twitter handles speaking out
against them. We would like everyone to join them in
tweeting about #DefeatingDaesh.
In conclusion, of course we cannot be complacent.
The challenges ahead still remain significant, but there
are some grounds for optimism. To illustrate that, I would
like to return to the story of Mr. Mahmoud. Thanks to
the love of his family, he never made it to Syria. His
brother used Twitter to reach Adnan just before he
crossed the border. He persuaded him to return to the
United Kingdom to take responsibility for his actions.
His brother was that vital, credible voice needed to
show Adnan that there was an alternative — and, of
course, it was the Internet that enabled him to do so. As

S/PV.7690

we continue our fight against Da’esh, I hope that we can
all keep that story firmly in our minds.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mr. Minister, we are grateful to the delegation
of Egypt for the very timely initiative of convening this
open debate on the theme of “Countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism”. We regard this meeting as
an important contribution to Security Council efforts
within the broad agenda of international counterterrorist cooperation.
We are grateful to the briefers for their substantial
contributions to the discussion.
The growth of radicalism of late has, to a large
extent, been fed and fuelled by unprecedented terrorist
propaganda, aimed primarily at youth and the socially
underprivileged strata of the population. It constantly
takes on new shapes and adapts to the potentials offered
by modern technologies, such as the Internet. Terrorists
are spreading a perverted ideology of intransigence and
violence not related to any of the religions. Despite
that, there is, unfortunately, a demand for such ideas,
which is demonstrated, for example, by the large-scale
recruitment of foreign terrorists fighters into the ranks
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
(Da’esh) and associated terrorist groups.
What is required are effective recipes for responses
to those dangerous trends. Currently, the time has
come to accumulate the resources and expertise of the
international community to erect a bulwark against
terrorist ideology.
We are convinced of the need for the organic
incorporation of preventive measures into the broader
counter-terrorist efforts. That work must be carried out
on the basis of international law and Security Council
resolutions and must be free of double standards and
any division of terrorists into good ones and bad ones.
States cooperation must be based on the existing
international legal framework and the Global CounterTerrorist Strategy. It is of fundamental importance
that the Council continue to focus on such important
tasks as combating radicalization and the incitement
to terrorism and countering the use of the media, the
Internet and social networks for terrorist practices.
The decisive role in combating the ideologies of
terrorism, just like in all counter-terrorist actions, must
reside with States and their relevant agencies. At the same
time, State agencies must, in a targeted way, also seek

16-1328621/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to involve the efforts and potential of non-governmental
organizations and civil society, religious communities,
academia, educational institutions, the mass media and
the business community.
In our country, priority attention is being paid to
effectively countering terrorist ideology and preventing
the radicalization of political and social forces through
its influence. Those tasks have become pressing in the
light of the unprecedented propaganda and mobilization
campaign being mounted by international terrorists,
first and foremost ISIL (Da’esh) and Jabhat Al-Nusra.
Preventive counter-terrorist work traditionally
actively includes religious representatives, eminent
theologians and leading experts in the field of law
and religion. The Government provides the necessary
support to public associations acting in favour of
strengthening interfaith and inter-ethnic trust. National
cultural events and social programmes are being
organized, including interregional youth forums in the
North Caucasus and seasonal youth clubs. Successful
examples of such efforts, with the involvement of
civil society, include the Peace for the Children of the
Caucasus project and the International Theological
Conference with the participation of religious
representatives from our country, the Commonwealth
of Independent States and Africa. The introduction of
a course entitled “Fundamentals of Religious Cultures
and Secular Ethics” into the curricula of Russian
schools was also quite successful. There is also the
regular preparation of publications for the mass media
and the posting online on various Internet sites of
various materials explaining the criminal essence of
terrorist organizations.

11/05/2016

“comprehensive international framework”, we will
fully utilize the positive experience of the work on
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) on combating
the incitement to terrorism. We view the adopted
presidential statement as a significant contribution to
the process of implementing that resolution.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
convening of this second open debate on terrorism, in
line with the one held under the Chinese presidency (see
S/PV.7670) in April, constitutes — if there ever was such
a need — eloquent proof of the special attention that
our Council devotes to the scourge afflicting modern
times, namely, violent extremism and its corollary,
terrorism.
That is why, Mr. Minister, the Senegalese
delegation is gratified to see you preside personally
over this meeting and wishes to convey its sincere
gratitude to Egypt for the opportunity afforded us to
engage in an in-depth exercise in considering ways and
means to more effectively tackle that pernicious threat
to international peace and security.
We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and our briefers, Mr. Modi El-Din Afifi, SecretaryGeneral of the Al-Azhar Islamic Research Academy
and Mr. Steven Crown, Vice President and Deputy
General Counsel of the Microsoft Corporation for their
statements. The delegation of Senegal also associates
itself with the statement that will be made by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

We
welcome
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2016/6) adopted upon Egypt’s initiative,
which quite rightly underscores the Security Council’s
priorities in the field of counter-terrorism. The
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee is
entrusted with the task of preparing and submitting,
in a timely manner, for the Council’s consideration a
“comprehensive international framework” containing a
set of recommendations to counter the pseudo-ideology
of ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaeda and associated groups.

With the development of information and
communication technologies, terrorist groups have
become masters of using the Internet and the social
media to defy States and international organizations,
incite people to violence, recruit adherents and to
fund and plan their heinous terrorist acts. However,
as effective as their strategies have been, violent
extremism and its discourse are based on an erroneous
interpretation of religion and on its instrumentalization
for purely criminal and material purposes. That is
why we have to act together to shatter that perverse
discourse, as was said so eloquently by the SecretaryGeneral of the Al-Azhar Islamic Research Academy.

We intend to participate actively in the elaboration
of that document and stand ready to provide support
to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in that regard. We expect that,
in the process of agreeing and implementing the

In a world that is marked by strong socioeconomic
disparities within States and among them, the terrorist
discourse is being manipulated by skilful propagandists
claiming to embody a vision of the world based on
the precepts of religion with the intent of providing

22/94

16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the illusion, to more than just a few individuals, that
they are the harbingers of hope and the providers of
solutions against oppression, injustice, cultural and
religious aggression.
Unfortunately, that biased narrative enables the
so-called Islamic State and other extremist groups to
recruit foreign terrorists fighters from nearly a hundred
countries. In fact, the current estimate is that there
are 30,000 such fighters. To stem that flow of foreign
terrorist fighters requires of us, Member States, that
we be more diligent in implementing the relevant
provisions of Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2253 (2015).
Senegal is part of the Sahel-Saharan region. That is a
region faced with the development of violent extremism
that is fuelled by ignorance, poverty and exploits the
foibles and weaknesses of the international system.
Terrorist groups are attempting to take hold of whole
swaths of territory and undermine existing States.
That calls for the urgent adoption of preventive and
repressive measures to counter such violent extremism
of a religious nature and its corollary, terrorism.
For its part, Senegal has adopted an approach that is
based on prevention, cooperation and rapid response. As
part of our preventive strategy, my country gives pride
of place to education, information and communication
and focuses on raising the awareness of the population,
as well as on dialogue with opinion leaders, notably
religious leaders, whose role is essential when it comes
to countering the extremist discourse. That policy is
based on sociological data and secular values, such as
tolerance and respect for diversity. Senegal is a secular
State that attaches great importance to dialogue between
cultures and religions, which can ensure cohesion and
perfect harmony between ethnicities and faiths.
However, in a globalized world and given the scale
of the threats, no country alone can confront the threat
of terrorism in a sustainable manner, especially given
its increasingly sophisticated and violent attacks. Aware
of that fact, the Ministers responsible for domestic
security of Côte d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Mali and
Senegal, following the wave of bloody terrorist attacks
that struck the West African subregion, including
the Radisson Hotel in Bamako on 20 November, the
Splendide Hotel in Ouagadougou on 15 January, and
in Grand-Bassam in Côte d’Ivoire on 13 March, met
in Abidjan on 24 March with the goal of coordinating
their actions in order to devise an appropriate response

S/PV.7690

to that scourge. They agreed to pool their efforts to
strengthen the relations between the national security
services in order to establish unity of action and
cooperation between security forces and to hold regular
meetings to update the information that they have
regarding terrorism in their respective States and to
publish a monthly bulletin regarding criminal acts of
a terrorist nature. A meeting will be held in the near
future on fighting Boko Haram. Next week in Dakar,
we will organize a subregional seminar for the West
African, Central African and the Sahel and Saharan
regions on the fight against religious extremism and on
border monitoring and control.
In order to ensure its effectiveness, any action
aimed at countering terrorism and violent extremism
must address both the cultural and the structural causes.
Those causes are numerous and include marginalization,
discrimination, poor governance and the absence of
socioeconomic prospects. Repressive measures must,
therefore, include a number of preventive and dissuasive
measures, including ones that will have a strong social
impact aimed at reducing exclusion, marginalization
and discrimination. The policies adopted, if they are to
be sustainable, must be coupled with good governance,
the respect for human rights, improving the conditions
of life of the population, and the building of peaceful
and inclusive societies.
It is in that spirit that a number of actions seem
pertinent to us in the fight against the extremist
discourse and violence of terrorist groups. We need to set
up religious-training establishments that are in keeping
with our perceptions and religious practice and that are
marked by tolerance and solidarity. We need to educate,
train and inform the citizens and the communities, so
as to enable them to resist fallacious ideologies. We
need to stress the real nature of terrorist groups, which
are nothing more than mafia-like organizations, with
a view to exposing their lack of credibility. We need
to respond to the rhetoric of terrorists and extremist
groups by underscoring the illegitimate nature of their
discourse in religious terms.
However, in addition to such good practices, which
are not in themselves enough to block the violent and
extremist discourse of terrorist groups, we must give
people, especially young people, good reasons as well as
the means to remain with their families and in their own
country rather than to seek adventure outside, beyond
our borders, which often has very tragic consequences.

16-1328623/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which will be reviewed next month, as well
as the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674), are, in our view,
appropriate frameworks, as they contain the necessary
elements to counter the discourse and odious ideology
of terrorists. Those frameworks will, however, have to
be interpreted in terms of partnership and cooperation
at the subregional, regional and international levels. At
a national level, it is important for Member States to be
inspired by the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to adopt, in full
exercise of their sovereignty, national plans of action
and national strategies inspired by local specificities
and better tailored to their socioeconomic and security
needs. The assistance of the international community
and the United Nations will, of course, be necessary in
that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to indicate that the
Senegalese delegation has worked with the Egyptian
delegation to ensure the elaboration and adoption this
morning of the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/6).
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to join others in expressing our sincere gratitude
to the Egyptian delegation and to you personally,
Mr. Minister, for convening this debate. Also please
accept our condolences in connection with the bloody
terrorist attack committed in Cairo on Sunday.
Our thanks also go to the briefers, who have
provided us with valuable information concerning
the current trends and policies applied in the field of
countering terrorist narratives and propaganda by the
United Nations, Member States and civil society actors.
Terrorist and violent extremist ideologies, which
have been propagated all over the world by terrorist
entities, the most well-known being the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and groups, nowadays pose a
serious threat to international peace and security, as
well as to stability in the world. They threaten our core
values and principles, including democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, equal opportunity and freedom.
Notwithstanding the recent tentative progress in
the suppression of those international terrorist threats,
especially by depriving the terrorist organizations
of some sources of their financing, there is still a
significant lack of cohesive actions with regard to
countering their propaganda while ensuring effective
24/94

11/05/2016

implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014). Achieving that goal will be possible
only through a comprehensive framework of concrete
strategies aimed at consolidating all existing efforts
and strengthening cooperation among all stakeholders,
including Governments, civil society and the private
sector, so as to improve their understanding of the ways
in which terrorists use information and communications
technologies (ICT) for terrorist purposes. That will
make possible the application of a unified approach
to deterring the use of the Internet and social media
to incite people to terrorism, train and recruit foreign
terrorist fighters, and plan and finance terrorist
activities.
To strike at the heart of the aggressive informational
campaigns of terrorists aimed at the recruitment
of new followers and sympathizers, the strategy of
the international community should involve not just
countering the ideologies of such groups, which
are being distributed through the Internet, but also
developing persuasive context-specific counternarratives and messages to neutralize the terrorists’
influence on persons belonging to the target audiences
and to eliminate the terrorists’ focal points for
radicalization. That is where civil society and, in
particular, representatives of local communities and
religious leaders, could play a crucial role in raising
public awareness by revealing the truth about wouldbe jihadists and by de-glorifying their activities. To
monitor the threat posed by the use of ICT for terrorist
purposes, to collect, identify and share good practices
developed in this field worldwide and to mobilize
resources for building required capacities, we need
to establish a strengthened international cooperation
mechanism that would engage relevant United Nations
counter-terrorism entities, acting within the all-ofUnited Nations approach, together with regional and
subregional organizations.
It goes without saying that counter-measures would
not have long-lasting effects without removing the root
causes of the threat of violent extremism and terrorism.
Having put out the fire in one place in the world, there is
no guarantee that an outbreak will not occur elsewhere.
Our collective response should be focused on addressing
underlying factors that create opportunities for violent
extremist and terrorist ideologies to spread and thrive.
Only by combining more nuanced and comprehensive
countering and prevention measures that address
governance deficit, promote social development and
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

dialogue and respect for the rule of law and human rights,
develop strategic communications, engage women and
youth and expand public-private partnerships can we
reduce the appeal of and support for terrorist groups
and enhance resilience against them. In this respect, we
note with appreciation the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), add
our voice in support of further consideration of the Plan
during the review process of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy this June, and look forward
to extensive discussions on how it can enhance the
existing comprehensive counter-terrorism architecture.
While addressing the need to intensify our common
work on preventing the spread of malevolent ideologies,
we should explore ways to engage young people, who
constitute one of the strata that are most vulnerable to
violent extremist and terrorist narratives. There are
many factors contributing to youth radicalization; one
of the most important is propaganda. Violent extremist
and terrorist groups actively exploit this tool through
media and social networks. In our opinion, the most
dangerous situation emerges when such manipulations
are elevated to the rank of State policies.
Under international law States are obliged to
refrain from engaging in acts of terrorism and to work
to prevent them. An essential element of both these
obligations is the necessity of countering terrorist
ideological propaganda. This observation should be
taken into consideration while assessing States’ input
on combating terrorism.
For more than two years, Ukraine has suffered
from the aggression of its neighbour, the Russian
Federation. Russia has temporarily occupied and
attempted to illegally annex a part of the territory of
Ukraine — the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol — and continues hostile and
subversive actions, supporting terrorism in the Donbas
region. Russia employs a broad range of hybrid warfare
techniques, including financing terrorism, to promote
ideology of the so-called Russian world, which implies
an exclusive role for the Russian Federation in the
internal affairs of the countries that were once part
of the Russian empire or the former Soviet Union as
well as in shaping their foreign policy priorities. This
neo-imperialist ideology tolerates and encourages
violation of international law and human rights and
the perpetration of serious crimes, including terrorists
acts. Fierce, deceitful propaganda disseminated by
the State-controlled Russian media is one of the key

S/PV.7690

elements of the ongoing hybrid aggression against
Ukraine.
The international community should be alarmed
by the fact that this hybrid propaganda machine
based on Soviet and czarist experience and other
totalitarian concepts continues to work very well and
in an effective manner, affecting, first and foremost,
young people. There are reported cases of teenagers’
participation in the activities of Russian-backed
terrorist organizations — the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic — that have
on several occasions attacked civilians in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine,
using arms and munitions supplied by the Russian
Federation. Some of the perpetrators are 15-years-old
or even younger.
There is also credible information that the Russian
proxies and their Kremlin masters are forcing pupils
and students into their ranks using different means of
influence, including religious organizations. Moreover,
there is plentiful evidence that such means as promising
to annul criminal records or repay loans are used in
the Russian campaign to recruit mercenaries into the
terrorist gangs operating in the Donbas. Young people
are common victims of such recruitment campaigns.
Therefore, apart from comprehensive efforts to
eliminate the social, economic, cultural, religious and
other grounds for the spread of violent extremism and
terrorism, there is a need to address such phenomena as
State propaganda imbued with intolerance and hatred
and information wars, which often serve as part of
hybrid warfare.
We proceed from the understanding that victims
of terrorism should also play an important role in the
aforementioned comprehensive preventive campaign to
combat extremist and terrorist ideologies and counter
their narratives. The messages brought by the victims
of terrorism and their family members can help us
revive people’s natural understanding of good and evil
and disrupt terrorist information campaigns aimed
at pulling the wool over people’s eyes. We strongly
believe that by establishing an international day of
commemoration of the victims of terrorist acts we
would send a strong signal about the dire consequences
of terrorist activities, which are to be remembered as
the lessons from the tragic past, with the ultimate goal
of preventing such acts from ever recurring.

16-1328625/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like, first
of all, to express our appreciation at seeing you this
morning, Mr. President, as you preside over this very
important and timely meeting of the Security Council.
I congratulate the Egyptian delegation for organizing
today’s debate on a troubling issue of great concern for
the international community.
We also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand and the Deputy Ministers of Malaysia,
Spain and Japan. We thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson for his timely briefing and we
also thank Mr. Crown and Mr. Afifi for their very
insightful briefings, given the very important role
their organizations play in the fight in which we are all
engaged.
We welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6, on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts, and commend the
Egyptian delegation for the efforts deployed that have
led us to its adoption by the Council this morning.
The ability acquired by terrorists to conquer and
administer territories is one of the most disturbing facts
in today’s international reality. By exploiting religious
beliefs, ethnic differences and political ideologies to
legitimize their actions, the terrorists have divided
nations, recruited followers and taken hold of vast
territories. They are, avowedly, intent on building
States, based on the most obscure irredentism.
The principal consequence of such a development
has been the spread of violent extremism across vast
regions of the world with a message of totalitarian
intolerance of religious, cultural, social and racial
diversity, posing an immense challenge to the
universal values of peace, justice and human dignity,
as proclaimed by the United Nations, and provoking a
humanitarian crisis of catastrophic proportions.
It is against that backdrop that the international
community is applying renewed determination and
seeking the most suitable ways to counter this new
brand of violent radical extremism and terrorism
through in-depth studies of the phenomenon, refined
operational tools to counter the threat, and international
cooperation as a key to our success. Angola, as Chair
of the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region and in partnership with the United Nations,
organized in mid-February 2015 a regional seminar
on terrorism, aimed at the pacification and resolution
of conflicts in the Central African region, where
26/94

11/05/2016

disturbing signs of the terrorist threats are making
inroads. Angola has also participated in meetings of
the Southern African Development Community, which
recently adopted a strategy to combat terrorism in the
southern African region. These actions highlight the
Angolan Government’s commitment to contributing
to the creation and implementation of mechanisms to
combat the terrorist threat.
Violent extremism originates and thrives in specific
contexts, with a number of clearly identified situations
as its drivers. Radicalization and violent extremism find
fertile ground poverty, unemployment, corruption and
disrespect for fundamental human rights. The political
and economic exclusion of ethnic and social groups,
marginalization, impediments to public freedoms, poor
governance, the culture of impunity, repressive policies
and discrimination are some of the fundamental drivers
exploited by violent extremists.
Another powerful driver, consistently invoked in
their narratives, is the issue of unresolved conflicts,
permitting extremists to exploit deep-rooted grievances
arising from oppression or its remnants and foreign
intervention. Such grievances, deeply entrenched in the
ideology of violent extremist, impose the urgent need
to resolve long-standing conflicts and put an end to
deceptive narratives of revenge and hatred.
The most outrageous feature of today’s violent
extremism is the exploitation of religious belief in
order to divide nations, suppress religious, cultural
and ethnic diversity, and perpetrate despicable crimes
in the name of religious homogeneity. In presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/6, which we have adopted
today, the Security Council notes how terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida craft distorted narratives based on
the misinterpretation and misrepresentation of religion
to justify violence and recruit supporters and foreign
terrorist fighters.
The Secretary-General, translating the deep
concern of the international community, presented to
the General Assembly at its current session his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, as and when
conducive to terrorism. Angola supports the Plan and
is ready to participate in the work necessary to make
it implementable. The Plan of Action acknowledges
the need of concerted action in addressing terrorism
beyond law enforcement, military or security measures
by placing special emphasis on prevention, in
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

particular through social and economic development,
good governance, human rights and humanitarian
concerns, the rule of law, combating discrimination,
marginalization and exclusion.

the universal values of peace, justice and human dignity
that violent extremism and terrorism are challenging in
a way unprecedented since the founding of the United
Nations.

The agenda to prevent violent extremism emphasizes
the impact of action at the local, national and regional
levels in a mutually reinforcing process with an allof-United-Nations approach. In that connection, this
meeting of the Security Council constitutes a valid
contribution to the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action, which we again welcome.

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We should like at the
outset to thank the delegation of Egypt for having
convened today’s open debate on a matter of such great
importance. This meeting has elicited great interest
within the international community, as evidenced by
the fact that some 70 participants have asked to speak.
It is also taking place concurrently with the General
Assembly’s review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy — a most timely juncture.

The Deputy Secretary-General this morning
clearly reminded us of the particular role that young
people have to play in our deliberations. Youth is
a fundamental element in this process. It is among
young people, mostly the disenfranchised and poorly
educated, that violent extremism thrives and is the
main recruitment base for the contingent of foreign
terrorist fighters. Accordingly, it is crucial to raise
young people’s awareness of preventing violent
extremism and terrorism by securing their integration
in decision-making processes, engaging in dialogue
among generations, their participation in their
respective communities, stepping up the struggle
against poverty social marginalization, and enhancing
education on respect for human rights, diversity,
peaceful coexistence and tolerance.
The participation in our meeting of Mr. Mohi
El-Din Afifi and Mr. Steven Crown is very welcome
indeed, given he pivotal role that their respective
organizations can play in the successful implementation
of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action and the
presidential statement that we have just adopted.
The ideological debate on preventing and actually
countering terrorism is a vital component in the area
of information technologies in order to effectively
challenge and demystify the narratives propagated
by violent extremists and terrorists. As the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism states, the United
Nations plays a central role in uniting the international
community and giving coherence to its efforts in
preventing and countering violent extremism and
terrorism.
The Security Council, through the mandatory
powers entrusted to it by the Charter of the United
Nations, must play a crucial role in leading the
international community in this decisive struggle to
uphold the principles and purposes of the Charter and

We also convey our respects to His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Arab Republic of Egypt, a country that is a friend
to Venezuela. We also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson; Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi, SecretaryGeneral of Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy; and
Mr. Steven Crown, Vice-President and Deputy General
Council of Microsoft for their briefings.
I join others in conveying my country’s condolences
to those Ministers here present in the light of the recent
terrorist attacks suffered by their people, and express
our unwavering rejection of such actions.
The phenomenon of terrorism is nothing new. It
has appeared throughout history as the most violent
political expression. That said, the subject joining
us together today, as expressed in the concept note
(S/2016/416, annex), is the concern that in recent years
we have seen in the Middle East and North Africa
the spread of terrorism and its transformation into a
global phenomenon by way of the terrible attacks by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, the Al-Nusra
Front and Boko Haram, inter alia. We must therefore
ask ourselves why this is happening precisely now and
precisely in those regions. If we do not take the time to
engage in a multidimensional analysis of the root causes
of the phenomenon, we risk overlooking certain key
elements as part of a discussion capable of combating
the extremist and terrorism narrative.
Terrorism, as the most acute expression of violent
extremism, is the result of accumulated factors that have
impacted the Middle East and North Africa in recent
years. The key factor, in our perspective, is the violent
foreign intervention that took place in Iraq and Libya
and is currently under way in Syria. As a result of such

16-1328627/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

egregious interventionism, the institutional framework
of those States has collapsed throughout most of their
territory. That has happened not only as a result of the
brutal nature of war, but rather, in many cases, as the
direct objective of the invading and occupying forces.
The State, as the body responsible for all education,
health care, cultural and law enforcement institutions
and the armed forces, is the only entity capable of
containing the spread of terrorism. Its weakening in
those countries prevents it from effectively fulfilling
that containment function. The destruction of the
State’s institutional fabric and the resulting vacuum has
allowed religious sectarianism to displace the political
groups that previously supported the Governments of
of the Middle Eastern and North African countries that
suffered foreign military interventionism, particularly
Iraq and Libya, leaving the civilian population at the
mercy of the influence and actions of the terrorist
groups. In some cases, as we are already well aware,
foreign intervention has led to the breakdown of States,
including their de facto and de jure disappearance.
Another aspect to take into account in addressing
the phenomenon of terrorism is the sociological
outcome of the fact that those countries now have a
generation of young people — entire societies — that,
in the past 15 years, have known no other way of life
than war and conflict. That has given rise to societies in
those countries that have been traumatized by violence
and become breeding grounds for young people who
join non-State armed groups, militias or terrorist
groups. Against that backdrop, the lack of opportunity
generated by the destruction of the economy due to
the ravages of interventionist wars and civil conflicts
must be taken into account, as it has a major impact on
young people, who see themselves trapped by poverty,
frustration and despair.
Another factor that must be considered is religion.
Venezuela believes that terrorism cannot and should
not be ascribed with any race, religion or people.
Nonetheless, we are struck by the fact that in various
instances, for political and ideological ends, some
elements have attempted to paint Islam as the religious
and ethical source of terrorism. That is an entirely
false connection and we roundly reject it. In the West,
such erroneous ideas have given rise to the fact that
the Islamic faith is misunderstood and misinterpreted,
which has led to discrimination and persecution in
certain societies.
28/94

11/05/2016

I also note and denounce, as a basic driver of the
resurgence of terrorism, the linking of terrorism to the
destabilization of a given region. I refer to the strategies
of various nations that promote and support the
establishment of violent non-State actors, who through
their actions weaken and contribute to the downfall
of Governments that do not please the countries that
back and in many cases finance such actors. Today, we
see many of those violent non-State actors spreading
throughout the region and joined the terrorist groups
that are shedding blood across the Middle East and
North Africa.
The lack of Governments and society’s loss of
capacity to come together under institutional control
in the region has resulted in a scenario conducive to
the proliferation of militias and other violent non-State
actors, as well as those who protect, arm and finance
them from abroad. The evidence is clear on that and
we have all seen it. Those violent groups that enjoy
access to a huge arsenal of weapons, financing and
political and ideological backing are transformed into
the terrorist groups.
Unfortunately, the overlap among militias, other
non-State armed groups and terrorist and extremist
groups in the region is becoming increasingly obtuse
and confused within the dynamic of war and death.
We cannot ignore that crucial factor because as long as
there is no explanation as to why such groups dedicate
themselves to terrorism yet enjoy extraordinary
logistical and financial support, in some cases
surpassing the capacities of States. Moreover, there
is a huge quantity of arms that are euphemistically
called “small” and “light” but often include large-bore
weapons that have been hijacked or distributed by
terrorist groups and flow throughout the Middle East
and North Africa, sewing death among civilians.
All of the factors we have just mentioned do not
explain another key aspect of the terrorism narrative.
How have more than 30,000 foreign fighters entered
Syria and Iraq to join the umbrella terrorist groups
operating there? Why do those foreigners, many of
them from Europe or the Middle East, embrace the
cause of terror? What goes on in the minds of such
young people in their home countries that would bring
them to make such a decision? In that regard, we point
to the discrimination and segregation suffered by many
young people of the Muslim minority who have grown
up in European societies.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Alongside all of that, we must also take into account
the narrative of some Governments of the West or of the
Middle East that promote propaganda and systematic
attacks against countries that they wish to destabilize
or in which they seek to intervene militarily. This
encourages many young people outside those countries
to feel that joining the Governments undermined by
this narrative is a form of so-called just war in which
they must participate.
Another key element that must be borne in mind is
technology, which allows for the rapid and widespread
dissemination of the messages of extremists and
terrorists. We are stupefied to see how skillfully
terrorists and extremists use the same political tools
and information and communications technology that
some countries use to attack others. They use such tools
in what some theorists have called fourth-generation
warfare — strategies which, I regret to say, have been
applied to many countries in the world. What never
ceases to surprise is how terrorism and extremism
deploy enormous technological and communications
capability to broadcast their extremist messages and
ideologies with political aims and for destabilizing
purposes. In that regard, it is up to technology and
media companies to make efforts to prevent those
platforms for being used as echo chambers for terrorism
and extremism. Statements have been made that this
technology is being used for espionage and political
intervention. As such, the States and actors involved
must assume their responsibilities so that such heinous
practices are not repeated or be made available for
terrorism.
The last aspect of the phenomenon of terrorism has
to do with the nature of its ideology. An ideology of
intolerance and violence, with little regard for life or
the most fundamental values human coexistence, is a
hallmark of these terrorist movements, and we must fight
it in a unified manner. When it comes to this issue there
must be no double standards in the Security Council.
There is no such thing as good and bad terrorists. It is a
matter of concern that somehow, as part of geopolitical
goals on the part of some Powers on the Security
Council, there is tolerance for the raising of the banners
of death and terrorism and imposing a culture of death.
Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of acts of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
the motivations and wherever by whomever such acts
are committed. Such actions are deliberate attacks on

S/PV.7690

international peace and security, in addition to being
flagrant violations of international law.
In that context, we once again underscore the
importance of prevention in this exceedingly important
fight. It is important to adopt measures aimed at
undermining the clear strategy and ideologies of
extremist groups, which have assigned themselves the
task of fomenting violence and intolerance. Addressing
the root causes of this odious phenomenon and
developing effective and innovative strategies to counter
the extremist narratives of terrorists and stimulate
critical thinking in society with a view to preventing
radicalization, recruitment and the mobilization of
resources, including inappropriate use of information
and communication technologies — that is a battle that
we must wage honestly, for it is one that involves all
countries in the United Nations.
Likewise, we believe that a long-term solution to
the threats we face also requires finding political and
peaceful solutions to the conflicts in countries such as
Syria, Libya and Yemen and to the Palestinian question.
Those prolonged crises further exacerbate conflicts and
serve as a breeding ground for violent extremism and
terrorism, transnational crime, the flow of financial
resources for the recruitment and training of foreign
terrorist fighters, thereby improving the capacity of
terrorist groups to act.
Lastly, we believe that the international community
must continue to develop, implement and strengthen
strategies adapted to each individual case and national
circumstances with a view to eliminate the ability
of terrorist groups to act, all the while with strict
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. In that regard, we believe that the adoption of
a future convention against terrorism would serve as a
complement to the host of existing international legal
instruments by arriving at a definition that makes it
possible to strengthen consensus in this domain.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to commend you, Mr. President, for your
concept note (S/2016/416, annex) and for your initiative
to convene this open debate focused on countering
the narratives and ideologies of terrorist groups. I
also express my gratitude for the briefings by Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi
and Mr. Steven Crown.
Every act of terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of the motivation behind it, where and when

16-1328629/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

it takes place or who commits it. Terrorism is a difficult
phenomenon to define given its multifaceted character
and the myriad reasons behind it, which could be of a
political, ideological, philosophical, religious, ethnic,
racial or any other nature. My delegation believes
that linking or conflating terrorism with any religion,
nationality or civilization should be rejected. Religious
extremism is not unique to Islam, and neither is — or
ever has been —the violent extremism that leads to
terrorism. Regrettably, the terrorist groups that are
at the focus of our attention today — such as Da’esh,
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and associated groups — justify
their actions on the basis of a distorted interpretation of
the precepts of the Islamic religion.
Several strategies have been mentioned for breaking
the cycle of radicalization that aim to destroy the
message or the messenger. We understand that some are
complementary of one another. While destroying the
messenger leads us to a short-term solution, destroying
the message will lead to the long-term solution that
combating this scourge requires today. An effective
strategy for combating violent extremism and terrorism
should not be limited to punitive measures alone, but
adopt a preventive approach that makes it possible to
identify and put an early stop to nascent radicalization
efforts.
Carrying on this fight requires taking into account
the underlying causes that contribute to the emergence
of extremist groups and terrorist groups and developing
encompassing strategies to address the various
problems. At the same time, we must appropriately use
international cooperation while helping those in most
need. As members of the international community,
there are various avenues we can take to address many
of the root causes that serve as breeding grounds for
the emergence of violent extremists with terrorist
inclinations.
It is urgent that we halt the spread of the extremist
ideology that serves as a precursor of terrorist groups.
Above and beyond the essential primary responsibility
of each State in exercising its sovereign powers, we have
a collective responsibility to act effectively and with
robustness. We owe it to the victims of terrorist attacks
and their families — victims from the international
community whom we mourn irrespective of religion or
nationality. We therefore commend the recent holding
of the Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent
Extremism and welcome the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action on the subject.
30/94

11/05/2016

In that context and against the backdrop of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
without duplication of effort, we think it is important
to create a space to address the issue of narratives,
which Egypt very aptly placed at the heart of today’s
debate. Although we agree on the need to step up global
efforts against terrorism, the proliferation of initiatives
by various actors do not seem conducive to promising
outcomes. Instead, it could serve to confuse, fragment
and weaken the global effort and take us away from
the common goal. It is therefore key to coordinate
the different ongoing initiatives, such as the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the Secretary-General’s
Action Plan and the efforts being made in the Alliance
of Civilizations. Religious leaders will play an essential
role in correcting the false statements of those promoting
violent extremism. All religions include a message
about going beyond being an individual and doing what
is right. We need to suppress calls encouraging people
to achieve supremacy over others through violence.
In combating terrorism we walk a fine line
between eliminating this scourge and protecting and
bolstering our fundamental freedoms and our values
of tolerance and solidarity. We must be very careful
not to violate human rights. No effort in the context of
combating terrorism must lead to limiting the freedom
of expression, the freedom of religion and the freedom
of the press or stigmatizing political opponents. Every
well knows how terrorists effectively use information
platforms and social networks to disseminate their
hateful messages. But in one way or another, we should
take more responsibility for the platforms and networks
that terrorists’ use for their own advancement,
because if they are used properly, they are ideal for
good communication.
Access to the political sphere must not be cut
off. Pushing out and eliminating radicals only
creates a breeding ground for extremist ideologies.
It fuels resentment, which often mixes with other
basic ingredients, namely, poverty, inequality,
unemployment, a lack of opportunities and censorship,
all of which fuel radical discourse. It is preferable to
allow radicals to act in the political sphere, so as to
be able to openly confront their discourses and ideas.
That is the best way to reveal their weaknesses and
inconsistencies. When we prohibit their involvement,
we see a resurgence of extremist violence and terrorism.
There have been recent examples of that.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We need to study and understand the ideologies of
extremist violence and the rhetoric that extremists use.
We must develop counternarratives that can dampen
the allure of those ideologies. Terrorist groups, such as
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram, use religion as a
pretext to justify the unjustifiable through a narrative
that twists the intrinsic value of faith. We cannot
remain idle in the face of their messages of hate and
destruction. Those ideologues of hatred, many of
whom are intellectually well trained but come from
places where progress has been lacking, end up only
ostracizing people and impoverishing the societies that
they dominate and claim to be defending.
We must establish a genuine global communication
strategy that is efficient and able to counter the
ideologies used by the violent extremist leaders. We
have to develop messages that offer better life-options
and that are not discriminatory with regard to the
religion that they practice. The progress of the world
and human beings is not determined only by religion.
We must assign it the place and importance that it
deserves as an intimate and personal belief, but it must
not be turned into a barrier for social development.
We must encourage the teaching of tolerance
in educational curricula and promote messages that
foster tolerance and respect for differences, harmony
and peaceful coexistence among nations, cultures and
religions. For that reason, we welcome the participation
of everybody in today’s timely open debate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I would also like to appeal
to speakers to deliver their statements at a reasonable
speed so that interpretation may be provided accurately.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): I would like to
express my sincere gratitude to the Arab Republic of
Egypt for organizing this important debate.

S/PV.7690

Today’s debate is, in my view, a very timely one,
timely because of the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and because
of the several, very tragic events that have happened
recently: terrorist bombs in Ankara and Istanbul and
gunmen attacking a hotel in Ouagadougou. Last week
I was on the beach in Côte d’Ivoire to pay tribute to
those who were killed in Grand-Bassam. The dozens
of ordinary men, women and children in a park in
Lahore killed by a suicide bomber targeting Christians
at Easter; the dozens of lives lost in terrorist strikes
at Brussels’ airport and metro, and today, the tragic
attacks in Baghdad killing at least 85 people underline
the urgency of this debate. My thoughts and sympathies
go to the victims of terrorism all over the world and to
their families. I would like also to pay my condolences
to you, Mr. President, because of the lost policemen
in Egypt this weekend. Such attacks try to create fear,
panic and the destruction of our ways of life and our
freedoms. They try to instil fear and division among us,
and they will not succeed because their attacks underline
the vital importance of international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism, in preventing violent extremism
and in offering alternative messaging.
Nobody in this Chamber can afford to go it alone,
if we want to achieve long-term success. Foreign
terrorist fighters, a new term, are in fact not foreign,
as they come from among us, from the social fabric of
our societies. Nobody can go it alone; we are all going
through stress tests in our societies, and one of the main
lessons we can draw from the recent attacks in the past
month is the need to think globally and act very locally.
As such, the Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, and underlines the importance of
building national action plans. Such comprehensive
plans should not be perceived as an exercise in finger
pointing. No — all of us face the same challenge of
violent extremism, and we have to work together to
meet it effectively. Sharing information is one key
element of cooperation, and frankly we need more
trust among ourselves and our nations and among our
law-enforcement agencies, our border guards and our
intelligence operations. We need to break the code
of silence that sustains networks of foreign terrorist
fighters and facilitates suspected terrorists, who operate
under the radar. We need to work with the private sector
and with civil society to break the silence and stop
terrorist financing in a legal and effective framework.

16-1328631/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has committed
to contributing robustly to the multilateral approach
to cooperation, including through the Global CounterTerrorism Forum, which we currently co-Chair together
with the Kingdom of Morocco. In that Forum, we work
to streamline our national policies on, for example,
the rehabilitation of former terrorists, because that is
a second obligation, namely, to achieve a better balance
between dissuasive and preventative approaches.
We have to work in our prisons, with returnees, with
youth, with police and with religious leaders. That is
the day-to-day work in our societies. The Jordan-led
Aqaba Middle East peace process poses an example
of an effective exchange of lessons learned, building
bridges between countries and increasing our day-today collaboration.
Even though Governments can be instrumental in
delivering a strong and positive narrative, messages
are more effective when they are developed and
disseminated by our new generations. To young people
who question the legitimacy of authority in general, any
message disseminated only by a Government could be
received with suspicion. So what are our alternatives?
We need to acknowledge that we as Governments often
try to fight a modern battle with old weapons. We need
young people, who can understand the motivations for
joining brutal terrorist groups, who speak the right
language and who know how to communicate via apps
and online tools.
We need to promote the positive role played by
young people who have fled from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and who are brave enough to speak
up. As a Government, the Netherlands can empower
them, with you and others to protect them against those
who want to stifle their voices. For that we have to work
with all the stakeholders — the teachers, the business
community, the parents and even the sports clubs.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes freedom
of speech is crucial for stimulating critical thinking,
which is one of the strongest weapons against extremist
propaganda. Last year, our association of journalists
organized a road show on press freedom and taught
young people how to question the opinions that they
encounter. We should reach out to children at an early
age to familiarize them with alternatives to violent
narratives. In Jordan and Lebanon, we are working
with local partners to build bridges between refugee
communities and host communities, with education for
32/94

11/05/2016

children on values like tolerance, diversity and respect
for others.
In conclusion, let me make two final observations.
First, the Council has not heard me use the word
“counternarrative”. I don’t actually care much for that
word because, to me, it sounds defensive and reactive.
There are no general counternarratives that can do
justice to an individual’s life in all its brilliance and
confusion and with all its challenges and rewards. I
prefer to use terms such as “positive” or “inclusive”
narrative.
My second observation is that working with our
young people should be our top priority for preventing
violent extremism. They are our first line of defence,
the people who can build bridges between countries
and prevent their friends from becoming terrorists.
But they need our help, at the national, local and
international levels. In order to enable them to be the
voice of reason, we must ensure that we put in place
appropriate international frameworks and policies for
upholding the standards of international human rights,
the rule of law and the freedoms that distinguish us
from barbaric terrorist groups. The only way to make
our strategy work is to teach young people to be critical
thinkers, make up their own minds and take control of
their own lives without hurting others. They are the
agents of change.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Argentine Republic.
Ms. Malcorra (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the Egyptian presidency for
the invitation to participate in today’s open debate
on an issue of such importance to the international
community. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his statement earlier and all the
briefers for theirs.
Argentina condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and considers terrorist acts to be a threat
not only to international peace and security but also
to human dignity, peaceful and civilized coexistence,
the stability and consolidation of democracy and
the economic and social development of nations. My
country, which was a victim of bloody terrorist attacks
in the 1990s, affirms that terrorist acts are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of why, when or by whomever
they are committed. Terrorism cannot and should not
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

be associated with any particular religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group.
Argentina has always repudiated the grave
violations and abuses perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), with their resulting
impact on regional stability and international peace and
security. We reiterate our categorical condemnation of
all terrorist acts carried out by that group in all their
forms and manifestations and would like to express our
deep solidarity with the civilian victims of the cruelty
and evil acts committed by that terrorist group and
the groups associated with it. We cannot and must not
succumb to fear, however.
Although our region is a long way from the current
conflict zone, we continue to be concerned about the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters, which demands
preventive action. We monitor the issue through the
Southern Common Market’s Permanent Working
Group on Terrorism, through which Argentina supports
the strengthening of cooperation with the countries of
the region through the exchange of information by the
relevant agencies and effective border controls. At the
global level, we also support efforts aimed at facilitating
the exchange of information that is helpful for the early
detection of flows of foreign terrorist fighters.
However, we cannot deal with terrorism solely
through defence and security measures. Our efforts must
be based on a comprehensive approach, as reflected in
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
founded on a balanced implementation of the Strategy’s
four pillars and with full respect for international law
and international human rights, humanitarian and
refugee law. We must intensify our preventive action.
In many cases, the reasons for such extreme violence
lie in the underlying causes, which makes imperative an
approach based on international, multidimensional and
multidisciplinary cooperation, which, in turn, requires
commitment and interdependence between security
stakeholders and entities in the areas of development,
social policy and education. As my Dutch colleague
just said, it also requires trust.
It therefore becomes a priority to combat
radicalization through the Internet by developing
positive, constructive messages and counternarratives
in collaboration with service providers and the private
sector, while respecting the freedom of expression. We
are pleased that presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6,
adopted by the Council today, covers many of those

S/PV.7690

elements, including the role that can be played by
victims, among other legitimate voices, in countering
the radicalization that leads to terrorist violence and
narratives.
We must take advantage of the opportunity
provided by the tenth anniversary of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy to reaffirm the consensus
that enabled us to adopt the Strategy in 2006. Through
its four pillars, the Strategy continues to be in full force
today as a guide for United Nations efforts. Argentina
has the great responsibility of having been designated by
the President of the General Assembly as co-facilitator,
together with Iceland, of the fifth biennial review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
call on all States to join in that exercise, which we want
to be open and transparent, in order to arrive at a solid
result that renews our Organization’s consensus on its
action against terrorism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important debate.
I also welcome the Council’s adoption this morning of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6 on the subject. I
condemn all terrorist attacks, including the recent and
horrible attacks in Iraq, in which so many have been
killed. I would like to offer my condolences to all those
affected.
Terrorism poses a major threat to peaceful,
democratic and open societies, as previous speakers
today have said so eloquently. It tears apart the fabric
of society. Here I would like to recall a story about one
young man who was tempted to go and fight for Da’esh
but was told by his imam that rather than dying as a
martyr he would drown in his mother’s tears.
While I align myself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union, I
would like to underscore the following. First, our
response must be collective. The threat of terrorism is
transnational, as we all know, and our response must
therefore also be multilateral. The United Nations has
unique and important assets enabling it to contribute to
providing counters to the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. Going beyond measures aimed at enhancing
security, it should focus on implementing the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), which Sweden strongly supports.

16-1328633/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Regional cooperation and regional organizations
play a key role. The United Nations can use its
convening power to bring together relevant regional
and intergovernmental organizations and mechanisms.
It can also support and facilitate their work in other
ways. The African Union, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the European
Union, the Alliance of Civilizations and the Union for
the Mediterranean all bring clear added-value to global
efforts through established programmes, networks,
counselling and cooperation. In the context of today’s
debate, I would like to highlight the priority that such
organizations give to issues related to the media, young
people, education and migration, and the United Nations
should continue to provide support to those efforts.
My second point is that we need more and different
actors. Governments and multilateral organizations
will not suffice. We need to team up with civil society,
the media, religious and community leaders, social
workers, faith-based organizations and business.
Through them, we can safeguard a culture of peaceful
exchange and dialogue — a multitude of actors
creating resilience through inclusive dialogue aimed at
promoting diversity and tolerance. That will contribute
to the loss of the appeal of the destructive discourses.
However, we must recognize that more research is
needed into the psychology of violent extremism. The
narratives — as abhorrent, violent and inhumane as
they are — are attractive to some. Our understanding
of radicalization processes is still too limited. The key
to success will involve reaching out to young people,
as we heard the representative of the Netherlands say.
Sweden therefore fully supports resolution 2250 (2015)
and the work of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
on Youth, Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi. At home, Sweden
has appointed a national coordinator to strengthen the
resilience of democracy against violent extremism. We
see clear and early benefits of that office, including at
the municipal level where many possible preventive
interventions can be made.
My third point is that we must target the root causes.
Destructive narratives sometimes fester because of an
abetting context. Terrorism and violent extremism feed
on grievances, which they do not solve, but nurture.
That is the logic of the instrumentalization that terrorist
and extremist organizations employ. Economic and
social disenfranchisement, lack of dignity, corruption,
democratic deficiencies and human rights violations
are sometimes part of the radicalization context. In that
34/94

11/05/2016

regard, we must tackle those challenges resolutely, not
least by implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).
But other threats that underpin the ideologies
of terrorism and violent extremism must also be
addressed forcefully. That includes racism, hatred, and
acts of violence based on Islamophobia, anti-Semitism
and Afrophobia. We must refrain from all forms of
scapegoating and fear-mongering. Targeting a certain
religion, region, nationality or ethnic group plays right
into the hands of the terrorist ideology that we seek
to counter. Interfaith dialogue and education play a
critical role in reducing such tendencies.
Terrorists seek to divide us and spread fear.
Our response — our counter-narrative and our
actions — must be one of inclusiveness, unity and
trust. Real dialogue, based on the equality and dignity
of all persons, is certainly the best antidote to racism,
xenophobia and Islamophobia. Therefore, the United
Nations — as the guardian of global dialogue among
nations and peoples — can and must be at the heart
of our global efforts to prevent violent extremism and
counter terrorism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Investment
Promotion of Somalia.
Mr. Omer (Somalia): The Government of the
Federal Republic of Somalia welcomes this timely
debate organized and chaired by Egypt on the topic
countering the narratives and ideologies of extremism.
Violent extremism is an issue that is truly dangerous
and needs to be countered effectively and immediately.
It is a threat that causes suspicion, hatred and division
across the world. It is also fuelling many of our wars
and humanitarian crises across the globe, crises that are
perpetuated by the lack of a political solutions and the
rise of radicalized foreign fighters.
The Government of Somalia welcomes the
Secretary-General’s call to action and unity on
countering violent extremism. Our Government is
working across all groups in our society to counter
extremism in Somalia, and we are partnering with the
United Nations and other key stakeholders, including
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the Global Coalition to
Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
individual partner nations to overcome that evil.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Countering violent extremism is indeed a key
challenge in our time. Where once people had to cross
borders to radicalize and divide societies with mindless
violence, today they just need to click a button on their
computer. That brings the threat of radicalization closer
to each home, street and nation around the world. That
is why we must work together as a community of nations
to formulate and execute a coherent and responsive plan
that safeguards our citizens and deals an ideological
blow to the extremism that has caused so much misery
and instability.
Confronting violent extremism requires a
combination of good governance, respect for the rule
of law and the promotion of the ideals of peace so that
we can show a better alternative to those at risk of
radicalization. Given the immanent and fluid nature of
the threat, everybody’s job is to work together to put
effective responses into practice. Governments, civil
society, religious leaders and the business community
must join hands at the local, national and international
levels to end radicalization so that one of the major
forces fuelling violent extremism can be extinguished.
Despite the misinterpretation of Islam by the violent
extremists, a central belief in Islamic teaching must be
used to defeat their fraudulent ideas. That is tolerance,
interfaith dialogue and education. We should bear in
mind, however, that Islamophobia is as extreme and
dehumanizing as other forms of extremism and must be
challenged and defeated collectively.
Currently in Somalia, we are countering violent
extremism with genuine religious education, amnesty
for those seeking to return from radicalization and
educating our people about the evils of radicalization
and violent extremism. We are also collaborating with
our partners and stakeholders to exchange knowledge
and formulate best practices. Furthermore, our draft
national security plan specifies countering violent
extremism as a priority. That is further evidence of our
Government’s commitment to addressing that crucial
issue purposefully.
As more and more Al-Shabaab fighters return from
the violent wilderness into Government hands and their
communities, we are confident that the Somali strategy
on countering violent extremism will steadily continue
to become more successful, especially as we make
further political, security and economic development
gains nationally.

S/PV.7690

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iceland.
Ms. Alfreðsdóttir (Iceland): Allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely debate
on a matter of vital importance. I would also like to
pay tribute to the co-organization by Switzerland
and the United Nations of the Geneva Conference on
Preventing Violent Extremism in April. We also look
forward to the conclusion of the review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
discussions on the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).
While it is clear that Africa and the Middle East
bare the brunt of terrorism, destabilization and the
corrosive effects on the lives of millions of individuals
and whole communities, there is virtually no country
left untouched. Underlying the violence are complex
webs of tacit and active support, sympathy and
encouragement, which are often hard to identify and
even harder to root out.
All our societies potentially harbour individuals
who instigate and nurture ideologies that can be turned
into a justification for violence and terrorism. What is
new in recent years are the powerful tools of modern
life that give such individuals tremendous leverage. To
give some examples, we know that YouTube has taken
down 14 million videos in the past two years. Facebook
receives and reviews 1 million user notifications per
week about violations of its rules, and Twitter has
closed down 2,000 accounts related to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in recent months.
The Secretary-General’s report on the threat posed
by ISIL (S/2016/92) paints a frightening picture of the
sophistication of ISIL and other similar movements in
manipulating young people through its use of visual and
social media. The same report makes the point that the
journey of each individual fighter into terrorist activity
involves a unique combination of factors. There is no
simple approach to identifying potential terrorists,
and even less a silver bullet to stop them from being
radicalized and recruited in the first place.
The impact of terrorism fuelled by violent extremists
is clear to us all. The massive scope and complexity
of the task of addressing it are also clear in scale, if
not in detail. We must act together urgently as a world
community. We must improve coordination within the
United Nations on how to address terrorism and violent
extremism. We need to work for an internationally

16-1328635/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

comprehensive approach. I fully agree with the Foreign
Minister of Egypt on the imperative of confronting
narratives and ideologies, and we must do that together.
We need to be honest about identifying the internal and
external drivers of violent extremism and terrorism. It
is my firm belief that if we do not do this, then we will
be fighting with one hand tied behind the back.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Vincenzo Amendola,
Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely debate on an issue that
demands a comprehensive global response and cannot
be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. The evaluation of the threat confirms
the need to face this challenge through a global
response of a wide-ranging nature. It is a challenge
without borders, and it is a challenge that requires a
multidimensional answer.
Italy advocates that our response must be holistic in
terms of answering through holistic political, cultural
and diplomatic actions. Italy’s approach focuses on
training local security forces and countering financial
flows to extremist groups. It takes into consideration
all aspects of those borderless challenges. Together,
we will defeat the military terrorist organizations, but
together we must eradicate the roots of those extremist
activities, and we must do it all together.
First and foremost comes prevention. I would
like to reiterate the Italian support for the Security
Council’s discussion and debate and for the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), because the Plan of Action involves a
comprehensive approach that encompasses not just
security-based counter-terrorism measures, but also
systematic preventive ones.
We have a twofold responsibility, because for
any long-term solution we must base our actions on
understanding the forces that alienate individuals,
young people in particular, and lead them to join
extremist groups. That means tackling the root causes
of the phenomenon. We need to address the conditions,
such as the lack of socioeconomic opportunities,
marginalization and discrimination, poor governance
and violations of human rights and the rule of law, as
well as radicalization in prisons and in marginalized
communities.
36/94

11/05/2016

Our twofold responsibility entails acting together
not simply to combat those organizations but also
to respect the freedom and values that every society
should defend and especially disseminated to the young
generation. We need to prevent sectarian political
conflict, which we believe opens the door for totalitarian
political organizations, such as Da’esh. At the same
time, we need to fight Islamophobia, which serves as a
major asset to terrorist organizations, since a minority
within certain groups want to become the majority.
Secondly, we must fully implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions adopted to cut off the
financial sources of terrorism. But we must also show
the value of community when we have crises, like that
of refugees flowing from the theatres of war. We must
show solidarity, as we are doing in Italy by developing
human corridors to save the lives of refugees escaping
from war, especially those from Lebanon.
Thirdly, we are speaking about counter-narratives,
which means building bridges of understanding,
starting from our resolutions on youth, in particular.
That is because we must engage the youth community,
especially when it is marginalized, around the
discussion of shared values and mutual respect. At the
same time, we must of course fight together to introduce
innovative counter-terrorism legislation. Our twofold
responsibility and twofold actions requires us to create
and build bridges of understanding in our societies.
After the recent attack in Paris, our Government
proposed and approved a new concept in our budgetary
legislation. For each euro that we spend on counterterrorism — last year we spent €1 billion — we must
spend the same amount on culture. That entails building
within society a space for involvement, inclusion
and strengthening. That is a message from a society
that respects freedom and the inclusion of the young
generation in particular. It is a commitment and action
based on what we are doing now, not just on the local or
national level, but also involves opening ourselves up
to a multilateral dimension that prevents conflict, helps
refugees to escape war and attempts to solve conflicts
through political means. These minority groups,
especially Da’esh in the Middle East and North African
region, want to create borders between the values of
the majority that we respect and a new community that
wants to become a State.
My final point concerns culture and education. In
our multidimensional approach, by focusing on culture
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

and invest in education we are investing in building a
bridge of understanding. This is not just a narrative; it
involves promoting and reorganizing our society based
on the concept of inclusion and shared values. Terrorists
seek to divide us by race, ethnicity, nationality and
values. This is the opposite of the identity and diversity
of the Mediterranean region, which is a melting pot of
various religions and cultures that together create an
intense and beautiful heritage.

more dangerous than the bombs and guns they use in
attacking civilians. Ideology can have more lasting
and deep-rooted impacts, which are far more complex
to address and resolve. Yet a greater proportion of
resources allocated for combatting terrorism have been
spent on combat operations. While combat operations
are important and necessary, we now recognize
that defeating terrorist ideologies is the lynchpin of
eliminating the global threat of terrorism.

I wish to express my condolences for what happened
yesterday in Baghdad. When I last visited Iraq, I visited
an Italian-Iraqi institute that defends the beautiful
archaeological heritage of the country. In that visit,
we studied what is taking place in Mosul. Via satellite
imaging, we saw the first destruction of antiquities by
Da’esh. What they are doing in Iraq, what they have
done in other places, is an attack on the very idea of
the Mediterranean region. The Mediterranean region is
an idea of identity and diversity that together created
the most intense experience of civilization in the past
century.

To do that, countries need to get a full grasp of the
ideology of terrorism. We need to understand why a
reasonable individual holding a decent job can be so
easily convinced to become a human weapon in the hands
of the terrorists. We need to ask hard questions about
whether the injustices and inequalities and such racial
or religious prejudices as the Islamophobia at national
and international levels are giving the terrorists an
easy excuse to assault the principles, norms and values
that we have cherished for centuries. We have to gain
a deeper understanding of the ideas that are fuelling
and driving terrorism. Only a correct analysis of the
situation will lead to developing the right strategies and
tools to eliminate the menace of terrorism.

Only by protecting our cultural heritage, refugees
and the idea of a society where security, respect for
freedom and the promotion of integration work together
can we create not just a counter-narrative but an idea of
society consistent with the efforts of the United Nations
and expressive of the values underlying relevant United
Nations resolutions that can fight terrorist and extremist
organizations and eradicate the roots of terrorism
and extremism, while actively promoting practical
proposals for our communities.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to the Foreign Secretary of the Republic
of Maldives.
Mr. Naseer (Maldives): I would like to start
by congratulating the Egyptian delegation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and thank it for convening today’s debate to coincide
with the high-level thematic debate on the United
Nations, peace and security, organized by the President
of the General Assembly. This is indeed an opportune
time to discuss this important issue of countering the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism, which is at the
heart of the war against terrorism.
It has become increasingly evident that the
psychological weaponry used by various terrorist
groups to propagate their narratives and ideologies
to recruit supporters and fighters are equally if not

The United Nations is ideally placed to lead
the global efforts aimed at combatting the ideas that
drive terrorism. As the primary body mandated by the
Charter to maintain peace and security, the Security
Council’s role is key within the Organization. Although
various resolutions have been adopted by Council over
the years, there is still much to be done to address the
root causes.
Resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014) are
important steps in the right direction. At the same time,
we must also quickly finalize the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, which is
currently being discussed in the Sixth Committee. And
we should work collectively to overcome the stalemates
in the negotiations, finalize and implement this draft
treaty, which has been in the works for almost 10 years.
Most importantly, the United Nations system can help
countries to work collaboratively. It can help Member
States cultivate the values of respect and the importance
of promoting peace at every level in society.
The Maldives enacted its counter-terrorism
legislation in October last year in an effort to stop
Maldivians engaging in terrorist activities. The law
restricts the publication and distribution, even through
media channels or the Internet, of any materials

16-1328637/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that could incite terrorist acts or propagate terrorist
ideologies. Pursuant to this law, President Abdulla
Yameen Abdul Gayoom formulated a comprehensive
national policy to counter terrorism and militant
radicalism in the country. And in February this year,
President Yameen established the National CounterTerrorism Centre. The Centre is mandated to formulate
counter-terrorism guidelines and procedures based
on the analysis of international benchmarks and
best practices. It is prepared to gather and analyse
intelligence on terrorism activities from all agencies
and implement recommendations. It is also seeking to
identify radicalized elements within the communities
and run targeted rehabilitation programmes for those
in need.
Our vision is clear and our commitment is strong
in stopping, defeating and eliminating the menace of
terrorism. To achieve this end, the Maldives and the
rest of the world needs the leadership of the United
Nations to counter the ideologies that shape and drive
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

11/05/2016

The global framework for countering violent
extremism and terrorism should be firmly anchored
at the United Nations. We must continue to implement
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy through a
comprehensive approach, and one that embraces core
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674) and
its all-of-United Nations approach. We must remain
focused on turning this common framework into
concrete actions and results on the ground.
Denmark introduced a national countering
violent extremism action plan in 2014, from which
we have benefitted greatly. It is a tool for developing
multi-agency approaches and partnerships with local
communities. Our experience has shown us that while
we are managing the imminent threats of terrorism, we
must at the same time be able to focus on prevention.
We know that violent extremism is more likely to
take root when we fail — for example, through local
communities — to offer attractive alternatives to the
distorted narratives offered by violent extremists.

I align my statement with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the observer of the European
Union.

Countering extremism by fostering a sense of
purpose and identity for our youth — through investing
in preventive measures, education and jobs — is key. In
our societies, we must continue to focus on ensuring that
fundamental notions of citizen participation, human
rights and democracy are passed on and reinforced.
The strongest counter-narrative against terrorism and
violent extremism is open and inclusive societies. The
Nordic countries have initiated a Nordic Safe Cities
Network, in line with the global Strong Cities Network,
exchanging experiences and innovative methods to
strengthen our work, in particular on prevention and
rehabilitation, and on the close collaboration among
social services, schools, police, religious communities
and civil society at the local level.

Terrorism and violent extremism seek to threaten
not just our collective security and stability but our
very way of life. The unacceptable acts of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other groups,
resulting in unimaginable suffering, devastation and
senseless loss of life, run counter to basic norms of
human decency and rights and the very values and
principles on which the United Nations was built. They
require a strong and determined collective response.
Denmark remains a resolute and active partner in global
efforts to fight terrorism, in particular the acute and
real threat posed by terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and, not least, ISIL.

I wish to also mention that Denmark has recently
initiated a new regional programme to counter violent
extremism, with a focus on assisting Jordan, Lebanon
and Iraq. It includes a focus on counter-messaging,
countering illicit financing, as well as exit support and
forms part of the comprehensive Danish engagement
to help counter violent extremism and promote peace
and security in the Middle East region. I should also
mention that in order to reduce ISIL’s appeal to potential
foreign terrorist fighters, we are supporting initiatives
to investigate and document war crimes and human
rights abuses in Iraq and Syria committed by ISIL and
other extremists.

The President: I now give the floor to the State
Secretary for Political Affairs of Denmark.
Ms. Wisborg (Denmark): At the outset, Denmark
would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of the
Security Council for the taking the initiative to convene
today’s open debate. The topic is highly relevant and at
the top of our shared agenda. Today’s meeting is also
very timely in the light of the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
June.

38/94

16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Let me conclude by affirming Denmark’s
continuing commitment to our shared effort and to
supporting the United Nations in countering the threat
of extremism and terrorism. Denmark welcomes the
Security Council’s continuing active role in addressing
that common challenge.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, Secretary General of the
European External Action Service.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate at a very
important moment, as today marks the eve of the
anniversary of the review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the introduction of the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674).
The recent terrorist attacks around the world,
including in Brussels, remind us of the urgency to join
forces in the fight against terrorism and radicalization
leading to terrorism and violent extremism. Terrorism
cannot be vanquished solely through security
measures. The response to radicalization and terrorist
recruitment must be comprehensive. We recall here that
violent extremism must not and cannot be associated
with any given religion, nationality, civilization or
specific ethnicity.
Today’s topic, “Countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism”, is of particular importance
to us in our battle against Da’esh and other terrorist
groups and our efforts to strengthen the resilience of
societies to violent extremism. In that context, it is
important to collaborate more closely with civil society,
including women, young people and religious leaders.
In that regard, I welcome the presence here today of the
Secretary-General of the Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy, whose briefing this morning was particularly
relevant. Women, young people, religious leaders and
civil society organizations are often better placed than
institutional actors to develop messages capable of
discrediting Da’esh propaganda.
Within the European Union (EU), we have
developed a clear vision of the battle that must be led
against terrorism and radicalization. It is reflected in
the new European security programme for 2015-2020
and the conclusions on counter-terrorism adopted by
the Council of the European Union in February 2015.
Allow me to present a brief outline of the EU’s counterterrorism functions, particularly the use of strategic

S/PV.7690

communications to combat terrorist propaganda, the
monitoring and suppression of terrorist content, and,
more globally, cooperation with the private sector in
developing counter-terrorism narratives.
In December 2015, European Commissioner
Avramopoulos launched the European Union Internet
Forum. On that occasion, Ministers of EU member
States, Internet service providers and civil society
gathered to discuss two goals: first, how to rapidly delete
terrorist content; and secondly, how to spread alternative
messages capable of countering terrorist propaganda.
With respect to the first objective, the European
Police Office Internet Referral Unit assists in
identifying terrorist content and reporting it to Internet
service providers so they may delete it. Initial results
are encouraging. However, as the representative of the
online industry mentioned this morning, new websites
appear almost instantaneously. As to the second goal,
the European Radicalisation Awareness Network brings
together representatives of civil society organizations
and industry to work on counter-narratives aimed at
strengthening critical thinking, civic values and a sense
of involvement.
(spoke in English)
Beyond our own backyard, we are also active
in developing strategic communications for people
outside the EU. A task force is working in the Arab
world to identify shared values and develop concrete
communication actions. The EU supports the Strategic
Communication Advisory Team project giving
technical expertise to EU member State authorities
to more effectively tackle terrorist propaganda, with
a particular focus on Da’esh propaganda. The EU is
also actively participating in the Global Coalition to
Counter ISIL Strategic Communications Working
Group and is very closely following the early work of
the anti-ISIL strategic communications cell set up by
the United Kingdom.
Communication is not the only answer, however.
We also need to address root causes, which means
also eradicating the inequalities that lead to exclusion,
marginalization and radicalization. Our commitment
to providing material support to developing
countries is well known. In that context, poverty
reduction, ensuring sustainable economic, social and
environmental development, democracy, the rule of
law, good governance and human rights are obviously
critical pieces of the anti-radicalization puzzle.

16-1328639/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Moreover, we also need to prevent violent extremism,
our other key priority. Our approach is based on local
knowledge. Criminal justice, information exchange,
education and youth participation, intercultural
dialogue, employment and initiatives for social
inclusion can all play a crucial role. In that context, the
EU has set up the Radicalization Awareness Network
Centre of Excellence, which now involves over 2,000
European practitioners, such as teachers, health-care
workers, social and youth workers, prison officers
and non-governmental organizations to exchange best
practices on prevention. That is key. The approach is
founded on understanding and addressing the root causes
of radicalization while strengthening resilience, and its
goal is to propose practical tools and recommendations
to practitioners and decision-makers alike.
We need to counter the narratives and ideologies
of terrorist groups if we are to be successful in the
global fight against terrorism. Terrorism and violent
extremism are global challenges, and the United Nations
has a central role in supporting Member States in that
endeavour. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
We remain engaged in considering it, including in terms
of strategic communications and building alternative
narratives on the occasion of the upcoming review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and in other
relevant forums.

11/05/2016

Terrorism and violent radicalization are among
the most salient threats facing la Francophonie. For a
number of years, the French-speaking regions of the
North and the South have been rudely shaken by acts
of terrorism, owing not only to the numerous recent
attacks on our States members, but also because
terrorist networks are targeting a significant segment of
French-speaking youth in their recruitment strategies.
That situation is not limited to la Francophonie.
Today it is a global concern. The situation is also of
particular concern to our organization, whose founding
principles — the promotion of democracy, cultural
diversity, tolerance and solidarity — have been put to
the test. Therefore, on behalf of the Secretary General
of la Francophonie, Her Excellency Mme. Michaëlle
Jean, we welcome the holding of this open debate and
would like to express our thanks for the opportunity
offered to us to share the vision of our organization.
We welcome presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6,
just adopted, which demonstrates the strong
determination of the international community to
counter hate speech. Similarly, we welcome the Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
launched at the beginning of the year. La Francophonie
intends to contribute fully to the implementation of
that Plan.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Nakseu-Nguefang, Director of Political
Affairs, International Organization of la Francophonie.

The situation is urgent. The conditions that lead
some of our youth to adhere to destructive speech are
manifold. Besides the unresolved conflicts that fuel
hatred, one of the causes of the increase in violent
radicalization that we must address is the crisis in the
relationship between the State and society. The deficit
in governance and political representation increasingly
is leading to a breakdown of trust in the State and its
representatives, at all levels. It can be shown that there
is very little room left for expressing the needs of young
people. The young people feel that they are not properly
directed nor involved in sociopolitical life, and they
accuse the State of not being able to tackle inequality
or to provide professional and economic opportunities.

Mr. Nakseu-Nguefang (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank you, Sir, for the invitation to
participate in this meeting and to commend your
initiative to organize this important debate on a topical
issue. We also take this opportunity to offer you our
condolences following the tragic events in Egypt a few
days ago.

It is important that public actors, supported by
international partners, be more and better able to
integrate young people, as well as women, into politics:
to create conditions conducive to involving them in
the exercise of power, to rejuvenate the political class
and bring in more women, and also to promote civic
and political engagement as a means of involvement

We
also
welcome
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2016/6, which was just adopted by the Security
Council, as a good basis for further work in this
area. Together, we can pool enormous resources and
expertise to face this immense challenge. We will be
successful against the terrorist narrative and ideology
only by responding with clear and concrete preventive
measures. A joint approach, based on our shared values,
is sine qua non.

40/94

16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

and create spaces for debate and dialogue in the public
sphere, universities and in social networks.

for all of us. What is at stake are the values to which we
all hold and the future of our young people.

In that connection, on 10 March the Secretary
General of La Francophonie launched a campaign
entitled “Free together”. It provides a public forum
for the voices of the francophone young people in
suggesting that they make their voices heard and affirm
their commitment to the values of La Francophonie,
which are freedom, equality, solidarity, brotherhood,
diversity and peace. This campaign is having
resounding success in the social media. In less than a
week more than 2 million young people have shown
an interest, reflecting their thirst for universal values.
The campaign also aims to encourage young people to
develop educational, cultural and artistic projects that
illustrate their commitment to the values ​​of freedom,
tolerance and solidarity.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the observer of the Holy See to the
United Nations to participate in this meeting.

Also in that connection, La Francophonie is
considering the role and responsibility of the media in
dealing with the subject of terrorism. In any case, the
freedom of the press must be guaranteed and innovation
in the media must be promoted so that journalists
can provide keys for understanding so that people
can understand this phenomenon and deconstruct the
narrative of terrorist groups. Similarly, we should raise
awareness among groups owning the social media
about their responsibilities with regard to the spread
of such content. In this sense, La Francophonie is
currently studying the stakes involved in regulation
in the digital age. Finally, we believe it is important
to emphasize media education. The development of
tools to understand the risks associated with the use
of new technologies and tools that can develop critical
responses to that content should be encouraged.
La Francophonie will hold an international
conference entitled “The fight against terrorism and
the prevention of violent radicalization: towards an
integrated francophone approach” on 6, 7 and 8 June
in Paris. The objective of this conference is to develop
a comprehensive strategy to fight terrorism and
prevent violent radicalization in our society. It will
pay particular attention to the political and economic
integration of young people, education, the rule of law,
coping strategies and the role and responsibility of the
media in fighting terrorism.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance of
multilateral action and say that we stand ready to work
with the United Nations in this matter, which is urgent

I now give the floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Brother Carroll (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the presidency of Egypt for bringing the topic of
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism
to the attention of the Security Council and the
international community.
The theme of this open debate is extremely
important, because it calls us to strike terrorism at
its very roots and where it must primarily be fought,
namely, in the hearts and minds of men and women, in
particular of those who are most at risk of radicalization
and recruitment by terrorist groups.
The narratives and ideologies of present-day
terrorist groups are well known. They do not attempt to
conceal their purportedly religiously inspired beliefs,
values and principles. Terrorist groups identify multiple
enemies, so that those who respond to their propaganda
can legitimately attack those enemies wherever they
may be, whether in Paris or in Brussels, in Istanbul, in
Aleppo, in Baghdad, or elsewhere.
Countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorist groups is a grave responsibility of all of us.
It should be recalled, however, that by building their
ideological narratives that justify their horrendous
acts of violence with tendentious interpretations and
an abusive use of scripture texts, terrorists groups are
throwing down the gauntlet principally to religious
leaders, in particular for them to refute the falsehoods
and condemn the blasphemies and narratives of those
ideologies. Religious leaders and people of faith must
be at the forefront in delegitimizing the manipulation of
faith and the distortion of sacred texts as a justification
for violence. Anyone who considers himself or herself
a believer while planning and carrying out actions
against the fundamental rights and dignity of every
man and woman must be condemned.
The fight to unmask the lies behind the narratives
and ideologies of present-day terrorist groups summons
all religions to unite in confronting not only the
unacceptable misuse of religion by these groups, but
also all forms of religious bigotry, stereotyping and

16-1328641/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

disrespect for what people hold sacred. Religious
leaders must be the first to demonstrate what the fourth
meeting of the Pontifical Council for Interreligious
Dialogue and the Royal Institute for Inter-Faith Studies
of Amman, held in the Vatican on 7 May, called the
humanizing and civilizing role of our religions.
That brings us to the fundamental importance of
education in countering narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. Much of terror groups’ success in recruiting
is based on misinformation and the distortion both
of history and the meaning of sacred texts. Objective
education can counter such false narratives. We
commend the Marrakesh Declaration on the Rights
of Religious Minorities in Predominantly Muslim
Majority Communities for urging Muslim educational
institutions and authorities to conduct a courageous
review of educational curricula that addresses honestly
and effectively any material that instigates aggression
and extremism, leads to war and chaos and results in
the destruction of our shared societies.
My delegation believes that the more religion is
manipulated to justify acts of terror and violence, the
more religious leaders must be engaged in the overall
effort to defeat the terrorism that hijacks it. Spurious
religious fervour must be countered by authentic
religious instruction and the example of authentic
communities of faith. There is a strong nexus between
religion and diplomacy and between faith-based
informal diplomacy and the formal diplomacy of States.
Strengthening that nexus would be wise diplomacy,
given its enormous potential for confronting terrorism
at its roots.
Measures to counter the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism must address the root causes on which it
feeds, and which make even the most outrageous claims
of terrorist groups sound credible. Young people who
join the ranks of terrorist organizations often come
from poor immigrant families disillusioned by the lack
of integration and values in some societies. Those who
feel excluded from such societies or live on their fringes
are immediately attracted to terrorists proclaiming
themselves to be freedom fighters. Governments should
engage with civil society to address the problems of
communities that are most at risk of radicalization
and recruitment and to achieve such communities’
satisfactory social integration.
Certain terrorist groups have excelled in the art
of cyber recruitment, giving them transnational and
42/94

11/05/2016

borderless reach. Their access to cyberspace must
be denied in order to prevent their narratives and
ideologies from poisoning the hearts and minds of
millions everywhere, cut off their financing activities
and disrupt their coordination of terrorist attacks.
The Holy See is convinced that if we are to win the
minds and hearts of our children and young people and
prevent them from joining terrorist groups, we must
build inclusive societies and prevent illicit trafficking
in arms. We must build bridges rather than walls, and
engage in dialogue rather than in mutual isolation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Iraq would
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Sameh Hassan
Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt. I would also like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of Egypt
in the wake of the killing of Egyptian policemen by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
I thank the Arab Republic of Egypt for convening a
meeting on this important subject relating to combating
terrorism. We often focus on the operational and
military aspects of terrorism at the expense of the
intellectual dimension. We also welcome and commend
the clarity and frankness of Egypt’s concept paper
(S/2016/416, annex), which clearly outlines the elements
in the current dialogue.
Today an area of Baghdad was hit hard by a
number of car bombs, which killed more than 100
people — women, children, merchants and others. Such
suicide attacks are among the tools used by terrorists
to spread their erroneous ideologies. Their watchwords
are killing and destruction and we thank the States that
have expressed their condolences today and shared our
pain at the loss of so many innocent civilians.
Violent extremist ideologies are a direct threat to
international peace and security. They are damaging to
peace, social cohesion and the stability of States. We are
therefore obliged to adopt a well-defined approach to
dealing with such challenges, based on a clear strategy
and declared positions. I would like to point out that
the adoption of curricula that call for making takfiri
accusations of others, and spreading erroneous takfiri
religious fatwas and concepts through social media, will
foster such distortions both in thinking and ideology,
which can lead those influenced by them to resort to
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

terrorism in its various forms and manifestations as
a way to impose such thoughts — thoughts that are a
serious threat to international peace and security and
human civilization.

of Governments and religious people everywhere
to counter takfiri extremist thinking and distorted
fatwas. Persons of moderate faith must fight against the
message whose aim is to eliminate others.

This is what we must do in order to participate in
the international community’s efforts to establish a
global strategy aimed at combating ideological, takfiri
terrorist thinking and messaging. First, we must identify
the sources and religious and ideological foundations of
terrorism. Secondly, we should ensure that ideologies
that hark back to old extremist views expounded in
books that some publishing houses have printed and
reprinted again and again must be confronted. Thirdly,
the international community must differentiate
between respect for freedom of thought, as it is agreed
on internationally, and for takfiri ideological thought,
which calls for killing and repressing anyone who does
not believe in an extremist ideology. Repressing such
ideologies and preventing them from spreading is not a
violation of people’s right to freedom of opinion.

In conclusion, we thank Egypt as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We also thank the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for its field visit to Iraq and for the first meeting held to
brief States on Iraq’s needs in combating terrorism and
extremist thinking.

Furthermore, the only way to counter terrorism is
to confront the madrasas and takfiri centres that exhort
the killing of others. People are only lured by aims that
can be attained, and if those objectives are extremist,
terrorism will certainly follow. We believe that the
world strategy against terrorist ideology must be based
on the following measures.
First, we need an international list of books and
publications disseminating takfiri thought and terrorist
ideology that are liable to confiscation by States
members of the United Nations and whose sale should
be prohibited by national legislation criminalizing the
publication of such books. Secondly, States suffering
from international terrorism should receive assistance
to establish mechanisms and initiatives allowing all
stakeholders to combat takfiri sources of terrorism
in their national communities. Thirdly, best practices
and lessons learned need to be applied in combating
the takfiri message of violence, in cooperation with
other States. Fourthly, experts or writers in the field of
religion — people who truly understand the religious
ideas used by extremists to spread their ideology — must
implement such a plan.
Terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida are perpetrating the most heinous
forms of destruction and killing in the name of Islam.
Islam washes its hands of those people. It is the duty

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Today is not an ordinary day
in the State of Israel. Once a year in Israel, all traffic
stops and all daily activity comes to a halt as the people
of Israel pause for a nationwide moment of silence, a
similar to the one we observed here in the Chamber
a few hours ago. Schoolchildren stand at attention,
drivers get out of their cars, and people walking down
the street bow their heads to remember those who have
fallen in defence of the nation and those who were
murdered because they wanted to live as a free people
in our homeland.
Today, the State of Israel commemorates Yom
Hazikaron, the memorial day for fallen soldiers and
victims of terrorism.Today, as we meet to discuss
terrorism in this Chamber, Israel honours the 23,447
individuals who have lost their lives to war and terror.
Sadly, this year alone, 127 names have been added to
this list of the fallen. May their memory be blessed.
For the Israeli people, the threat of terrorism is as
old as Israel itself. Since the State was founded 68 years
ago, not a day has gone by without the threat of terror.
There is no one in Israel who does not know the pain of
a family member or a friend whose life was destroyed
by the cruel hand of terror. My own father was severely
wounded during a terror attack while protecting the
Jordan Valley as a reserve soldier and passed away after
a long struggle. So I know the pain of terrorism firsthand.
In the past two decades alone, Israelis have faced
tens of thousands of terror attacks in the form of
missiles and rockets, stabbings and suicide bombings.
During that period, 1,600 Israelis have been killed in
acts of terror out of a population of only 6 million.
Our enemies continue to use any means to murder
innocent Israelis. Just three weeks ago as we met here

16-1328643/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

in the Council Chamber discussing the Middle East, a
Hamas terrorist blew himself up on a crowded bus in
downtown Jerusalem.
Certain Member States, including some on the
Council, are trying to keep those victims of terror out
of today’s discussion. When it comes to Israeli victims,
there is always some excuse for terror. So let me set
the record straight. Terrorism against Israel is not about
our actions. It is about our very existence. It is about
the values we represent. Terror attacks against my
people started before 1967, before Israel became a State
in 1948. Before this institution was even established,
we had to face terrorism. I remind those who think
that it is a conflict about territory that Israel withdrew
completely from Gaza and southern Lebanon more than
10 years ago, yet to this day Hamas continues to build
a terror base in Gaza, and Hizbullah has transformed
the villages of southern Lebanon into armed outposts
of terror.
The terror tactics have not changed because the
ideology of terror has not changed. It is this evil ideology
that drives terrorism in Israel, my country, in the region
and around the world. Militant Islamic groups like the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Hizbullah, Hamas,
Boko Haram and others distort justice in the name of
religion to justify the murder of innocent people. They
teach a philosophy of violence and hatred and they
preach an ideology that glorifies death. The only way
to defeat those terrorists is to counter them with moral
clarity and political unity.
Unfortunately, that unity is broken when it comes to
my country, Israel. Some Member States not only fail to
condemn acts of terror against Israelis, but they justify
the murder of innocent men, women and children in the
name of a violent, radical ideology. Let me be clear.
This is not human nature and they are not freedom
fighters — they are terrorists. Shooting youngsters in
a concert hall, targeting a busy airport and blowing up
a bus full of people are not acts of freedom — they are
acts of terror.
Those violent radical groups use modern means to
achieve their barbaric goals. Terror groups now have
advanced modern weapons and recruit on social media.
We might ask ourselves how small bands of fanatics
in remote places became sophisticated terror networks.
Like any group seeking to expand its operations, they
look for investors and backers. And they found them.
Global terror is promoted, financed and supplied
44/94

11/05/2016

by State sponsors, and the biggest shareholder in
the terrorist enterprise is Iran. Iran funds death and
destruction across the region and beyond. It bankrolls
fear, instability and chaos around the globe, It is long
past time for the Council to eliminate Tehran’s trust
fund for terror and end the supply line fuelling violence
in the Middle East and around the world.
Israel, like France and Belgium and too many
others, is not being attacked because of what we do,
but because of what we represent. Israel is an outpost
of freedom, liberty and democracy. We are on the
front lines and will continue to be on the front lines
against those who reject those principles. In order to
effectively counter terrorism, we must stand united as
an international community against that global threat
to our way of life.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I want to thank the Arab Republic of
Egypt for convening this meeting and for the concept
note (S/2016/416, annex) prepared for this debate.
Colombia strongly rejects acts of terrorism and
violent extremism in all their forms and manifestations,
out of our conviction that such acts are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivations and at
whatever time or by whomever they are committed.
Those acts pose a grave threat to the life, well-being
and fundamental freedoms of all peoples and threaten
international peace and security by undermining
the values and principles of States, their democratic
institutions, the rule of law and the freedoms enshrined
in and promoted by the various instruments of the
United Nations. Terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, ethnicity, community or
nationality. We must therefore unite to forcefully fight
that scourge based on objective criteria.
At this point, I would like to clarify that, although
Colombia has not suffered the terrible effects of violent
extremism based on religious grounds, it has, for years,
suffered great violence owing to a domestic conflict
in which terrorism was used as a tool of action. As a
result, my country has acquired good practices and
capabilities to deal with such new phenomena, which
could yield notable results.
The Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674) offers Member States a
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

series of recommendations for countering the threat,
which Colombia considers useful. Of particular
interest to this debate are the recommendations on
prevention. States must work with relevant members
of their local communities and with non-governmental
actors in the development of strategies to counter all
kinds of incitement to acts of terrorism, regardless
of their purported justification. We are aware of the
importance of the participation and involvement of
civil society and local communities in efforts to help
the victims of terrorism, especially in the promotion of
trust, harmony and intercultural respect and in efforts
to boost individual and community resilience against
terrorist activities.
Women should be included in all stages of the
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation
of counter-terrorism efforts. Those efforts must be
accompanied by the promotion of education for girls
and women, which in the medium- and long-term,
enables them to increase their capabilities, knowledge
and resources and which, by extension, will enable
them to play a more active role in the actions that
States and societies take in countering terrorism and
violent extremism.
The policies for the prevention of terrorism and
violent extremism must also focus on our young people,
providing them with opportunities to study and work and
play an active role in their societies. That will minimize
the risk of their being radicalized and recruited by
terrorist groups. Similarly, I consider it important to
highlight the crucial role of the communications media
in sensitizing and mobilizing public opinion against
the atrocities committed by terrorist groups, using an
approach that emphasizes the rights of victims and
that forcefully condemns the perpetrators of terrorist
acts. The international media have already begun to
contribute to the common goal of creating spaces and
opportunities in which we can raise awareness of the
tragic consequences of terrorism.
At the same time, with regard to prevention, we
must assess the negative impact of the cult of violence,
to which many, in particular those same younger
populations, are exposed. Under no circumstances can
we accept the paradigm in which the use of violence is
presented as an option for resolving conflicts or dealing
with situations of any kind.
Finally, Colombia supports the further strengthening
of international cooperation aimed at supporting

S/PV.7690

the victims of terrorism, as called for in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is vitally
important that Governments, international and regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
the media continue the work of supporting the victims
of terrorism. My delegation reiterates its commitment
to continuing to work actively with the international
community in the discussion of this issue and in
particular on the deliberations that will begin this
week for the fifth Review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Dialogue, cooperation
and concerted efforts are indispensable to a civilized
coexistence free of the scourge of terrorism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate focusing
on the ways and means to counter the malevolent
propaganda and twisted narratives of terrorism.
Pakistan aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation countries.
Pakistan unequivocally condemns terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. There can be no
justification for the killing of innocent people, but we
know from history that even the most abominable of
mass murderers have crafted twisted webs of narratives
to justify their heinous acts. Terrorists do the same.
Terrorism cannot be associated with any religion,
culture or region. The ideologies and narratives of the
various terrorist groups emanate from diverse sources.
But three characteristics seem common to all. First,
they seek to recruit followers by stoking people’s
sense of fear and deprivation and by manipulating
the prevailing perceptions of victimization and
injustice that fuel extremism. Secondly, they create
a web of complex and false interpretations of beliefs,
disseminating them as widely and as often as possible.
And thirdly, their narrative seeks to provide a path to an
illusionary salvation.
If we are to defeat terrorism, it is imperative
that we counter that schematic approach of terrorists
comprehensively and at every step. There is no point
in emptying a tank through one tap, while it is being
constantly replenished through others. Terrorists seek
to exploit fears and grievances, real or perceived,
emanating from diverse factors, local or external.

16-1328645/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

While individual Member States should do all they
can to address socioeconomic conditions and political
factors at the national level, we must also address
the international drivers that contribute to injustice,
inequality, hatred and deprivation.
The condoning of foreign interventions and
occupation and the denial of the right of selfdetermination, all in violation of the agreed principles
of international law, provide fertile ground for
terrorist propaganda to take root. The persistence of
those conditions and the failure of the international
community to redress genuine grievances of the weak
against the powerful are important factors that create
the breeding grounds of terrorism. If conflicts spawn
terrorism and if terrorist narratives feed off conflict
situations, it is critical to seek an end to those conflicts
in order to deprive terrorists of their oxygen.
In the second area, we lack concerted efforts to
counter the messages and rationales spewed out by
terrorist groups that fuel violent acts. In the battle
of ideas, much ground has been lost to the narrative
of terrorists owing to, for example, the failure to
prevent xenophobia, Islamophobia and other forms of
discrimination, the confusion of hate speech with free
speech, and the profiling of entire communities on the
pretext of seeking to strengthen security measures,
which is counterproductive. Such actions have only
strengthened the divisive notions of “us” and “them”,
which is what the terrorists prey on. They want to make
us believe that a clash of civilizations is inevitable and
even necessary.
We must not allow them to do that. Not only do
we need to develop a more robust counter-narrative
against terrorist ideologies, we also need effective
communications strategies appropriate to our digital
age. The use of social-media platforms by terrorists
is unprecedented, particularly in the way they engage
young people, disseminate messages and mobilize
recruits. That requires effective responses to such
messages on our part, efforts to counter online
radicalization and measures to prevent such groups
from exploiting digital space.
The terrorist narratives and ideologies are aimed
at radicalization, which leads from indoctrination
to action. There are several ways to counter that
phenomenon. First, we need to invest in efforts to create
opportunities. We must offer hopeful alternatives to
the narratives used by terrorists, who seek to invoke
46/94

11/05/2016

fear and hold out the false promise of an idyllic future.
Secondly, we need to make the young aware of the dire
consequences of following the violent path prescribed
by terrorist ideologies. Many examples can be found
among people who have renounced terrorism. Thirdly,
we need to prevent any glorification of terrorist
acts, whether intended or unintended, in the print or
broadcast media.
My country’s national action plan to counter
terrorism contains six specific action points that
directly and indirectly seek to counter the narratives
and ideologies of terrorists. We are committed to
fighting this battle of minds, as much as we are
committed to fighting the terrorists on the ground.
Pakistan stands ready to share its national experience
with the international community in order to further
our common goal of defeating terrorism and eliminating
violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States
to the United Nations.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate Egypt on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to express my appreciation for the
convening of several important high-level meetings
on pivotal issues such as countering terrorism and its
impact on international peace and security. I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson;
Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi, Secretary-General of Al
Azhar Islamic Research Academy; and Mr. Stephen
Crown, Vice-President and Deputy General Counsel of
Microsoft, for their exhaustive briefings.
We met last month for an open Security Council
debate on countering terrorism and its impact on
international peace and security (S/PV.7670). We
are meeting again today to confirm the will of the
international community to assume global governance
of international peace and security. As I mentioned
in the meeting last month, to do so will require a
willingness to replace many concepts and mechanisms
of international action with new concepts and
mechanisms created by the Security Council consistent
with existing policies, with a view to implementing the
relevant resolutions of the Council in order to minimize
the threats to international peace and security.
We recognize that the implementation of Security
Council resolutions could be much more effective. With
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the upcoming review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June, together with the
efforts to implement the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which
was discussed in Geneva in April, international action
could be strengthened and the tools at our disposal
shaped so as to be more complementary, giving rise to
a clearer vision of the way in which the international
community should respond to extremist and terrorist
ideologies.
Over the past 10 years, expressions of hate have
increased, especially in our region. Over the past
five years we have seen a sixfold increase in the use
of social media, which has further given voice to the
prevalent attitudes in the region. Promoters of terrorist
and extremist ideologies have used social media
to spread hatred, taking advantage of the existing
political, cultural and social vacuum, in order to
achieve objectives that are in complete contradiction
with the three religions that come from our region.
Those ideologies are also in contradiction with the
principles, traditions and customs of our region, which
is the cradle of all of the world’s civilizations.
Technological progress should have been used to
build prosperity for the region and the entire world,
rather than be used by extremist forces for purposes
of sabotage and destruction of one of the world’s most
important civilizations. That is why it is urgent that we
undertake the steps necessary to fight and prevent the
propagation of extremist ideologies, which will require,
first and foremost, addressing the root causes of the
problems in the region and resolving them one by one.
They represent the main threats to international peace
and security.
Today, we are forced to confront many types of
hate speech, all reflecting the range of extremist and
violent ideologies. They have come to light at a time
when the media and its platforms have not yet achieved
a mature sense of the value of professionalism, thereby
creating a gray area between actions to achieve
political transformation that seek to fulfil the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, on the one hand,
and exploitative media feeding off the current situation
in the world, which is rife with social conflicts and
crises, on the other. The situation in our Arab region,
in particular, presents a fertile breeding ground for
social, political and economic problems that have led
to erroneous interpretations of religious thought, which
then form the basis for erroneous ideologies rooted

S/PV.7690

in hate, extremism and incitement to violence. The
situation calls for developing new tools to marginalize
extremist ideologies and promote religious moderation.
In that context, some believe that the Security
Council should undertake a review under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, with a
view to criminalizing hate speech, the incitement to
terrorist acts and the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters via electronic media and to preventing
terrorist organizations and affiliated individuals from
propagating their extremist ideas and ideologies, using
the Council’s unified sanctions lists. Incitement to
hatred in all of its aspects should be a crime, whether it
is linked to terrorist acts or to terrorist organizations’
use of social and other media.
This might be a propitious time for setting up a
Security Council working group that could look into
prosecuting terrorist organizations that propagate
terrorist ideologies on the Internet and elsewhere. If
such a working group were created, it could have a
situation room, the central mission of which would be to
follow terrorist and extremist publications throughout
the day with a view to taking the necessary steps to shut
them down.
In that context, I would like to refer to some of the
statistics that Mr. Steven Crown of Microsoft shared
with us today. He mentioned that there were more
than 1 billion electronic messages on the Internet each
day, which gives an idea of the importance of direct
communication for those companies and especially for
Microsoft in the quest to find a solution for dealing with
those messages that simply spread extremist ideologies.
Such a mechanism would prevent the dissemination
and promotion of extremist ideologies and could also
lead to ending financing or mobilization of any type
carried out through social or electronic media platforms.
It could include any type of Internet communication
technology, including audiovisual, other Internet
resources and any type of relevant communication
based on use of the Internet or its applications. I believe
that those ideas are in line with the Council’s resolutions
concerning various ways to counter terrorism and
especially its methods of dissemination through the
Internet and related resources, in particular resolutions
2253 (2015) and 2178 (2014), which enable action on the
part of the Council.
In that respect, I wish to underscore the importance
of the Arab media forum, which was held jointly

16-1328647/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and which took place in July 2015 here in
New York. I also wish to emphasize the importance of
the action plan concerning communications to combat
violent extremism to 2020. It was adopted in 2015 as
a preliminary step in the implementation of the joint
Arab strategy to combat terrorism, which was adopted
in 2014.
In conclusion, ascribing all violent and extremist
ideologies to a religion is not possible. Religion exists
to reform the conduct of the person, with a view to
ensuring prosperity, peaceful coexistence among many
peoples and groups, so they may live together in peace
and prosperity, based on the human rights enshrined in
the texts of the divine religions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Terrorism is one of the
most serious threats to global peace and security today.
It affects all of us. May I, therefore, join all of those
who have extended their condolences to you, Sir, over
the sad deaths of the Egyptian policemen who were
killed by terrorists while performing their duty.
Since the beginning of the year, more than 4,000
lives have been lost in more than 40 countries to
terrorist attacks. As many as 1,000 people have lost
their lives since the Council last met, one month ago,
to discuss the issue of terrorism (see S/PV.7670). We
therefore support the President’s initiative to discuss
ways to address this common challenge in today’s open
debate on countering the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism.
Terrorism thrives on and is sustained by
transboundary networks for its ideology, recruitment,
propaganda, funding, arms, training and sanctuary.
No one nation alone can tackle that menace decisively.
Tackling terrorism demands extensive coordination and
effort. The fight against terrorism has not known success
so far owing to insufficient international cooperation.
The Hydra-like monster of terrorism continues to
spread across continents, in developing and developed
countries alike, aided by targeted propaganda of hatred
disseminated over ever-growing social media networks
that were designed to bring people together.
48/94

11/05/2016

The rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is drawing foreign terrorist fighters of vastly
varying ethnicities, social backgrounds, education and
economic status from distant continents, demonstrating
the immense complexities of the push and pull factors
involved. It is increasingly clear that no single path or
set of paths exists to define the process of radicalization,
thereby ensuring that the task of mounting a counternarrative will be difficult. One of the common threads
is that the overwhelming proportion of foreign fighters
are males between the ages of the mid-teens and the
mid-twenties. That may be an indication of a possible
way to address the issue.
The ideological framework that guides terrorist
groups is their real strength. It is built upon very
specific and extreme arguments. The fight against
terrorism is not a confrontation targeting any religion.
It is a struggle between the values of humanism and the
forces of inhumanity. It is also a battle that must be won
through the strength of our values and the real message
of religions.
A concerted effort is needed to deny any space for
the spread of extremist ideologies and narratives and
to launch specific counter-narratives. The counternarratives must address theories of victimhood,
conspiracy and the denial of inconvenient facts that are
contained in the terrorist ideologies. It requires building
a wider social consensus against the inhuman activities
and crimes committed by the terrorist groups. The
active engagement of local community and religious
leaders may be necessary in order to disseminate more
moderate and mainstream teachings challenging the
radical and motivated interpretations.
Since the phenomenon of radicalized foreign or
homegrown terrorists defies any easy generalizations,
it is important to identify the nature of the perceived
individual or group grievances that push them towards
membership in such extremist groups. Radicalization
can be prevented only if young people develop a stake in
their mainstream sociopolitical and economic milieus.
Providing long-term care for the de-radicalized is also
an important aspect in convincing the possible recruits
of alternatives available to them.
Moderate views can be spread effectively through
the education system, civil society, opinion-makers
and domestic political leadership. The powerful
role of media — print and electronic — cannot be
underestimated in this debate. The misuse of social
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

media to disastrous effect by terrorist groups needs
to be monitored carefully and countered, with due
safeguards for respecting the freedom of expression. At
the same time, positive and balanced narratives about
the fallacies of extremist ideologies and the successes
of peaceful coexistence need to be disseminated
more widely.
Countering the narratives of terrorism is a long-term
preventive endeavour. Equally important is effective
counter-terrorism through monitoring and intervention,
which requires close international collaboration.
Narrowly perceived interests have often prevented
the framing of legal frameworks for international
cooperation and even the effective implementation of
sanctions that could restrict possible threats. We hope
that countries realize that the threat is serious, knows
no borders and requires a more coordinated response.
The effort should start, with renewed vigour and
determination, here at the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate which is very well timed, as it allows us to go
further into issues that were discussed a few weeks
ago at the Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent
Extremism and at the high-level debates organized
by the President of the General Assembly. It will also
provide useful inputs for the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his briefing and extend my thanks to
Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi and Mr. Steven Crown. I express
my condolences to the Egyptian presidency and the
Iraqi delegation, in particular, over the recent victims
of terrorism in their countries.
The concept note (S/2016/416, annex) that was
circulated encourages us to discuss possible elements
of a comprehensive strategy for countering the
narratives of terrorist groups, which would contribute
to the work to be undertaken until April 2018 by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism. A
central element of that effort should be ensuring that
the international community does not overlook the
underlying causes of terrorism, including exclusion,
marginalization and discrimination. Terrorist groups
such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, the Al-Nusra

S/PV.7690

Front and Al-Shabaab have been attracting recruits
by offering them a sense of purpose, belonging and
identity that they probably failed to acquire elsewhere.
It is equally important not to lose sight of the fact
that no country is immune to this phenomenon. It is
widely reported that foreign terrorist fighters have
been recruited even in the most prosperous countries.
Promoting inclusion should be at the basis for any
narrative aimed at countering extremist ideologies.
We must take a critical look at measures that
could be inconsistent with respect for diversity and the
acknowledgement of our common humanity, such as
discriminatory laws enabling the profiling of particular
groups. Certain responses to the refugee crisis are
of concern, as they might be increasing rather than
decreasing the risks associated with violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. The credibility of any narrative
depends on its coherence. For example, we cannot
uphold a responsibility to protect civilians plagued by
terrorist attacks and human rights violations in regions
distant from our homes and then ignore the victims’
plights when they knock on our doors seeking refuge.
Our efforts should also contribute to dispelling the
stereotypes that have tended to associate terrorism with
specific cultures, religions or ethnic groups. We must
be wary of rhetoric that fuels xenophobic prejudice.
I commend those Governments around the world
that have rejected such attitudes. Promoting genuine
dialogue among religions and cultures is pivotal for
creating much-needed environments of tolerance and
mutual respect. Initiatives such as the Alliance of
Civilizations have made positive contributions in that
regard and should be acknowledged.
Consistency is another necessary feature of
counter-radicalization narratives, or “positive inclusive
narratives” as suggested by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands. Part of that challenge lies in
the need to avoid selectivity. It is our duty to condemn
terrorism and to prevent its spread, wherever and
whenever it may strike. Victims in one country are no
less deserving of our attention than those in another.
Civilian casualties resulting from counter-terrorism are
no less tragic, from a human perspective, than those
generated by other causes. Furthermore, the potential
of certain measures to fuel increased radicalization
should not be underestimated. Terrorist groups seek to
provoke Governments into over-reaction, so as to exploit

16-1328649/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

narratives of abuse and oppression. Unfortunately,
many Governments have fallen into that trap.
Conformity with international law is a prerequisite
for the effectiveness of our efforts against terrorism
and violent extremism. If measures are implemented
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, or
other texts of international law, including human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law, their legitimacy will have
been compromised, rendering them counterproductive.
The use of the Internet and social media by
terrorist groups illustrates the evolving nature of the
challenge that we are facing. Having been conceived
to bring people together, those platforms are also being
used to incite hatred and recruit. While acting against
those trends, we must guard against transgressions
with respect to the freedom of expression and the right
to privacy. We should simultaneously foster digital
inclusion since the Internet and the social media are
powerful tools for disseminating challenging messages
of respect and dialogue.
The limitations of counter-terrorism strategies
solely based on repressive measures have been
demonstrated in tragic ways. Today, terrorism is
more widespread and claims more lives than 15
years ago. It is encouraging, therefore, to identify the
growing recognition of the centrality of prevention,
as demonstrated by the support for the initiative of
the Secretary-General to present a Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).
Brazil expects the Security Council to translate
such concerns into practice by recommitting to
diplomatic efforts as a privileged vehicle for promoting
peace founded on justice. Let us not lose sight of the
protracted conflicts that directly or indirectly fuel
terrorist agendas. Our collective failure in dealing with
the ongoing crisis in the Middle East, including Israel
and Palestine, is an obvious case in point. Reaching
a durable solution to that conflict would represent
a powerful action in our efforts to undermine the
narratives of terrorist groups. Let us not prevent the
Security Council from getting involved in prevention.
There can be no justification for terrorism. Brazil
reiterates its commitment to a multidimensional
response to that threat and remains convinced that
cooperation and dialogue within the United Nations
will enhance our capacity to achieve the results that we
need. We will only succeed if we join efforts on the basis
of shared values and enhanced multilateral cooperation.
50/94

11/05/2016

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate,
which offers us a timely opportunity to exchange views
on the narratives and ideologies of terrorism. I also
thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Sheikh Mohi El-Din Afifi
and Mr. Steven A. Crown for their comprehensive
briefings, and commend Al-Azhar University for the
steps that it is taking to thwart extremist narratives.
I must also condemn the terrorist attacks by Da’esh,
today, in Baghdad and last week against police officers
in Egypt, and offer my condolences to the peoples and
Governments of Egypt and Iraq and the families of
the victims.
Violent extremism is the most critical challenge
currently facing the Middle East, and as borders
worldwide go unrecognized, many other parts of
the world are threatened as a result of the spreading
scourge. Syria, followed by Iraq, is among those
nations that have borne the brunt of the atrocities and
barbarity practiced by extremist groups. At the same
time, the blind violence committed by the individuals
and groups affiliated with Da’esh in various parts of the
world highlight the widening scope of the threat posed
by the rise of violent extremism.
It is evident that the takfiri ideology, which
has nothing to do with Islam, lies at very core of
the predicament that we now face. Therefore, the
international community needs, first and foremost, to
focus on that vicious ideology and its proponents, who
seek to instil hatred and anger in the hearts and minds
of young people everywhere in the Islamic world and
beyond. Those with wealth and power have undertaken
for many decades to diffuse that mode of thinking in
the larger Muslim community and around the globe and
force it upon peoples and communities near and far,
thereby advancing their shortsighted agenda. Al-Qaida
and the Taliban represent their first so-called successes,
and Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front and its affiliates are
the latest.
For many decades, the proponents of that perverse
ideology have pinpointed individuals susceptible to their
schemes, then bankrolled them, providing all necessary
cover and support, in order to bring pressure to bear on
various Governments to condone their activities, and
so on. And the results have been the atrocities, rapes,
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

slavery, burnings, beheadings and innovative, creative
ways of killing that we have sadly come to learn about
through the media.

should end. Anything that undermines the unified front
against extremists and provides them with space, such
as the invasion of Yemen, should be halted as well.

The opponents of the takfiri or excommunicative
ideology include those who do not believe in that
ideology, who are on a very long list of so-called
non-believers, which includes Shiites, Christians, Jews,
and moderate Sunnis, and the list continues on and on.
The atrocities committed against the Yazidi people
reflect the intentions and behaviour of adepts of the
takfiri ideology towards minorities. The social-media
accounts glorifying the horrific massacre of 1,700 Iraqi
air-force cadets in Tikrit in June 2014 portended what
those extremists intend to do wherever they prevail.

Finally, Iranians of all ages and affiliations,
particularly the youth, have been consistent in rejecting
and fighting violent extremism from the Taliban and
Al-Qaida in Afghanistan to Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula, Da’esh and others similar forces in Yemen,
Iraq and Syria. We also have tried to help fight
extremists on the ground and provide a path to combat
their ideology, including through promoting Dialogue
among Civilizations and A world against violence
and violent extremism (General Assembly resolution
70/109).

In parallel with the need to highlight the roots of
Da’esh and its affiliates in the historic development of
their extreme ideology, we must also be mindful of the
strong impact of Iraq’s recent bloody history on the
formation and growth of the current violent extremist
groups. Political and military interventions in the
region, especially in the past decade, have exacerbated
the situation, created an enormously fertile breeding
ground for extremists and helped the most radical among
them to grow. With the Syrian crisis and the support
that the extremists have received from some wealthy
individuals, quarters and States within and outside the
region, they have found a new breeding space.

Let me conclude my statement by rejecting the
baseless and worn-out accusation by the representative
of the Israeli regime against my country and my
Government. When it comes to terrorism, that regime
has to be accountable for two reasons. First, it has been
engaged in all sort of terrorist activities to create the
regime and, thereafter, in suppressing the legitimate
resistance of those whose lands are under its occupation.
Secondly, this regime should also be held accountable as
its occupation and the misery and grievances it creates
are exploited by extremist groups for recruitment and
to justify their crimes.

As in any war, in order to defeat violent extremism,
the battle must be fought, first and foremost, on a
cultural and ideological front. Those who have so far
supported that extreme ideology should reconsider. It
is very encouraging that Islamic community leaders
everywhere, including Sunni scholars and clerics, have
defied Da’esh’s threats and denounced and rejected its
ideology.
At the same time, full compliance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations is also a must,
as it helps drain the breeding ground for extremism.
The contributing factors that help create space for
extremism, such as the occupation of the Palestinian
land by Israel, which constitutes the greatest form of
terrorism, must also be addressed. Other contributing
factors like dictatorship, poverty, corruption,
discrimination and marginalization are also important.
And so is the need to counter Islamophobia, which plays
right into the extremists’ hands and lends credence to
their messaging. Likewise, funding extremists and
condoning their recruitments through lax border control

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt, for
presiding over the earlier session of the open debate and
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
meeting. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Secretary-General of Al Azhar
Islamic Research Academy and the Vice-President of
Microsoft for their briefings.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Kuwait and
Thailand on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, respectively.
The concept note (S/2016/416, annex) for this
debate underlines the grim reality of the global nature
of terrorism. Terrorist groups recruit and train new
members, operate and seek funding anywhere they
wish, regardless of State boundaries. Supported by those

16-1328651/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

capacities, certain terrorist groups, notably the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram and other
groups linked to Al-Qaida, have devastated regional
peace and stability and threatened the stability of other
regions. Terrorist groups have also used information
technology extensively to spread messages of hatred
and violence. Their propaganda has also contributed
to the rise of lone wolf terrorists. With those facts in
mind, it is imperative to strengthen synergy at all levels
and all aspects of our cooperation.
Countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism is indeed critical in preventing terrorism
and violent extremism. Indonesia believes that more
efforts must be made in this regard with a view
to establishing effective strategies at the national,
regional and global levels. Along that line, I wish to
share some of Indonesia’s experiences in developing
and implementing strategies to counter narratives and
ideologies of terrorism, as part of our contribution to the
efforts to enhance global cooperation in this particular
matter. First, our national efforts to counter narratives
and ideologies of terrorism are conducted within the
framework of the blueprint on deradicalization, which
focuses on at least three critical programmes: dialogue,
empowerment and reintegration.
Dialogue is conducted among convicted terrorists
and a team of experts in religious, social and
psychological counselling. It aims at building trust and
eradicating the ideology of terrorism. Education and
training are provided to equip former terrorists with
practical trades to assist them in their reintegration into
society, following the conclusion of their sentencing
period. The role of family and women is important
in educating individuals and assimilating them into
the communities.
It is important to note that, in order to succeed,
we must be able to identify the root causes of the
ideologies of terrorism. Based on our experience, the
misinterpretation of religion is not the only reason
behind the ideologies of terrorism. There are many
other factors that must be taken into account, such as
individual backgrounds and motivation, or collective
grievances and victimization.
It must be emphasized that deradicalization is a
long and challenging process. At the same time, we
also have to be watchful of the danger of the terrorists
spreading their ideologies among inmates in prison. Yet
the result of our de-radicalization strategy is tangible.
52/94

11/05/2016

Today, terrorists who have denounced their ideologies
are among our allies in countering terrorism. On
account of their past, they are in a good position to
explain the danger of terrorist ideologies, as well as
its impacts on the public, the terrorists themselves and
their families.
Secondly, deradicalization programmes must be
complemented by counter-radicalization, which aims
at providing the public with narratives to counter
those of the terrorists. Our counter-radicalization
programmes involve many important stakeholders,
such as educational and religious institutions, youth
organizations, media, women, victims of terrorist
attacks and even former terrorists, at both the national
and provincial levels. Within the context of counterradicalization, we have put in place appropriate
measures to prevent the spread of terrorists’ messages
through the Internet. We also use the Internet to
prevent, detect and deter acts of terrorism. That include
creating websites to disseminate messages of peace
and respect and the gathering of information that may
lead to the prevention of terrorism and prosecution of
terrorist suspects.
Thirdly, we remain faithful to the belief that
respecting human rights contributes to effective
counter-terrorism efforts. This is so since respect for
human rights, while countering terrorism, can help
secure the confidence of terrorists and their families
in the Government. Building this confidence is a
fundamental element in de-radicalization because the
ideologies of terrorism are often built upon views of the
illegitimacy of the Government. Moreover, violations
of human rights and lack of good governance may
contribute to the spread of ideologies of terrorism.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore the importance
of the sharing of best practices and lessons learned in
de-radicalization and counter-radicalization, as part of
our continuous efforts to strengthen States’ capacities.
In that regard, Indonesia will continue to utilize the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation
as a platform for regional and global cooperation in
capacity-building and invite others to do so.
We look forward to a closer collaboration
among States and the United Nations system in this
important task.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Belgium.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on
countering narratives, as this is one way to counteract
the phenomenon of terrorism. This scourge is
particularly worrisome to Belgium, which was a target
of horrific attacks on 22 March, following those in
France, Lebanon, Pakistan, Côte d’Ivoire, Turkey and
many other countries in the recent past. I would like
to align in spirit with our debate all the victims of
these atrocities. These attacks are attacks against the
international community and against our values.
We know how a terrorist group like Da’esh makes
harmful use of social media and radical discourse.
They spread broad-based propaganda and they adapt it
to their audience by adopting the codes of youth and
of the regions concerned. Besides this widespread
propaganda, what makes Da’esh particularly effective
is the investment in time and resources dedicated to
each of the individuals they hope to recruit. Recruiters
are trained for this purpose and, by following a specific
procedure, they find the type of narrative that is
most likely to lead that particular individual to join
their ranks.
We will never be able to thwart this extremely
effective machine by using only standardized, banal
and negative discourse. We cannot simply produce
counter-narratives. We have to convince people that
there are better things to do than to give aid to Da’esh
and commit terrorist acts. We have to coordinate our
efforts at the international, regional, national and local
levels, right down to single neighbourhoods, and we
have to ensure the participation of civil society.
I would like to share some thoughts about the
conditions that can enable us to produce effective
counter-narratives. First, it is important to adapt a
narrative to its target audience. Every culture, population
sector and social group has its own sensitivities, which
is why it is so important for each State to design its
own strategy for countering the radicalization that
leads to terrorism and terrorist recruitment. That is
exactly what the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674) is promoting in
its call for the adoption of national plans. Its section on
strategic communication, the Internet and social media
(see paragraph 55), details the importance of adapting
narratives to the local context, encouraging research
on Internet use in a context of violent extremism,
promoting values of tolerance and freedom of opinion,
working with victims and protecting journalists.

S/PV.7690

Secondly, an effective counter-narrative must also
be based on knowledgeable analysis of the motives of
potential terrorists, which often vary greatly. In that
regard, the results of projects such as the returnees
interview programme developed by the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force could prove
very useful.
Thirdly, it seems probable that the most effective
type of narrative will be those with a positive message;
too often, the messages are negative, saying, for
example, “Do not go to Syria. They are lying and it
will not be what you think it is.” A positive message
should convey through very concrete examples that
young people can play an active role in society that is
rewarding both for them and for the community as a
whole. In short, they can imagine a positive future for
themselves. That assumes, however, that all the key
actors around them — the public authorities, school,
the local community, businesses, culture and the
media — have the means to ensure that this hope can
become reality.
Lastly, and most importantly, the counter-narrative
most likely to change the direction an individual has
taken is face-to-face dialogue that makes it possible to
work with potential terrorists, giving them time and
personal attention. Such counter-narratives generally
rely on those close to such young people — their
families, friends and religious leaders. They are also the
hardest to implement, because they require resources
and expertise. The United Nations undoubtedly has a
role to play in that regard in capacity-building and in
providing and promoting the exchange of experiences.
Belgium has established several instruments
aimed at combating violent radicalization that I will
describe briefly.
First, scientific research has shown that building
resilience during the early stages of exposure to radical
ideas has a protective effect against radicalization,
which is what Belgium has sought to do through a
project named BOUNCE, aimed at young people and
those close to them. More than 100 local representatives
have been trained in the use of BOUNCE resilience
tools. The project has been positively assessed by the
European Commission and will be expanded to several
European cities.
Secondly, as part of a broad prevention and safety
programme, 19 Belgian cities and municipalities have
added the fight against violent radicalization to their

16-1328653/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

11/05/2016

prevention and security plans, supported by a significant
supplement to their budgets allocated by the federal
Government. In that regard, the Belgian Ministry of
the Interior is also organizing quarterly coordination
meetings at which cities and municipalities are kept
informed about developments in radicalization and
share their local experiences.

who are in alliance with every thief around the world
sponsoring terrorism and criminality — after all of that,
we are justified in telling those involved in fuelling and
lengthening the crisis to keep their hands off Syria.
Enough misinformation, enough intervention in our
internal affairs under pretexts that have been proven
to be false in Syria, Iraq, Libya and many other States.

Belgium, in cooperation with the United Kingdom,
has launched a project open to all European Union
member States and financed by the European
Commission: the Syria Strategic Communications
Advisory Team. It aims to develop and share best
practices in the area of strategic communications with
the goal of preventing and countering acts of terrorism
and violent extremism, especially those linked to foreign
terrorist fighters. The project includes a small team of
experts from European Union member States who have
developed successful communications strategies for
dealing with the issue of foreign terrorist fighters.

Since the start of what some like to call the
Syrian crisis, the Security Council has held hundreds
of meetings and adopted dozens of resolutions and
statements. It has set up fact-finding mechanisms and
has quite seriously been unable to take a single step
to bring pressure to bear on the sponsors of terrorism;
to stop the export of terrorists and mercenaries from
abroad into Syria and Iraq; to control borders in order
to halt the flows of terrorists; to end the Qatari-financed
treatment of injured terrorists in Israeli and Turkish
hospitals; or to prohibit broadcasts by television stations
from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey and London inciting
people to sectarian terrorism that utterly violates all the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on the Arab Republic of Egypt’s
leadership of the Security Council for this month. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim at
today’s important meeting. We are grateful to Egypt for
convening it.
Before I begin, I would like to express our sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of Egypt
for the victims of the heinous terrorist attack a few days
ago. I would also like to convey our condolences to the
Government and the people of Iraq for the hundreds
of victims of the car bombs today in Baghdad. They
are suffering from the very same terrorism that we
are enduring in my country, and thus today’s topic is
therefore very timely.
Some five years have elapsed since the assassination
began in Syria of the principles of international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and good-neighbourly
relations around our territory. After exhausting every
possible means of destroying Syria — its State, its
people, its infrastructure — including terrorism, media
misinformation, recruiting foreign terrorist fighters and
mercenaries from every corner of the globe, facilitating
terrorist groups’ use of chemicals, trafficking in
the suffering and hopes of millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, creating opponents abroad
54/94

My delegation has repeatedly stressed its full
support for any sincere effort to confront the threat
posed by terrorism and its poisonous ideologies and
to uphold the values of peace, dialogue and respect
for religious, ideological and cultural diversity. We
continue to assert that terrorism is the gravest threat to
the world today; it is the common enemy of all mankind.
Therefore the United Nations and the Security Council
must take up their responsibilities to coordinate and
promote international cooperation to combat terrorism.
However, such cooperation must be very far removed
from selectivity and double standards.
It is unreasonable for persons to be deemed to
be terrorists in France, Belgium, Spain, the United
States of America, the United Kingdom, Australia
and Tunisia while elsewhere they are called jihadists,
non-State armed groups or the moderate Syrian armed
opposition, and showered with money, weapons, entry
visas, intelligence and protection. Indeed, they are
brought to Syrian borders and their entry into Syria is
guaranteed.
Some have created a State for terrorism called the
Caliphate, with an official flag and with media sites.
Words like “Islam” are used. It has two capitals, in
both Syria and Iraq, and therefore an international
coalition was set up to confront it. Today the scenario
of constructive chaos is complete. The entire world
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

is watching the theatrics of the so-called anti-Da’esh
coalition. That scenario is not serious. It is not credible,
particularly since, instead of targeting Da’esh elements,
the so-called international coalition is destroying the
infrastructure of the Syrian State, of the Syrian people,
under the pretext of combating terrorism. At the same
time, the coalition is turning a blind eye to the Da’esh
trade in petroleum and archaeological treasures with
Turkey and their export through Turkish territory to
Israel and European countries.
The mask has now fallen from the faces of the States
that are sponsoring takfiri terrorism in my country,
the region and Africa. The efforts of those murderous
Governments are doomed to fail. The series of lies
and crocodile tears shed because of the suffering of
the Syrian people — caused by the very Governments
claiming to combat terrorism — have ended. Many
WikiLeaks documents have disclosed the role of those
Governments in targeting Syria following the invasion
and destruction of Iraq. Those who manufactured
Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida, the Al-Fatah
Army, the Army of Islam, the Al-Ahrar Al-Sham,
the Jund Al-Aqsa, the Liwa Al-Sultan Murad, the
Turkestan Liberation Party, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab,
the Salvation Front and dozens of Al-Qaida-affiliated
terrorist organizations; those who provide weapons,
money, training, fatwas, political and media protection
and describe them with such terms as “political
violence” and “jihadism” in order to hide their true
terrorist nature — they comprise the very party that
has been holding up the flag of terrorism and should be
the common enemy of all mankind.
Confronting the poisonous ideologies of terrorist
organizations and their supporters and financiers is no
less important than confronting the use of biological
or chemical weapons by terrorist organizations. In that
regard, we cannot turn a blind eye to the important
role taken by the Governments of States sponsoring
terrorism. The Saudi and Qatari regimes are abusing
Arabs and Muslims through the dissemination of Wahabi
extremist thoughts and their erroneous thinking that
distorts Islam. Together with the Turkish regime, they
are providing all kinds of support to takfiri terrorism
that crosses borders and crosses continents — the very
terrorism that my country is confronting.
The honourable achievements of the Syrian Army,
with the support of our friends in the battle against
terrorism, including the liberation of the historic city
of Palmyra and its liberation from Da’esh, the return of

S/PV.7690

art and music to its old amphitheatre — those are the
victories of civilization and light over terrorist ideology.
My delegation stresses the need to end Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan and other occupied
Arab territories and to put an end to the practices of
the occupation forces that support terrorism and led
to the expulsion of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force from the separation zone in the occupied
Syrian Golan and to their replacement by terrorist
elements from the Al-Nusra Front and the Yarmouk
Martyrs Brigade .
In conclusion, my delegation stresses that terrorists
must not be rewarded. Their sponsors must not be
rewarded for their criminal acts. It is unfortunate and
shameful for Europe to conclude an agreement with
the Erdogan regime, which is supporting terrorism in
a way that allows Erdogan to blackmail Europe, to take
advantage of the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons and to profit from their suffering.
That is the result of the practices of Erdogan, thanks
to which his citizens have received visa-free travel to
Europe, a base achievement.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): We thank the Egyptian
presidency for organizing this very timely debate.
All too often, our discussions centre on the effective
use of law enforcement and military capabilities to
combat terrorism. But as the concept note (S/2016/416,
annex) rightly points out, we must combat terrorism
in a comprehensive manner. Countering the root
causes of violent extremism, especially the underlying
ideological tenets that correlate with terrorist acts, is
essential to defeat global terrorism.
Terrorism is not a new phenomenon. We have
witnessed it for centuries in Europe and elsewhere.
However, completely new is the apparent effortlessness
with which terrorists are recruited today. Modern
technologies make it possible for terrorists to spread
their murderous ideologies across the globe in literally
seconds. Perhaps the most troubling feature of that
new development is that those messages often resonate
even with those who have not espoused extremist
views before. In too many cases, the messages have
been a catalyst for terrorist attacks. In view of those
dangerous developments, we must redouble our efforts
in combating the spread of ideologies of terrorist
organizations.

16-1328655/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Critical to limiting the effect of extremist
propaganda is a confident society, one in which citizens
are compelled to uphold peace and tolerance. We cannot
take those values for granted; they have to be reaffirmed
and defended every day. The exclusion of minorities,
the lack of democratic participation, the suppression
of certain opinions or beliefs, and grave human rights
violations in general are all well-documented factors
that make people more susceptible to violent extremist
narratives. Therefore, all Governments — and I include
in this appeal all the countries who have just spoken
before the Council — are well advised to strengthen
structures that promote inclusive dialogue grounded in
the values mentioned.
As was highlighted in the General Assembly’s
high-level thematic debate last week, religious leaders
and faith-based initiatives can play a significant role
in promoting tolerance and countering radicalization.
In my country, the German Islam Conference, which
was founded ten years ago, has been instrumental
in that sense. It has brought together Government
representatives and Muslim organizations in an effort
to discuss important issues, such as the introduction
of courses on Islam in schools and universities and
the State-funded further education of imams. The
German Islam Conference aims to empower Muslims
to participate in society, while seeking to advance the
integration of Islam into the cooperative relationship
that exists in Germany between religious communities
and the State.
Currently, the fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is at the top of our counterterrorism agenda. Germany is an active partner in
the global coalition against ISIL. We are confident
that the military campaign will be successful, as the
territories controlled by ISIL are being diminished by
the day. It is important, however, that liberated areas
do not become breeding grounds for terrorism in the
future. We must help to quickly stabilize those regions
and restore trust and confidence among the population.
We have to demonstrate that there is a positive future
in a multi-ethnic and multiconfessional society. As
Co-Chair of the Stabilization Working Group, Germany
has initiated a whole range of projects to that end.
My country continues to engage actively in the
fight against violent extremism in other international
frameworks, including the European Union, the Group
of Seven Roma-Lyon Group, the Global CounterTerrorism Forum and the Organization for Security and
56/94

11/05/2016

Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As this year’s OSCE
Chair, we will host in Berlin later this month an OSCE
conference that will focus on preventing and countering
violent extremism and radicalization that lead to
terrorism. We are convinced that the conference will,
inter alia, give us valuable input in our efforts to draft
a national action plan on preventing violent extremism,
which will be published shortly.
I would like to close by reiterating that Germany
remains firmly committed to taking action against
terrorism, ensuring accountability and tackling its root
causes, including by exposing its faulty narratives and
ideologies.
The President (spoke in Arabic) I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Terrorism is one of the
critical challenges of our time. As terrorist groups
such as Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
have expanded their reach and influence, it is evident
that many find their narratives and tactics appealing.
Countering that appeal and preventing the spread of
violent ideology is essential to their long-term defeat
and is a priority for Australia. Australia recognizes that
the pathways to radicalization are complex and that
there is no single pathway. Each individual experiences
unique drivers to violent extremism. That challenge
means that there is no single solution to combating
violent extremism.
Australia’s efforts to counter the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism aim to reduce the reach and
appeal of extremist narratives. We do that by limiting
access to their extremist propaganda online through
content removal and digital advertising, by undermining
the appeal of extremist messages through communityled counter-narrative activities, and by hardening the
audience by increasing the digital resilience of youth
so that they are less likely to take propaganda at face
value. Governments cannot act alone in meeting this
challenge, and Australia collaborates with civil society,
industry and creative industries to compete with the
pace and scale of the dissemination of violent extremist
content.
Australia is committed to a regional and
international approach to meet the shared challenges of
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
Regionally, we are working through programmes
aimed at marginalizing the appeal of extremist
thinking and messages and building community
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

resilience to extremist messages by promoting values
such as democracy, human rights and tolerance. In line
with Australia’s national countering violent extremism
strategy, we strongly support the role of civil society
organizations in countering violent extremist ideology.
In 2015, Australia hosted a regional summit on
countering violent extremism. We are pursuing the
implementation of the outcomes from that summit,
which include connecting civil society, improving
regional partnerships between Government and
non-governmental actors, building the technical
capability of grass-roots organizations and developing
counter-messaging resources tailored to the South-East
Asia region. Working closely with partners and allies
in the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, Australia supports strategies
dedicated to disrupting, degrading and destroying the
toxic narratives of ISIL and other terrorist groups and
to challenging their ideology. And we are seeing results.
As the threat from terrorism and violent extremism
has evolved, so must the response. The global nature
of terrorist narratives and the need to counter them
globally underlines the critical role of the United
Nations. Australia strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674) as a practical approach to preventing
violent extremism. There is a pressing need for the
international community to come together to combat the
threat of terrorism. The review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in June presents Member States the
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the strategy
and to continue to support efforts to counter terrorism
and terrorist ideology. Australia is committed to doing
its part.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate Egypt on its assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
we wish to express our appreciation for the convening
of this important debate on countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for providing us with a comprehensive
concept note (S/2016/416, annex) to guide our
discussions.
Indiscriminate attacks — such as the three bomb
attacks in Iraq today on innocent civilians, including
women and children — by increasingly ambitious

S/PV.7690

terrorist groups persist with alarming frequency across
the world. This is leading to untold human suffering
and is provoking an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis in some regions of the world. Terrorist groups’
adept use of modern communications technologies to
recruit, to incite violence and to spread their distorted
ideologies of hate and intolerance poses a serious and
ever more complex threat to international peace and
security. Through fear and force they sow instability
and continue to deprive those they control of the
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The threat of terrorism is universal, transcending
borders, and we have reached a stage where no country
can declare itself free of this scourge. Similarly, no
country can deal with it on its own. For that reason,
it is important that the international community
adopt adequate measures to counter it. The United
Nations, with the broad range of expertise and tools
at its disposal, is best placed to lead the coordination
of international efforts in this regard. South Africa
continues to support the central role of the United
Nations in countering terrorism and strengthening the
multilateral system to take effective measures within
the framework of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Initiatives to support improved
coordination and cooperation among United Nations
entities involved in countering terrorism, and improved
coordination between the United Nations and regional
structures, should be encouraged and supported.
We acknowledge the work being done by the General
Assembly and the Security Council in guiding the
international community’s response to that challenge.
The General Assembly, with its universal membership,
has a valuable contribution to make, especially with
regard to the upcoming review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Together with the
Secretary-General’s Plan to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), it provides a valuable opportunity for all
Member States to assess the progress thus far and to
make recommendations for more effective cooperation
in countering terrorism, particularly with regard to the
creation of new mechanisms.
It is my delegation’s view that the creation of
any new mechanism should be measured against its
contribution to facilitating and assisting international
counter-terrorism efforts, rather than duplicating
work that has already been done in other structures.
South Africa continues to support a multifaceted,

16-1328657/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

comprehensive approach to dealing with terrorism in
all its complexity.
Terrorism cannot be defeated militarily and cannot
be dealt with solely through the use of force or coercive
measures. To counter the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism in the medium- to long-term, international
cooperation must also address the factors that give rise
to this scourge. There is an urgent need to understand
and address the conditions and contexts that make
terrorism an attractive option for the disaffected.
Engagement,
including
through
education,
eliminating inequalities and working with disadvantaged
groups of society, particularly young people, and
developing appropriate strategies at the national,
regional, and international level remain critical. There
is no one-size-fits-all approach to countering this
threat; it is up to each subregion and country to define
its specific conditions and take appropriate action in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
in observance of international law.
Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, nationality or civilization. We therefore
welcome and support initiatives and efforts that promote
dialogue, tolerance, diversity and understanding among
peoples, cultures and religions. Acts of mobilization
directed against individuals, communities or nations
simply because of their faith, language or race cannot
be justified. The international community should seek
political solutions to resolve long-standing conflicts. In
this context, terrorism should not be equated with the
legitimate struggles of peoples under foreign occupation
to achieve their inalienable right to self-determination,
as recognized by the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
delegation’s commitment to continuing to work within
the United Nations and other multilateral structures
to seek ways to counter effectively and efficiently the
threat posed to international peace and security by
terrorist acts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Mr. Brende (Norway): No country is immune to
violent extremism. From Baghdad and Bamako to Paris,
Brussels and Istanbul, we have had tragic reminders
of this global peril. Threats to our security are more
complex than they have been for decades, and the most
serious among them is violent extremism. It must be
58/94

11/05/2016

defeated at all levels by Governments and citizens
alike. When and where necessary — as in Syria and
Iraq — we must also be willing to use military means.
At the same time, we must stop the flow of finances
and foreign fighters, improve our development policies,
strengthen fragile States and offer young people
education, jobs and opportunities. It does not help to
win the day-to-day battles in Iraq if we lose the battle
for the future. The likes of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) can be degraded and destroyed
only if their ideology is dismantled. We must refine our
counter-messaging, bearing in mind that messages are
only effective when accompanied by substance and real
progress. Young people must be able to find jobs and
opportunities, to be seen and to influence their own
lives — in the Middle East, North Africa, Europe and
elsewhere.
As we refine our methods, extremist groups are
finding new ways to spread their propaganda, finance
their activities, recruit people and carry out attacks.
The sharing of intelligence and information between
our countries must be improved. The core values of
peace, tolerance, democracy, human rights and rule of
law are what the terrorists are fighting. If we want to
defeat terrorism, we must defend the values that gave
birth to the Security Council 70 years ago.
As ISIL is losing ground in Syria and Iraq and
its recruitment seems to be slowing down, we must
increase our focus on the threat that foreign fighters
pose when they return home. We must also do what we
can to prevent new ISILs from emerging.
The international community must adapt to
a changing security landscape. The SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), building on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, is timely and much needed.
It focuses on national, regional and United Nations
activities that can become drivers for change. The Plan
seeks to tackle conditions conducive to terrorism while
aiming to ensure respect for human rights and the rule
of law. It addresses how we can effectively counter
the manipulative messages of violent extremism by
advocating freedom of expression and the values of
tolerance, pluralism and understanding. These are
all necessary ingredients for building peaceful and
inclusive societies.
Governments have the primary responsibility for
preventing extremism, but they can only succeed if
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

they work closely with civil society, including with
young people and women. That is why Norway has
initiated the launch of two civil-society networks. First,
there is YouthCAN, which is a network of young people
working together against violent extremism, not least
by developing alternative narratives. Secondly, we have
established an alliance of women’s organizations. Many
of the women in the alliance have suffered directly
from extremism in places like Syria and Iraq. There can
be no more qualified and credible voices in speaking
out against terrorism than its victims and witnesses.
Norway will continue to work with these networks and
help them expand.
We all have a role to play in countering violent
extremism. Our efforts must be amplified and our
methods refined. We need a strong United Nations to
show global leadership. We need a United Nations that
is fit for purpose and has sufficient resources to do its
important part. Norway is pleased that the General
Assembly earlier this year welcomed the initiative of
the Secretary-General to develop and present his Plan
of Action to Member States. We can fight terrorists
with soldiers and police and indeed we will. But in the
long run, we can only prevail if we understand the root
causes of violent extremism and commit ourselves to
translating this understanding into action.
We cannot rest in our quest for answers and
solutions. Violent extremism is a threat to us all, so we
must fight it globally, at home and together.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Egyptian delegation for convening
today’s debate on this important and relevant topic.
The concept note (S/2016/416, annex) was helpful and
raised several important issues. At the outset, I would
emphasize that in the experience and approach of
Canada violent extremism cannot be associated with
any particular religion, nationality, civilization, or
ethnic group.
My statement today will focus on three specific
topics in the fight against terrorism: the role of publicprivate partnerships, positive alternative narratives
rooted in action, and multilateral coordination.
(spoke in English)
First, effective counter-narrative strategies require
meaningful partnerships with the private sector and

S/PV.7690

civil society and have to include innovative approaches
that tap into the growing body of knowledge about
countering terrorist narratives. We have seen that some
terrorist groups are effective in using the Internet to
advance their aims. The content they produce appeals
to the generation that grew up with YouTube and has
contributed to radicalization towards violence.
Yet our efforts to counter terrorist narratives online
must not legitimize controls that hinder peaceful use of
the Internet. Governments must forge partnerships with
Internet-based companies and online communities.
They must also help create open, safe spaces for debate
that appeal to regional audiences, taking into account
cultural realities and sensitivities.
Furthermore, the process of radicalization to
violence is complex and highly individualized. In fact,
Government efforts to counter radical messages can be
ineffective or even counter-productive, partly due to
real or perceived credibility gaps with target audiences.
Therefore, partnerships with credible local parties must
also be part of our strategy.
Secondly, we understand the importance of having
a positive alternative narrative that stands on its
own. Governments have an important role to play in
this endeavour. Despite some stumbles, the Canadian
Government has been actively enabling the building
of a peaceful, pluralistic society throughout Canada’s
history. It is our belief that diversity and inclusion are
crucial to healthy and prosperous societies that are
resilient against extremism — not just as aspirational
values, but as a proven path to peace and prosperity.
The recent resettlement of 25,000 Syrian refugees in
Canada, with more still to follow, is a part of that story.
We are not perfect, but we believe that Canada
has a lot to contribute to the international community
in terms of our experience building a peaceful and
resilient society, particularly at a time when there is a
pressing need to prevent violent extremism. Against
that overarching story line, Governments should
encourage social and political dialogue that undermines
narratives spun by terrorists, spearhead research and
knowledge sharing, engage young people and empower
those who are marginalized. To help us focus our
efforts, Canada is establishing an office dedicated to
community outreach and counter-radicalization. The
office will advance research, coordinate local, national
and international initiatives, work with civil society
and support community engagement.

16-1328659/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

(spoke in French)
In the short term, multilateral efforts related to
communications and counter-messaging are relatively
new and more needs to be done to develop them. Canada
stands ready to share its experience and expertise
with the international community. Canada is actively
engaged in the communications and counter-messaging
efforts of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Canada strongly supports
the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which emphasizes the
need to address underlying conditions to prevent the
development of violent extremism. We also support
the efforts undertaken by a range of multilateral
organizations and forums, including the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on behalf of the
Kenyan delegation, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of May. I commend you for
the manner in which you have conducted its affairs. I
also thank you for hosting this important debate at a
time when the United Nations is preparing to review
its Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to align it with
current realities and developments. We too welcome the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674).
Let me express our sincere condolences and
sympathies to our Arab brothers in Iraq, who today have
once again suffered an outrageous attack by terrorists.
Iraq has suffered for way too long under the terror of
events in the country.
What was impossible to imagine a generation
ago has come to pass. Nearly all the international
conflicts on the agenda of the Security Council have
violent extremist groups as main protagonists. We have
witnessed the emergence of groups such the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) (Da’esh), Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaida and numerous affiliates
and other non-State actors in violent conflict hotspots
across the world. Those groups have exploited the
conflicts, the attendant State collapse, socioeconomic
grievances and geopolitical disorder, especially in the
Middle East, to survive and to thrive.
60/94

11/05/2016

Violent extremist movements hide behind religion
to pursue political ends. In Kenya, the Somali-based
Al-Shabaab, an Al-Qaida affiliate, utilizes a Salafijihadi ideology through selective reading of Islamic
religious texts and histories in order to justify its own
hideous acts. They use claims of global and local
victimization of Muslims to assemble militant recruits
willing to carry out suicide and mass casualty attacks
against civilians and infrastructure in our country and
neighbouring countries. The group retains an ambition
to establish an East African caliphate to replace the
current secular States and other religious traditions.
We believe that the international community’s
counter-narratives in response to the challenge of
violent extremism are manifestly weak. It has failed
to adequately address frustrations and hopelessness,
particularly among the youth. Just this morning in a
room next door, we listened to Asha Mansour from
Tunisia, who challenged us to in that high-level
meeting by asking us why it is that today, in a country
like Tunisia, where the Arab Spring was born, so many
young people have turned to recruitment by ISIS.
Failure to address frustration and hopelessness,
mainly caused by economic injustices, endemic
conflicts, human right violations and social inequalities
seems to have left many young people throughout the
world vulnerable to extremist ideologies. Migrants and
refugees are also targets of violent extremist ideology
due to their vulnerability. Refugee camps have been
used as recruitment and staging grounds by violent
extremists. That is our experience in Kenya, which has
driven our Government, after 25 years of hosting over
500,000 refugees, to finally decide to shut down those
camps. Similarly, the use of cyberspace, particularly the
social media on the Internet, is posing new challenges
in the war against terrorism and extremism.
Kenya’s strategy to counter narratives and ideologies
of violent extremism seeks to facilitate an inclusive and
total rejection of extremist ideologies hostile to the
Kenya’s nationhood and way of life as a secular State.
It seeks to promote narratives that minimize sympathy
for terrorism as a means to change society or politics.
Allow me to share some of the lessons leant from our
experiences that we believe to be crucial to the success
of any strategy, be it local, national or international, in
countering extremist ideology and the terrorism that it
drives.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

First, there is a need to prevent conflicts and to
expeditiously resolve the existing ones. No narrative
to counter any ideology can succeed if communities
are still engaged in open hostilities. The primacy of
politics — which we take extremely seriously — in the
resolution of conflicts is key to attaining sustainable
solutions.
Secondly, we need to improve coordination, both
nationally and regionally, through the timely sharing of
information and best practices. There is need to reach
out to and involve all sectors of society — including
through community policing, religious leaders, private
sector and civil society — because it is only through
those partnerships that we can hope to attain success.
Thirdly,
investments
in
deradicalization,
rehabilitation and reintegration are key to winning the
war of ideas with violent extremist groups.
Fourthly, Governments should formulate inclusive
policies to address the various socioeconomic and
political drivers behind the violent extremist narratives.
Fifthly, adequate resourcing and capacity-building
are critical at all levels, as are investments in educational
programes and early warning systems to ensure timely
corrective interventions.

S/PV.7690

The rise and spread of violent extremism across the
world in general and Da’esh terrorism in particular, as
well as its increasing ability to reach out to the masses
through media, make it imperative to effectively
counter the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
Terrorism and violent extremism remain two of the
most serious threats to every society, as well as to the
international peace and security as a whole. Regardless
of its ethno-religious identity, geographical location,
socioeconomic conditions or political stance on the
world stage, every nation is more or less susceptible
to the growing threat of terrorism. Therefore, never in
history has a comprehensive and concerted response to
terrorism been needed as much as it is today.
The OIC believes that the first step of such an effort
should be to deprive terrorist groups of legitimacy in the
eyes of their primary support base by repudiating the
very arguments they use to justify their criminal acts.
In this regard, it would be appropriate and necessary
to correct first and foremost a misnomer that is often
repeated, and even wrongly cited in the concept note
of this open debate (S/2016/416, annex). There is no
such thing as a “religiously inspired terrorist group”, as
no religion either condones or inspires terrorism. Yet,
there are terrorist groups that exploit religions.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Kuwait.

As reflected in numerous Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, the OIC member
States believe that terrorism cannot be and should
not be associated with any religion, ethnicity, race
or nationality. Accordingly, no one should refer to
Al-Qaeda, Boko Haram, Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front,
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups as being
religiously inspired. On its part, committed to fighting
terrorism and countering violent extremism, the OIC
works towards delegitimizing terrorist ideologies,
through developing counter narratives to such extremist
ideologies and propaganda by elevating credible and
authentic religious voices that support tolerance and
non-violence.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honor to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the
OIC group. At the outset, allow me to express to the
delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt, a fellow OIC
member State, both our congratulations for presiding
over the Security Council this month, and our gratitude
for its convening of an open debate on such a timely
and important topic as countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism.

With respect to countering the appeal of Da’esh
specifically, the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers,
at its forty-second session held in Kuwait, adopted a
resolution entitled “Crimes of Da’esh” and called for
the effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) in order to
prevent that terrorist group from recruiting foreign
terrorist fighters. In this regard, the OIC believes
that building the capacities and capabilities of States
is critical to the effective implementation of Security

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance
of preventing conflicts, the separation of religion
from politics, the proper coordination and sharing
of information, and the role of amnesty in fostering
counter-narratives against the ideologies of violent
extremism. The Kenyan delegation looks forward to
the continued debate during the forthcoming review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
and to receiving the Security Council in Nairobi later
this week, where we hope to take this conversation even
further.

16-1328661/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council resolutions. Furthermore, the resolution also
calls for the imposition of stringent measures against
social media sites that are used by Da’esh in order to
propagate its heinous ideology and recruit sympathizers.
The OIC is extremely disturbed by the fact that
terrorist groups, including Da’esh, are increasingly
exploiting cyberplatforms to spread their messages of
hatred and to disseminate their distorted interpretations
of the Holy Koran. Such messages are aimed at
exploiting the socioeconomic and political frustrations
of Muslims. It is therefore of the utmost importance that
States, within the framework of international law and
while respecting the freedom of expression, identify
and shut down such media platforms, while also
engaging with communities to counter the narratives
of terrorists and their propaganda. To that effect, the
OIC has been working to establish its messaging centre,
based at the OIC headquarters in Jeddah, as part of its
efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism.
The OIC has consistently been at the forefront
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
Cooperation with key international and regional
partners in combating terrorism is among the key
objectives of the OIC Charter. Adopting its code of
conduct and its Convention on Combating International
Terrorism in 1994 and 1999, respectively, the OIC was
among the first to formulate a clear and principled
position against terrorism.
Moreover, the OIC 2025 Programme of Action,
adopted at the thirteenth session of the Islamic
Summit Conference in Istanbul last month, is yet
another important milestone. The Programme of
Action recognizes the need to improve the utilization
of information and communications technologies to
counter the exploitation of cyberspace for terrorist
purposes, including radicalization and recruitment. In
addition, the OIC Summit reaffirmed its support for
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the importance of addressing the causes of violent
extremism in a comprehensive manner.
Extremism flourishes when human rights are
violated. It is therefore crucial that collateral damage
and human catastrophe in counter-terrorism operations
be avoided, as they fuel extremism and radicalization.
The OIC is gravely concerned ovwere the mounting
trend of intolerance and discrimination against
Muslims, and the consequent surge of Islamophobia,
which is an affront to the human rights and dignity
62/94

11/05/2016

of Muslims. The OIC believes that extremism grows
within the context of an economic, social and political
environment. It is essential that the contexts that
provide conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
and violent extremism, such as historical injustices,
occupation, deprivation, exclusion, discrimination and
marginalization, be addressed with equal vigor.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Egyptian presidency for its vision in drawing attention
to the need to counter the narrative and combat the
ideologies that give rise to terrorism. Combating such
deeply rooted belief systems and perceptions is a most
difficult task, for they have taken a strong hold in many
societies.
As a long term approach, several measures should be
considered, such as exposing false notions, improving
public diplomacy and partnering with deradicalized
persons. New, revised and inspiring messages have
to be put forward to the younger generation, calling
for cooperation with parliamentarians, religious
leaders, educators, the private sector, civil society
and the media. Much work has to be done in families,
schools, communities and prisons. We encourage close
interministerial coordination within each Member
State’s Government, as well as collaboration within the
United Nations system, United Nations country teams,
together with regional and international organizations.
Kazakhstan has been at the forefront in striving to
bridge the ever-growing clash of civilizations, religions
and cultures. It was because of our efforts and those
of our partners that the General Assembly designated
2010 as the International Year for the Rapprochement
of Cultures and 2013-2022 as the Decade of
Rapprochement of Cultures, together with UNESCO. A
declaration by the Presidents of Kazakhstan and Turkey
on Islamic rapprochement at the recent OIC Summit in
Istanbul is another such example.
World leaders will need to be engaged in a drive to
identify how to promote peace and heal divisiveness.
These ideas, values and principles constitute the core of
the manifesto “The World. The Twenty-Firstt Century”,
authored by my President, Nursultan Nazarbayev,
which is a new security paradigm on war and peace.
He proposes therein to establish under United Nations
auspices a global coalition of States for peace, stability,
trust and security to end current conflicts, which are
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

fertile environments for radicalism. Last September,
my President also suggested establishing a United
Nations -led counter-terrorism network with a unified
mechanism, comprising various entities, to end all
forms of terrorism and bring perpetrators and their
supporters to justice.
According to our President, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy should be made
legally binding. We believe that the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674) must be fully supported by all Member
States. Kazakhstan has ratified all global instruments
on countering violent extremism. Currently, we are
engaged in the joint action plan to implement the Global
Strategy in Central Asia, and have hosted two meetings
in Almaty on the regional plan, as well as two training
workshops of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
With a view to promoting dialogue, my country
convenes triennially the Congress of the Leaders of
World and Traditional Religions, bringing together
religious and political leaders to promote peace. At
the national level, we hold inclusive and democratic
interactions among citizens and youth groups in
every locality through the Assembly of the People of
Kazakhstan. On 6 May, His Excellency Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft, President of the General Assembly, at the
initiative of Kazakhstan and Jordan, convened a highlevel conversation on religions for peace, with very
significant recommendations for the way forward.
Above all, we have formulated Kazakhstan Strategy
2050, which is very people- centred and whereby the
needs of all sectors of our society are met on the basis
of justice and equality, thereby laying the foundations
of durable social peace and solidarity.
Let us not forget that development and peace are two
sides of the same coin, and the President of Kazakhstan
has suggested that the international community adopt
a plan for a global strategy 2045 during the United
Nations centennial year, with a view to establishing
equality among nations and thereby ending all
conflicts. Narratives and ideologies know no borders,
so Kazakhstan will work steadfastly on multilateral
activities to spread the culture of peace and tolerance.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate Egypt on

S/PV.7690

assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
We are proud to see Egypt presiding over the Security
Council. We are confident, Sir, that your expertise and
wisdom will have a major effect on ensuring the success
of the Council’s work. I also thank you for convening
this open debate on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
valuable briefing early in this meeting, as well as other
briefers.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/6 on fighting terrorism. We are
committed to the statement and reiterate our support
for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy as the Organization’s comprehensive umbrella
for fighting terrorism.
Fighting extremist rhetoric and ideologies that fuel
terrorism is among the most urgent challenges facing
the international community today and one of our
main priorities. Indeed, we have taken the initiative
to fight extremism and terrorism in word and deed at
all levels — local, regional and international. In that
regard, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has adopted a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy. We have
not only adopted security measures, enacted counterterrorism legislation and worked to dry up the financial
resources of terrorism, but we have also diagnosed the
intellectual reality and assessed the root causes of the
proliferation of violent extremism and ideologies. We
have also developed an intellectual security strategy
based on three key pillars: prevention, rehabilitation
and care. We have established the Mohammad Bin Naif
Counselling and Care Centre, which reabsorbs those
convicted of terrorism-related crimes, rehabilitates
them and reforms those at risk of espousing extreme
ideologies.
We have striven to share our pioneering experience
in intellectual security based on the principles and
teachings of Islam, which promote tolerance and
peaceful coexistence, with other States through several
initiatives and international and regional activities. We
submitted a proposal to establish an Arab office for
combating terrorism and extremism that was adopted
at the thirty-first session of the Arab Council of Interior
Ministers, held in Morocco on 13 March 2014. We also
participated with Spain and Austria in opening the
King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz International Centre for
Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue, in Vienna in

16-1328663/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

2014, with the aim of combating extremism, promoting
a culture of respect and building peace.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was a pioneer in
urging the international community to fight terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We have called on
the international community to adopt a comprehensive
plan, in line with international law, to end terrorism
while maintaining the sovereignty, security and stability
of all States. In that regard, we helped to establish
the United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism.
We have taken part in setting the Centre’s strategic
priorities, including countering the rhetoric of violent
extremism and developing the strategies necessary to
that end, including on the Internet. We have provided
capacity-building support to Member States. We have
also announced that we will establish a centre to fight
nuclear terrorism in Vienna.
We are facing a wave of intellectual extremism
whose tragic repercussions are being felt around
the world. Those who believe in extremism and
marginalization, urge hatred and the dehumanization
of others, and justify the use of violence against them
are extremists, be they Christians or Muslims, Jews or
Buddhists, Hindus or atheists. The mongers of violent
rhetoric are no less dangerous than those who perpetrate
terrorist acts. Failing to fight them could drive us into
further vicious cycles of violence, killing and terrorism.
Some have sought to adopt extremist rhetoric that
distorts the image of Islam and links it to violence. We
have been following with serious concern the increase
in this rhetoric, the ongoing acts of marginalization
which amounts to violence and the terrorism carried
out against some Muslims, which amounts to blaming
Muslims for the indiscriminate acts of some extremists,
including calls for prohibiting Muslims from entering
a certain country and increasing the searches of
Muslims, and other measures of marginalization, which
only multiply the risk of terrorism and facilitate its
proliferation.
Palestine remains the principal cause of our Arab
and Islamic nation. In fact, Israel continues to resort
to all forms of violence and excessive force against
the lone Palestinian people. It has been acquiring
Palestinian lands and it continues with its colonization
day after day. It is imposing its hegemony on Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. Throughout all of this, it is basing itself
on an extremist, terrorist, racist rhetoric that calls for
killing, displacement and destruction. It turns a blind
64/94

11/05/2016

eye to the dangers of this rhetoric based on violence
and State terrorism. Failing to expressly condemn it,
failing to fight it and failing to hold accountable those
who promote it is closely linked to the growing rhetoric
of hatred, violence, extremism and terrorism by both
parties to the conflict. The ongoing Israeli occupation
of Arab occupied territories in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon is in itself a terrorist act that denies the Arab
people in this region their legitimate rights.
We have been witnessing a great rise in dangerous
sectarian rhetoric in our Arab region and in the Islamic
world, fuelled by Iran, through which it is trying to
exacerbate conflict and feed sectarian strife. It is
exploiting mosques and the media. It is also exploiting
official statements. This has provided a breeding ground
for the proliferation of extremism, secretarianism and
terrorism. Moreover, Iran continues to support armed
sectarian militias and terrorist groups, such as the
terrorist group Hizbullah in Lebanon.
Syrian authorities continue to perpetrate hideous
crimes through their gangs and forces. It is making use
of foreign groups and chanting sectarian slogans. That
has provided a breeding ground that has fuelled violent
extremist rhetoric. It has contributed to the proliferation
of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
and Al-Nusra Front. The failure by the international
community to provide protection for civilians in Syria
is one of the main reasons for the proliferation of
violent extremist ideologies and one of the main reasons
driving thousands of young people from all corners of
the world to join the ranks of Da’esh and the Al-Nusra
Front. Therefore, the ruling regime and terrorist groups
in Syria are two sides of the same coin which feed off
each other. It is unrealistic to expect to put an end to
terrorism in Syria without a true transition in power,
in line with the first Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex) and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that, first,
terrorism has no justification, regardless of where
and under what circumstances it is carried out.
Secondly, countering terrorist ideologies requires
a comprehensive and coordinated effort. Thirdly,
fighting terrorism requires fighting violent extremist
rhetoric against Muslims and Islam. It requires putting
an end to occupation, refraining from supporting
oppressive sectarian regimes or sectarian militias and
their extreme ideologies. It requires working to achieve
a comprehensive development for all peoples.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The last few years have resulted in massive
human loss and human rights violations caused by
the proliferation of the phenomenon and ideologies
of extremism, violence and terrorism. Those are also
the main reasons that this phenomenon continues to
exist. In order to address them, we must be courageous
and bear the responsibility of listening to the voice
of reason instead of narrow political interests. My
delegation looks forward to continuing to coordinate
and collaborate with the Council in this important work
to ensure the stability and security of the region and to
maintain international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Jordan.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend our sincere thanks and
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry
Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, for holding this important meeting
on countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency.
At a time when campaigns of manipulation and
recruitment by terrorist groups continue unabated, I
would also like to thank our three briefers and welcome
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6
on the issue under consideration. We commend the
Egyptian initiative in this regard.
Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, King of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, has always vigorously countered
the ideologies and narratives of terrorism, in particular
those of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
One and a half years ago (see A/69/PV.6), His Majesty
recalled before the General Assembly the serious
threat of religious manipulation and other practices by
terrorist groups around the world, in particular through
social media and secret partnerships involving religious
figures and stressed the need to face up to this danger
and to reach peaceful and just settlements to political
crises.
The continued political crises in many countries, in
particular in our region, and the failure to reach peaceful
settlements create a fertile ground for terrorists,
exacerbate the problems and provide them with space
to develop their agendas. Therefore, the restoration of
peace and security to countries that undergoing political
crises is the main tool to face up to this phenomenon. I

S/PV.7690

would also like to stress that, although we firmly believe
in the importance of military and security measures,
we still stress the importance of strategies that address
the intellectual and ideological dimensions.
I would like to stress that facing up to this
phenomenon cannot succeed through unilateral
governmental efforts, but rather all stakeholders must
cooperate effectively and particularly through the
following means. Religious scholars of all faiths — and
I would like to thank the President for hosting the
important figure from Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy — have boldly faced up to this dangerous
phenomenon and they should raise their voices against
religious manipulation and the ideologies of the traitors
of our age, ISIS, who hide behind Islam when Islam
has nothing to do with what they preach. They use it
to justify their barbarity and violence against civilians,
manipulating Islam in their own interests.
I would like to stress how important it is to
ensure the verification of all those edicts by religious
institutions and not to allow them a free hand to issue
whatever edicts they desire. Under that elevated concept
of religion, Jordan has launched various initiatives in
that area, starting with the 2004 Amman Message and
ending with the 2010 World Interfaith Harmony Week,
focused on the importance of education, particularly
regarding different creeds and beliefs, and emphasizing
the peaceful and diverse nature of Islam.
We should also focus on young people and
on protecting them from recruitment by terrorist
organizations, ensuring that they have economic,
political and social opportunities. Jordan has stressed
the importance of the issue through its sponsorship
of resolution 2250 (2015) on the relationship between
young people and peace and security during its
presidency of the Council in April 2015 and in the
Amman Youth Declaration, adopted at the Global
Forum on Youth, Peace and Security in August 2015.
We also stress the importance of working with
social-media companies and Internet service providers
and of coordinating Government efforts in that regard,
while ensuring full respect for human rights and the
principles of international law. Terrorists are making
effective use of those communication channels, which
are also very important on the military and security
fronts, particularly in the battle for cyberspace.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize how crucial
this issue is. It will require us to seriously evaluate all

16-1328665/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

our efforts to deal with the problem of terrorism, and in
that regard, I commend the final paragraph of today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/6), which calls for
establishing an international framework for dealing
with that phenomenon and stresses our willingness to
cooperate with the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and other relevant bodies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Faizunnesa (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you and your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s open debate and for the informative concept
note (S/2016/416, annex). Bangladesh aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
Terrorism and violent extremism thrive on a set of
corrosive narratives and ideologies. The true essence
and understanding of any religion, nurtured and
practiced over centuries, can hardly justify the skewed,
fragmented and exploitative narratives propagated by
terrorists and violent extremists. The international
community must remain invested in preserving and
promoting the core, mainstream message of peace,
mutual respect and tolerance that lies at the heart of
all religions. The misguided appeal of the messages of
terrorists and violent extremists demands a cautious,
context-specific and well-calibrated approach, marked
by the active participation and ownership of religious
leaders and establishments, civil-society organizations
and the media, among others. It must be underpinned by
a broader pursuit of a culture of peace and non-violence
across the entire social spectrum.
We also need an objective assessment of the
sense of deprivation, discrimination and exploitation
at the national and international levels that terrorists
and violent extremists tend to use to justify their
self-serving agenda and means. It will be critical
to demonstrate sincere and meaningful efforts to
address such grievances with no discrimination or
equivocation. It is unfortunate that the empowering
tools of information and communications technology
have assumed an unwelcome dimension in the hands
of terrorists and violent extremists. Terrorists’ smart
use of social media and other online platforms has
enabled them to suitably package and disseminate their
messages, establish links with potential sympathizers
across borders, recruit foreign terrorist fighters and
66/94

11/05/2016

often conduct their organized criminal activities with
impunity.
In Bangladesh, we remain committed to addressing
such emerging threats and challenges in a focused and
determined manner and to building on our achievements
in tackling terrorism and violent extremism, including
through broader community engagement and enhanced
capacity-building at the institutional level. In the light
of our experience in that regard, we would like to
emphasize five specific points.
First, the international response to terrorist and
violent extremist narratives must be comprehensive
and go beyond simply securitizing the discourse.
In view of the various dynamics of radicalization,
violent extremism and terrorism, we need nuanced
responses, short- and long-term initiatives, hard
and soft approaches and inclusive and participatory
mechanisms for customizing responses in accordance
with local needs.
Secondly, there must be a robust, consensus-based
understanding among law-enforcement and prosecution
authorities,
information-technology
companies,
social-media administrators and human rights actors
that can ensure appropriate filtering of and sanctions
against online terrorist and violent extremist narratives
and outlets, while respecting people’s rights to access,
privacy and freedom of expression.
Thirdly, we must focus on education at various
levels, if we are to embed the right narratives of religion,
culture and identity as part of global-citizenship
education initiatives. We must be vigilant with regard
to the creeping intrusion of violent extremist messages
and propaganda into higher education. We emphasize
the importance of continuing to work on developing
curriculum standards for the religious education of the
various denominations.
Fourthly, it will be crucial to give due consideration
to the impact of terrorist and violent extremist ideologies
on women in affected communities. We must revisit the
traditional approaches, in which women are seen as
victims of terrorism and violent extremism, and further
explore their potential roles as agents of prevention,
resilience and change at the community level — and
even as perpetrators.
Fifthly, an effective strategic response aimed at
countering terrorist and violent extremist narratives must
reject any form of racial or xenophobic — particularly
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Islamophobic — attitudes and categorization. We are
particularly concerned about the added vulnerability of
migrants and others in need of international protection,
a problem that deserves further consideration at the
global level.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
emphasize its support for any initiative by the Council,
in coordination with the General Assembly, aimed at
developing a comprehensive international strategy to
address, with a sense of urgency, the deepening threats
of terrorist and violent extremist ideologies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to thank the Egyptian presidency for arranging
today’s open debate on countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism.
From Paris to Brussels to Istanbul, the spread of
terrorism and violent extremism poses a grave threat
to international peace and security. In their attempt to
establish their so-called caliphate, violent extremists
such as the adherents of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant are imposing a brutal reign of terror and
inciting people to join them. They are also carrying
out ruthless attacks on innocent people in various
parts of the world. They are marketing terrorism over
the Internet, through which they attempt to justify
the ideology of terrorism. Through their strategic
communication and messaging via new media, which
is instant, unlimited, and personal, they are recruiting
potential jihadists, also known as lone wolves, from
all over the world. They are specifically targeting
young people, who are vulnerable and susceptible to
the narratives and ideologies of terrorism. Therefore,
beyond military countermeasures, countering terrorism
demands a comprehensive approach that deals with the
fundamental drivers of the phenomenon, including
addressing the root causes.
First, we must continue our efforts to raise public
awareness of the danger of the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism. The Republic of Korea has been doing its
part by organizing a seminar on countering violent
extremism, in partnership with the Hedayah Center in
the United Arab Emirates last July, and by planning
the hosting of the Korea-ASEAN workshop on the
prevention of violent extremism with Indonesia this
year. Furthermore, Korea will contribute $300,000
to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee

S/PV.7690

Executive Directorate for capacity-building projects for
vulnerable countries.
Secondly, strengthening education deserves more
attention in order to tackle and alleviate the risk of the
radicalization of youth and to give them an alternative
view that is rooted in hope, harmony and peace. In
that vein, in close cooperation with UNESCO, the
international community and civil societies, the
Republic of Korea will continue to work to promote
Global Citizenship Education, which emphasizes the
importance of core values such as human dignity, human
rights, tolerance, diversity and the rule of law. In that
regard, we commend UNESCO, which is now studying
how Global Citizenship Education could contribute to
preventing violent extremism. Furthermore, the theme
of the 66th United Nations DPI/NGO Conference, to
be held in Gyeongju, Korea, from 30 May to 1 June,
is “Education for Global Citizenship: Achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals Together”. I hope
this largest NGO Conference will discuss how global
citizenship could be fostered to prevent violent
extremism and radicalization.
Thirdly, we need to reinforce our efforts to
prevent terrorists from abusing the Internet. As we
have observed, their information and communications
technologies and online media strategies increase
the likelihood of youth radicalization. Preventing the
abuse of the Internet and social media for terrorist
purposes has been an important task for the Korean
Government, and Korea will strengthen partnerships
with private companies and civil societies, sharing
relevant information and best practices with other
States Members of the United Nations.
Last but not least, as emphasized in resolution
2178 (2014), the establishment of an effective legal
framework and law enforcement will not only further
deprive terrorists of resources and mobility, but will
also strengthen international cooperation in tracking
terrorist plots and suspects. In that connection, in
March this year the Korean Government enacted and
promulgated the Act on the Prevention of Terrorism for
Protection of the People and Public Safety.
Our noble but arduous endeavour to combat terrorism
demands both multidisciplinary efforts to bring the
Government, non-governmental organizations and civil
society together, but also full United Nations support,
as suggested by Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon in the
Action Plan to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).

16-1328667/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Republic of Korea will continue to work closely
with the international community throughout the
process and looks forward to discussing and finding
effective strategies and ways to reduce and eventually
end the threat of terrorism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of May. I wish you success in your
endeavours. I thank Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt, for
presiding over this open debate. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his statement
this morning.
The lessons learned from growing terrorism have
proved that it did not start in a vacuum. It started and
developed in a fragile environment fuelled by policies
that neither assigned importance to social, economic
and political problems nor dealt realistically with their
root causes. Therefore, the successful eradication of
terrorist groups depends on addressing the root causes
that provide a fertile terrain for the increase in those
groups. That was proved by the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Terrorism, adopted by the General
Assembly in 2006, which was based on the root causes
of terrorism.
Terrorism spares no one. It is a threat to international
peace and security. Therefore the solution must be a
comprehensive one, involving the joint efforts on the
international community. It must end the root causes of
that phenomenon. It must reject any use of terrorism to
achieve certain political goals. We must also stress that
the fight against terrorism must be in conformity with
international law, the rule of law and the protection of
human rights.
In the State of Qatar, when we call for the adoption
of a broad-scale approach to address the root causes
of terrorism, such a demand never undermines the
importance of the need for an urgent military response
to the imminent threats of terrorist groups. However,
we believe that the military response must not come at
the expense of addressing the root causes of terrorism
and its causes. Military solutions alone are unable to
solve all the problems. We must find comprehensive
solutions that provide a better future for societies, ones
68/94

11/05/2016

that ensure stability and promote international peace
and security.
The growing terrorism in our region is fuelled
by the policies of a regime that has an interest in
its presence to promote itself as a partner in the
international campaign for fighting terrorism so as to
ensure its own endurance, after its peoples and the world
have rejected it because of its criminal policies and its
blatant violations of international humanitarian law.
In fact, the Syrian regime has used chemical weapons,
starvation and indiscriminate bombing of civilians, and
the destruction of infrastructures and capacities of the
Syrian people. That has proved that that regime is the
very embodiment of terrorism. It continues to target
medical and civilians facilities, thwarting the delivery
of aid to those in need. It continues to violate legal and
moral instruments. It is a grave threat to international
peace and security. This requires a strong, urgent
stance from the Security Council to protect the Syrian
people against the atrocities of the regime and not to
allow impunity.
The State of Qatar has stressed on all occasions
when we discuss this theme that terrorism must not
be linked to any religion, ethnicity or culture. We
must address its root causes, including the illicit use
of force, aggression, foreign occupation, the denial
of the right to self-determination of those under
occupation, the absence of political and social justice
and marginalization. That must come in line with a
comprehensive treaty that includes a definition of
terrorism. Therefore we stress that any attempt to
link terrorism to any culture, religion, civilization,
nationality or group will give a pretext to terrorists to
justify their terrorist acts, to recruit young people.
Terrorism knows no religion, nationality or
ethnicity. It is a criminal phenomenon that sows the
seeds of chaos and undermines international peace
and security. We stress the need to respect religions
and promote tolerance. Religions do not call for
terrorism; they call for tolerance, cooperation and
solidarity. Therefore, an interpretation that is far from
the preaching of tolerant Islam, which basically calls
for peace, tolerance and coexistence, is rejected. Such
an interpretation is an attempt to distort Islam for
specific purposes. It provides pretexts for extremists
and terrorists.
Based on our policy that attaches great importance
to fighting violent extremism that leads to terrorism.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

we have taken an initiative, with other countries, to
hold on 3 June a high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on youth and children affected by violent
extremism, in line with the international efforts to fight
terrorism. Moreover, given the great role of education
in protecting children and youth against extremism and
terrorism, we have adopted various programmes for
the education and rehabilitation for Syrian refugees to
ensure that they enjoy their rights.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that Qatar
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Despite its many resources and perpetrators, we are
committed to drying up the resources of terrorist
groups and the tools they use to propagate criminal
ideologies, including through the Internet. In line
with the counter-terrorism mechanisms adopted by the
international community, we will continue to promote
our partnership with United Nations agencies in this
regard to promote peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in congratulating the Egyptian
presidency of the Council and expressing gratitude for
convening today’s debate.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union earlier today. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.
The violence and brutality inflicted by terrorists
on humanity is of grave concern. Egregious attacks on
innocent civilians in different parts of the world make
it obvious that terrorism — one of the most pressing
challenges for the contemporary world — has become
transnational and cross-border by its nature.
The situation in the Middle East overtly demonstrates
how inhumanely terrorists can abuse the opportunities
opened by modernity, modern technologies and growing
globalization. In a technological age, recruitment no
longer requires face-to-face communication. Da’esh
terrorists are using modern encrypted networks, which
poses a huge obstacle to law enforcement agencies in
the process of combating terrorism. No single State can
have full access to the relevant data.
To counter those challenges, Georgia has
significantly
streamlined
its
procedures
for
intelligence-sharing, and our special agencies have

S/PV.7690

demonstrated the good practices of successful
international cooperation. We added new articles
to the criminal code, criminalizing participation in
international terrorism and recruitment for membership
in a terrorist organization. We also amended existing
terrorist articles in accordance with the provisions of
relevant international treaties and best practices. We
have undertaken certain technical measures to tighten
border control, including strengthening document
security. Georgian law enforcement uses cameras,
United Nations sanctions lists, terrorist watch lists and
advance passenger name records on commercial flights
at ports of entry, all of which helps detect potential
terrorist movement. Georgia has adopted a strategy
and action plan for combating money-laundering and
terrorist financing. The Government established the
Interagency Commission on Implementation of United
Nations Security Council Resolutions to coordinate the
Government’s immediate compliance with resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001).
But despite the progress achieved, the Russianoccupied territories of Georgia continue to represent a
major challenge for the Government of Georgia in its
efforts to combat terrorism. Those areas, like black
holes, could serve as a safe harbour for terrorists and
other radical extremist groups that could potentially
destablize the security situation in the entire region,
while the seaports in the occupied areas could also be
used for transporting foreign terrorist fighters.
The occupied regions of Georgia, like any other
grey zones throughout the world where legitimate
national and international mechanisms are nonexistent,
have also been used for various illegal activities,
including the smuggling of nuclear and radioactive
materials. In that connection, I would like to remind
the Council that over the past years, there have been
a number of attempts at smuggling nuclear and
radioactive materials through the occupied regions.
The perpretrators were apprehended by the Georgian
authorities, and the international community has been
duly informed about that.
Full compliance with the obligations under the
relevant international arrangements — such as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, resolution 1540 (2004) and
so on — must stand out as the top priority for the
international community. In that regard, I would like to
remind the Council that, in cooperation with the United

16-1328669/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, the Government of Georgia organized highlevel side events in October 2014 and again in 2015
on topics related to chemical, biological, radiological
or nuclear (CBRN) risk reduction. In December 2015,
Georgia, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Republic
of the Philippines, as the Co-Chairs, established
the United Nations Group of Friends on CBRN Risk
Mitigation and Security Governance. It is aimed
at promoting various CBRN-related topics in the
United Nations by actively engaging with the Member
States and the United Nations Secretariat. The Group
will help to integrate the CBRN component in the
international security architecture and foster regional
and subregional cooperation on CBRN challenges.
As we held our second meeting at the ambassadorial
level in April, we once again encouraged other States
participating in the European Union’s Risk Mitigation
Centres of Excellence Initiative to join the Group.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Georgia’s resolve
and determination to further engage with our partner
countries and international organizations with the
common objective of reducing threats posed by
terrorism and violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The United Arab Emirates would like to thank
His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, for presiding over this
important debate. I wish to acknowledge the central
and historical role that the Arab Republic of Egypt
plays in maintaining international peace and security.
My country commends the important role of Al-Azhar
University, which has served as an intellectual and
cultural beacon for centuries throughout the Islamic
and Arab worlds. We would also like to welcome the
adoption earlier today of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/6).
The international community recognizes that
violent extremism has transcended national borders and
become a global phenomenon. We therefore welcome
the effortsto develop a comprehensive international
strategy to eliminate this scourge. Our region has
endured far too many nightmares perpetrated by
terrorist organizations, which have absolutely no link to
true Islam and which have become a major contributing
factor to insecurity and instability.
70/94

11/05/2016

We acknowledge the importance of a society’s
full participation in State-building, especially for
the population of youths under 25 years old, who
constitute 50 per cent of the population of Arab
countries and who are targeted by extremist groups
that exploit their grievances. Our counter-terrorism
strategy also empowers women and integrates them
into decision-making, including efforts to combat
extremism, based on the concept of moderation,
coexistence and tolerance throughout society. His
Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan,
President of the country, has issued a decree to combat
discrimination and hatred. In addition, we support
efforts to foster a number of relevant initiatives aimed
at reforming the religious narrative and returning to the
noble vision of Islam.
Education also plays a significant role in countering
terrorism. We need to promote research and religious
scholarship in order to develop effective curricula for all
levels of education with a view to building the resilience
and capacity of Governments and communities. That is
why we host the Hedayah Centre for Countering Violent
Extremism, and the Muslim Council of Elders, chaired
by the Sheikh of Al-Azhar, which aims to address the
root causes of sectarianism.
We also need to develop ways to combat the
new online recruitment tactics used by terrorists and
extremists. To that end, we established, in collaboration
with the United States, the Sawab Centre, which
aims to combat extremist messages through social
media. Furthermore, in terms of policy development,
the entities we host are dedicated to building
multi-stakeholder efforts to map, identify and remove
the drivers of extremism. We are also eager to organize
workshops with Government officials and experts in the
technology sector to share information and encourage
the development of counter-narratives, including the
perspectives of female former foreign terrorist fighters.
The Arab region has historically exemplified
pluralism and coexistence. Today, we call for a return
to that model and vision. I would like to offer some
recommendations for actions that would help to achieve
this objective.
First, the Security Council must apply a single
standard to all actors, all States and all perpetrators
of occupation, State terrorism or foreign interference.
Secondly, the international community, including the
private sector, must expand its efforts to implement
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

relevant existing norms to combat terrorism, including
resolution 2178 (2014). Thirdly, we must discuss how
best to rehabilitate and reintegrate foreign terrorist
fighters who have defected from extremist groups and
returned to their countries. Fourthly, we must work to
improve the economic and social context for young
people, create job opportunities, protect their rights and
engage them in building the future of their countries.
Finally, we look forward to the recommendations that
will be proposed in June in the context of the review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I would like to reiterate that the United Arab
Emirates believes in the importance of countering
extremism before it becomes violent, in an urgent and
comprehensive manner. I would also like to express
our appreciation for today’s important debate and wish
Egypt continued success in its presidency this month.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank the Egyptian presidency for convening this
open debate of the Security Council under the theme
of countering narratives and ideologies of terrorism,
particularly those threats emanating from such terrorist
groups as the Islamic State, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida,
whose discourse continues to fuel hatred and violence.
Narratives and ideologies of hatred and intolerance
are the fuel that feeds the machinery of terrorist groups.
Through these narratives they are able to recruit
more fighters, receive greater financial resources and
logistical support; they even use them to justify their
actions. In this regard, we believe that terrorist acts
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or culture.
Countering terrorist narratives and ideologies is
a key element in the area of ​​prevention and the fight
against terrorist groups and their actions, as set forth
in pillar I of the Global Strategy. This idea is further
developed in the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), whose
integration with the Global Strategy and methods for
its implementation should be analysed more closely.
Indeed, on the one hand, we must focus on reducing
the conditions and circumstances that lead to the
radicalization of individuals, targeting the structural
and conjunctural factors that undermine social cohesion.

S/PV.7690

In this context, we believe it is crucial to promote the
development of peaceful and inclusive societies.
On the other hand, in addition to material factors,
we believe it to be of particular importance to build
a culture of peace, dialogue and ethical values​​
that downplay the personal motivations that lead
radicalization and violence. In this regard, the use
of information and communications technology also
represents a significant challenge to the international
community. When seeking to limit the use of social
networks and the Internet by terrorist groups, we must
also improve the capacity of States to use information
and communications technology, with support of
the United Nations agencies involved, with a view to
limiting, countering and dismantling terrorist rhetoric.
Similarly, we must remember that terrorist groups
also rely on alternative mechanisms and traditional
communications platforms to spread and disseminate
hate speech, often hidden in legal activity. Therefore,
in full respect for the freedom of expression, we must
neutralize these distorted narratives.
In the fight against this scourge, States, together
with the entire international community, must adopt a
strategic and comprehensive vision that incorporates
the various pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In the fight against terrorism, Peru supports
all international action in the multilateral context
geared towards providing a systematic, sustained and
efficient response.
Accordingly, we also consider both the conceptual
work and the practical implementation of this vision
at the national, regional and international levels to be
of great importance. My delegation therefore takes
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on activities of the United Nations system
in implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, in the context of the upcoming fifth
biennial review of the Strategy.
My delegation also wishes to recall the importance
of finalizing the process of preparing the draft
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism,
as well as deliberations on convening a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
To that end, we must redouble our efforts to reach
agreement on the Comprehensive Convention.
I reaffirm Peru’s commitment to countering the
threats posed by terrorism and violent extremism, and

16-1328671/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

11/05/2016

we assure you, Mr. President, that you can count on my
delegation’s unwavering support.

civilians but also creates a vast number of living but
terrified hostages.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.

Their goal is well known; our determination must
therefore be limitless.

Miss Hassan (Djibouti): My delegation joins other
delegations in congratulating the sisterly delegation of
the Arab Republic of Egypt on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and for the initiative taken to hold this important
debate on countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism.

Alongside actions taken through such organizations
such the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to prevent
and fight terrorism and violent extremism, the States of
the region have rapidly taken recognized the importance
of beginning consultations to develop a strategy to
counter the ideas and speech propagated by extremist
movements. In that perspective, we have decided by
mutual agreement to establish a regional centre for
the prevention of and fight against violent extremism,
which will be located in Djibouti.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Kuwait, who spoke on behalf
of the member States of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
I am confident that this open debate will give
us yet another opportunity to better comprehend a
phenomenon that has led to emergence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab, which poses a serious threat
to international peace and security, thus unravelling
decades of economic growth in many parts of the world.
It will offer us an opportunity not just to understand how
ISIL has successfully attracted some 36,000 foreign
fighters from more than 100 countries, established an
effective terrorist network with the capacity to launch
deadly attacks in many parts of the world and created
an online apparatus aimed at spreading messages of
hatred and destruction and mobilizing impressionable
individuals. It will also help us identify additional steps
and measures to address the drivers and enablers of
violent extremism and terrorism.
(spoke in French)
For many years, the peoples of the Horn of Africa
have resisted the seeping-in of extremist ideologies.
Unfortunately, as a result of unending attacks by
extremist groups, our region has today become part
of one of the epicentres of violent extremism on the
African continent. The theme at the heart of today’s
debate focusing on the ways and means of countering
the narratives of terrorism and violent extremism as
well as the activities of terrorist groups demonstrates
that the challenges we face are of both an intellectual
and security-related nature.
The goal of radical extremists is to set up what some
writers have called a “panic civilization”, where each
act of terrorism not only destroys the lives of innocent
72/94

In addition, under the leadership of President
Ismaël Omar Guelleh, the second and third Regional
Forums of Ulemas of East Africa were held in 2014
an 2015. Their main objective was to pave the way
for reflections on the development of proactive and
preventive policies to address the rise of extremist
rhetoric, and on the most appropriate ways and means
to expose and thereby discredit people and groups that
bear such messages. I take this opportunity to highlight
the fact that the conclusions of these meetings clearly
stressed the importance of identifying methodological
tools to better deal with the phenomena of terrorism
and violent extremism.
Alongside this intellectual work to a better
understand religious precepts, it is also important to
strengthen the role of social institutions and educational
incubators in training young people, with a focus on the
role of media in education and in clarifying the aims
and objectives of religion. In brief, we must prioritize
integrated treatments that combine educational policies,
socioeconomic development policies, and the review
and drafting of legal texts.
The beginning of this year was bloody and
punctuated by a series of heinous terrorist attacks
around the world. This must serve to launch a decisive
new impetus and international mobilization against
the phenomenon of violent extremism. The adoption
of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, along with the impending review
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, will be
an unprecedented opportunity for the international
community. It is high time for Member States to agree
on the need and strategic value of sending a message
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that fully incorporates alternative narrative countering
extremist and violent messages.
In this perspective, we believe it important for the
response strategy that we must formulate to loudly
resonate with the voices and testimonies of victims of
violent extremism and repentant extremist fighters.
Indeed, their contribution to the demobilization and
rehabilitation of recruits will be crucial and shed
special light on the psychological process that allowed
them to reject the deadly passion that animated them.
Finally, in terms of partner participation, it is essential
to have the full support of Internet service providers
and owners of social networks. Every individual’s right
to freedom of expression must be weighed against the
need to protect vulnerable people from incitement to
hatred, discrimination and violence.
My delegation wishes to emphasize that violent
extremism and the resultant terrorist acts cannot be
associated with any religion, race, culture or society.
It is also important in the fight against the phenomena
of terrorism and violent extremism that we safeguard
the promotion and protection of human rights. In
that respect, the promotion of a culture of tolerance
and moderation in all societies will contribute to the
protection of minorities, including religious minorities.
My delegation deplores and rejects the rampant
and growing Islamophobia in many countries, which
is honed and amplified by opinion leaders and certain
media. This is counterproductive and undermines the
individual or collective efforts that are essential to the
promotion of collective action to promote the values a​​ nd
ideals of respect and mutual understanding necessary
to the peaceful coexistence of peoples and civilizations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the delegation of Egypt for
the timely organization of this debate.
We have witnessed a dramatic evolution in the
nature of the terrorist threat. In recent months, attacks
on almost every continent have killed, maimed or
displaced tens of thousands of civilians. We send a
message of solidarity to the Governments and the
peoples of Egypt and Iraq with respect to the recent
attacks they have suffered.
Terrorism is more than ever a serious threat to
States and the international community as a whole. The

S/PV.7690

flow of foreign terrorist fighters — more than 30,000
individuals from some 100 United Nations Member
State, as reported by the Organization — has further
complicated the response to the threat. Terrorist groups
such as Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front promote the
recruitment of young people through media campaigns
with a narrative that presents the West as an enemy of
Islam, which requires recruits willing to defend it.
In 2014 and 2015 alone, Da’esh launched more
than 1,000 media campaigns for recruitment purposes.
These were translated into Russian, English, French
and German. Most consisted of videos showing
terrorists in battle. The second-most recurrent theme
consisted of interviews with terrorists who have been
recruited from around the world. In that period, the
number of foreign fighters grew by 70 per cent. If we
want to prevent vulnerable young people who hold
moderate opinions from becoming militant extremists,
and militant extremists from becoming terrorists, it is
necessary to address the ideological narrative used to
draw them into their ranks.
In that regard, my delegation recognizes the
importance of resolution 1624 (2005), which seeks,
among other things, to prevent educational, cultural
and religious institutions from encouraging extremist
indoctrination by calling for Member States to legally
prevent and prohibit incitement to acts of terrorism, in
accordance with their obligations under international
human rights law.
However, nowadays, when Da’esh recruits mostly
through social networks and collective media, it might
be appropriate for the media to consider the possibility
of adopting voluntary codes of conduct for journalists
covering terrorism, including, for example, avoiding
the glorification of terrorists. Another possibility is to
provide media communication opportunities to victims
of terrorism and their families, thereby empowering
the victims and giving them a voice. That voice
should be transmitted in the same cultural language
and through the same channels used by young people,
like the terrorists do. Without affecting freedom of
expression and the right of access to information, it
may be appropriate to assess whether the establishment
of guidelines such as those I have mentioned could be
useful to counter the terrorist narrative.
The day after the bombing in Paris, a network
campaign was launched under the title “Nous Sommes
Unis”, prepared by the Quilliam Foundation, a civil

16-1328673/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

society think tank based in the United Kingdom.
The campaign carried a message of peace in which
several people, Muslim and non-Muslim, francophone
and non-francophone, European and non-European,
spoke of unity and solidarity, rejecting ideologies and
narratives that divide and kill innocent people. That
is a good example of possible actions to counter the
terrorist narrative.
At the same time, Costa Rica reaffirms its belief
in the need to address other situations that can create
spaces for the spread of terrorism and its narrative, such
as prolonged unresolved conflicts; the dehumanization
of victims; the absence of the rule of law; violations
of human rights; discrimination on ethnic, nationality
or religious bases; the political exclusion; economic
marginalization, and the lack of effective governance,
among others.
We reaffirm the need for a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary and multilevel approach, led by the
United Nations. We take this opportunity to appeal
respectfully to States that have not ratified the Arms
Trade Treaty to do so without delay. The diversion
of weapons to extremist groups could be reduced
significantly if more States implemented the provisions
of the Treaty.
Finally, we wish to reiterate the commitment of
Costa Rica to preventing and combating terrorism in
the context of respect for the rule of law and human
rights, and we call on all States to try to bring to fruition
the ongoing negotiations to draft the comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, with a view to adopting
it as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to thank you, Sir,
for organizing today’s debate. Our thanks also go to the
briefers for their presentations.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
today. I shall speak in my national capacity.
Unfortunately, despite all the efforts of the
international community, terrorists continue to
perpetrate deadly attacks. Terrorist organizations
continue to recruit, deploying a morbid rhetoric of
hatred. In that regard, we strongly condemnt the heinous
terrorism attacks committed today in Baghdad, extend
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims,
74/94

11/05/2016

and reiterate our support for the Government and the
people of Iraq.
Every terrorist organization produces its own
narrative and uses different ideologies in order to recruit,
attract sympathy and support, and legitimize violence.
Common to all of them are their attempts to inflict
pain and instil fear on our citizens, to create chaos and
polarize societies, and to weaken Governments. A case
in point is the counter-terrorism experience of Turkey.
Today, my Government is fighting simultaneously three
different terrorist groups: the Devrimci Halk Kurtuluş
Partisi-Cephesi, an extreme leftist terrorist group; the
Partiya Karkerên Kurdistanê/Yekîneyên Parastina Gel,
a Marxist-Leninist organization trying to exploit ethnic
differences in Turkey and the turmoil in Syria; and
Da’esh, which manipulates religion. The latest bomb
attacks in Ankara and Istanbul took the lives of 184
innocent people and left hundreds wounded. In recent
days, more than 20 of our citizens in the town of Kilis
lost their lives as a result of rockets fired by Da’esh
from Syria.
It is counter-productive to adopt a selective
approach to global-counter terrorism efforts, focusing
only on one form of terrorism, group or cluster of
terrorist groups. This weakens our collective stance and
will not defeat the scourge. The best way to counter the
hateful ideologies of terrorists is to make our societies
more resilient against extremist narratives. Preventing
young people from being attracted by the lure of
terrorist groups is a key factor. Terrorist groups exploit
frustrations, feelings of grievance, discrimination,
social and political exclusion and socioeconomic
marginalization, and target more vulnerable groups,
such as women and youth. Protracted conflicts nourish
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. The
lack of rule of law and good governance and violations
of human rights also contribute to creating such
conditions.
Therefore, we should focus our energies on
preventive efforts to counter violent extremism and
radicalization that lead to terrorism. In this regard,
we agree that a broader approach is needed in order to
effectively counter terrorism, as stated by the Secretary
General in his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, which will be given further consideration
by the General Assembly in the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counterterrorism strategy.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Turkey’s own experience reveals that enhancing
fundamental rights and freedoms, strengthening the
criminal justice approach, reforming law enforcement
and the judiciary, and enhancing a lively public debate
have a direct impact and an added value in this regard.
On the other hand, specific counter-messaging is
also essential. As terrorists increasingly exploit new
information and communications technologies, our
global counter terrorism responses should also have a
stronger communications component.
A communication strategy is therefore part of my
Government’s overall counter-terrorism efforts against
Da’esh and other groups. A two-tier strategy is being
implemented in this regard, consistent with human
rights obligations. The first part of the strategy is to deny
terrorist groups space for their propaganda, including
measures to disable their communication networks.
To date, we have closed down dozens of Da’esh-linked
Internet sites, and in cases where the server is located
outside Turkey we have banned access to online terrorist
content. We are also conducting extensive operations
against Da’esh facilitators, radicalizers and networks.
More subtle strategies are also needed. We conduct
content-specific counter-narrative policies against each
terrorist group. With regard to Da’esh, we encourage
voices of reason and knowledge to speak up on the true
meaning of religion, and we promote role models who
can speak about alternatives to violence and terrorism.
The role of religious leaders in contributing to these
efforts is important. In Turkey, the Office of Religious
Affairs, along with various Government agencies,
plays a special role in ensuring that correct information
on religion reaches the public and that religious
teachings are interpreted appropriately. It endeavours
to disseminate messages of non-violent and peaceful
coexistence, dialogue and unity among peoples.
The focus on the role of religious leaders should not
lead us to assume that religions are part of the problem.
Terrorism and violent extremism cannot be associated
with any religion, ethnicity or nationality. Any attempt
to the contrary is wrong and dangerous, as it plays into
the hands of terrorists. Victims of terrorism also cannot
be treated selectively. Singling out the victims of a
specific group and ignoring others also bears the risk
of creating divisive perceptions. We believe that these
messages should be embraced in words and in deeds
by the United Nations system, including its Member
States.

S/PV.7690

Protecting our societies from toxic indoctrination
requires conveying messages of peace and tolerance as
part of our common struggle against discrimination,
intolerance, racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia,
anti-Semitism and discrimination against Christians and
members of other religions. It is in that understanding
that Turkey has co-sponsored such initiatives as the
Alliance of Civilizations and Mediation for Peace in
order to promote dialogue, tolerance and religious and
cross-cultural understanding to create an environment
of mutual respect.
It should not be forgotten that the suppression of the
democratic aspirations of the Syrian people, divisive
sectarian policies, war crimes and massive violation
of human rights that have been and continue to be
committed by the regime have created a fertile ground
for radicalization, extremism and the recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters by Da’esh. In that regard, the
representative of that regime, which is also responsible
for the flourishing of Da’esh and cooperates with that
terrorist organization, is not in a position to lecture
anybody on counter-terrorism. It is regrettable that this
platform has once again been misused to distort facts.
Turkey is actively supporting global efforts in
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism,
including within the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
and the Forum-inspired Hedayah Institute. Turkey is
part of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, which has a separate Strategic
Communications Working Group.
In conclusion, Turkey is determined to maintain its
approach to combating terrorism and violent extremism
in all forms and manifestations. Only with an openminded and just approach and cooperation at the global
level, and, most importantly, by upholding the rule of
law, human rights and fundamental freedoms can we be
successful. These considerations should be taken into
account as we prepare ourselves to review the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank the Egyptian presidency for
organizing this important and timely debate at a moment
when the world is witnessing the unprecedented growth
of terrorism. We welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6 and its acknowledgement of the need
for the international community to consider the most

16-1328675/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

effective means to combat terrorist propaganda. We
must counter recruitment and incitement, including
through the Internet, and mobilize mechanisms of
international cooperation to that end. In that connection,
terrorist groups have used the space provided by the
social media to spread their propaganda and reach
prospective recruits throughout the world. Thanks to
the commitment of its political class to dialogue and the
effective participation of civil society, Tunisia has been
able to overcome the difficulties that the democratic
transition process faced, in particular by adopting a new
Constitution that upholds human rights, including the
right to freedom of expression, religion and conscience.
We were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 2015 for
our approach.
However, as important as these achievements
are, they should not blind us to the magnitude of the
challenges our country faces, especially with regard to
the eradication of the phenomenon of terrorism. While
Tunisia has achieved qualitative successes, especially
on the security front, in combating this phenomenon
by thwarting numerous terrorist schemes, eliminating
many extremist terrorist leaders and arresting numerous
suspects and bringing them to justice, it has witnessed
several terrorist operations and has sacrificed the souls
of its sons in defending its country. We commemorate
the lives of four member of the Tunisian National Guard
who were martyred today on 11 May in southern Tunisa
while chasing a number of terrorists.
Tunisia is determined to counter this phenomenon
through the use of the rule of law. In that regard, it
adopted, in 2007, a foundational law on combating
terrorism and money laundering, which was inspired by
international standards and best practices and reflects
the fulfilment of its international commitments,
including the implementation of resolution 2178 (2014).
Tunisia, in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, developed its
national strategy to combat violent extremism based
on the four pillars of protection, prevention, follow-up
and response. That strategy has focused on prevention
and on addressing threats by countering the attempts
to polarize communities and the spread of Takfiri
messages on the Internet and in prisons and mosques.
The strategy also highlighted the importance of
building a culture of dialogue, peace, tolerance and
respect for all regions religions, beliefs and cultures
and provided for the promotion of curriculums and
the promotion of dialogue to resist extremist thinking.
76/94

11/05/2016

It also encouraged the study of the role of women in
preventing violent extremism. The strategy focuses
on mobilization via the Internet and encourages
those specializing in Islamic studies, sociology and
psychology to participate effectively in discussions on
the Internet. Practical measures along the same lines
have also been taken.
In 2016, the Minister of Religious Affairs launched
the campaign for a better tomorrow, which involves
the establishment of a cyber portal to propagate true
Islamic values, in accordance with the moderate Zaytuni
approach, and the establishment of a centre to respond
to young men’s questions about Islam and to convene
meetings with young people in clubs and any spaces
available in order to raise awareness about the gravity
of extremist takfiri ideology and its repercussions
on the State and its institutions. The importance of
the cultural dimension in resisting takfiri trends has
been emphasized.
While stressing that the main responsibility
in taking measures to counter the messages of the
terrorists and their takfiri ideologies fall on the States,
in accordance with the principle of national ownership,
we reiterate the importance of promoting national
corporation and an exchange of best practices. In that
regard, we emphasize the need to develop international
corporation, including the promotion of private
institutions, so as to ensure respect for human rights
and freedom of expression.
Finally, we would like to affirm the importance for
the international community to make further preventive
systematic efforts to tackle the root causes of violent
extremism in order to more effectively prevent it and
to strengthen the capacity of communities to counter
terrorist ideologies. We believe the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
provides a comprehensive guide to promote our efforts
by adopting a preventative approach on the national,
regional and international levels. The upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy offers a great opportunity to achieve notable
progress in that direction.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Khaled Khiari, Permanent Representative
of Tunisia, for his statement and extend to him
our condolences on the martyrdom of the Tunisian
policemen in southern Tunisia.
I give the floor to the representative of Morocco.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me
first of all congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
Minister on the assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. We are confident
that the experience and wisdom of the brotherly country
of Egypt, garnered over centuries and inspired by the
great Egyptian civilization rooted in history, will guide
your leadership and presidency of the Council.

who had been well educated in good schools and lacked
nothing, left to join the ranks of terrorists in Iraq or
Syria or in other hot spots. However, without a counter
narrative and with only a single hateful and incendiary
discourse, young people have become easy prey to the
forces of evil. The absence of measures to stem the
misuse of information technology and the Internet
allow terrorist groups to continue their dirty work.

The choice of the theme “Countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism” shows that the Egyptian
delegation has identified an important factor in the
exacerbation of terrorism. It is through the use of
rhetoric that incites violence that terrorism has spread
like wildfire. The access of terrorist groups to the
most sophisticated means of communication — the
Internet, social networks, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram
and so forth — has facilitated their success on many
occasions. Consequently, several countries have fallen
victim to terrorism, including Egypt this morning, as
well as Tunisia and Iraq. Every day more countries are
added to the list of countries victims of terrorism.

Terrorist groups have no respect for life or humanity,
much less for ethics and morality. They broadcast their
atrocities on the Internet and social networks. They
also exploit the public’s right to information. Their
terrorist acts are reported in the media, serving as an
instrument to impress and take the lead in international
affairs. The images of the barbarity of terrorists are
broadcast in the media and newspapers. These latter, in
the name of freedom of the press and against all ethical
deontology, wrongly propagate these photos, thereby
disseminating terrorist propaganda without realizing it.
Accordingly, the trap of dividing societies and sewing
confusion between a religion like Islam and terrorist
groups that seek to identify with Islam is spreading and
fueling Islamophobia, xenophobia and racism.

The Kingdom of Morocco, which has also been
the target of terrorist attacks in the past, expresses
its solidarity with the three brotherly Arab countries.
Morocco offers its condolences to the families of the
victims. It reiterates its condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and emphasizes that nothing can justify
any terrorist act. Terrorism can not be associated with
any religion, civilization, nationality or ethnic group.
The past two years have been disastrous for the
international community, which has been hit several
times by the terrorist groups Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front,
Al-Qaida and Boko Haram and their affiliates. This list
is likely to grow if the international community does
not take appropriate measures to counter and, above all,
erradicate the discourse and ideologies of terrorism.
The well-oiled financial machine, together with a
sophisticated communication strategy, have enabled
Da’esh by exploiting the Internet and social networks to
recruit foreign terrorist fighters from all over the world.
It has websites preaching its destructive ideology to
which many young people and civil servants from
different nationalities and social strata are unwittingly
converted. This has brought the number of foreign
terrorist fighters to more than 30,000, coming from
more than 90 countries.
It is unfortunate and unthinkable that a family
would wake up one morning to discover that their child,

Worse yet, the media, television audience and
newspaper readers are caught in this trap as they
appropriate the discourse of xenophobia and racism,
supporting extremist political thought. Without citing
examples, journalists have become the spearheads of
hate speech and xenophobia. The radical discourse in
houses of worship, and incitement to violent extremism
and the commission of terrorist acts are other means
adopted by terrorist groups to achieve their destructive
goals.
While resolutions 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2199
(2015), 2249 (2015) and 2253 (2015) helped to respond
to some aspects of terrorism, especially foreign
terrorist fighters and the draining of financial resources
of terrorist groups, other measures are needed. In
this regard, allow me to advance some ideas that
my delegation considers to rein in this factor giving
terrorist groups access to a large global population of
all ages and categories.
While the right to freedom of expression, access
to information and use of information technologies,
including the Internet and social networks, must be
guaranteed for all, in law and in constitutions, it
should not be exploited for the purpose of terrorism.
It is therefore important to adopt new laws that, in full

16-1328677/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

respect for human rights and the right to freedom of
expression, prohibit the misuse of Internet.
We must also develop a counter-narrative that
exposes the rhetoric of terrorist groups that exploit
Islam to purely criminal purposes that our religion
and the teachings of Islam have always condemned.
Television channels dedicated to the dissemination of
moderate speech should be authorized. The private
sector, Internet service providers and the social media
benefits must operate in compliance with the law and
allow their customers to use the Internet solely for
peaceful purposes and not to infringe the safety of
citizens.
Imams must preach the true Islam of tolerance and
coexistence with moderate views accepted by the youth
of the twenty-first century. That is why the Kingdom
of Morocco has restructured and reformed religious
realm, in particular through, first, the establishment
of a scientific authority responsible for interpreting
the texts of the Koran and the Hadith, which explains
the acts of the Prophet; secondly, the training of young
male and female preachers in the precepts of Islam
based on the values of dialogue, tolerance, moderation,
coexistence and respect for others, as advocated by
Islam; and thirdly, the creation of a programme for
the deradicalization, rehabilitation and integration of
foreign terrorist fighters. The Moroccan experience in
training preachers has been shared with several friendly
countries in Africa, the Arab world and Europe through
bilateral agreements. Fourthly, interfaith discussions
must be intensified. Morocco organized in Fez a forum
on the role of religious leaders in preventing incitement
to hatred in 2015, and a conference in Marrakech on the
protection of religious minorities in Muslim societies,
sanctioned by the Marrakech Declaration, to guarantee
the security of minorities.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Mr. President, allow me
to convey my congratulations to you and the Arab
Republic of Egypt on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. Also, allow
me to express my gratitude to you for organizing this
highly important debate.
I wish to associate myself with the statement made
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
78/94

11/05/2016

Since the turn of the twenty-first century, terrorism
has grown increasingly transnational, and the threat of
the next terror attack has become ever-present. Indeed,
this threat has no territorial limits, it knows no borders,
and any city of the world could be the next target.
Playing on the emotional reactions of anger, fear,
and anxiety among the general population, terrorist
organizations have been publicizing their despicable
crimes on the Internet, targeting social media platforms
to spread their message of violence and contempt for
humankind. Regrettably, their efforts have enabled the
recruitment of supporters.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the intensity
and spread of terrorist attacks. We need to work
closely together in countering the spread of terrorism
and counteracting the violent narratives and distorted
ideologies of these terrorist groups. In the fight against
terrorism, countering extremist ideology and the
narrative is one of the most important objectives to
achieve. In this context, the international community
must adopt an integrated social, economic and political
response that would counteract the message of
violence and destruction with a message of peace and
prosperity. In this light, my delegation believes that
the United Nations can play a central role in designing
a comprehensive international strategy aimed at
countering and refuting the extremist ideologies of
terrorist organizations.
To that end, a number of measures could be
considered, including addressing the root causes
of violent conflict, promoting education and civic
engagement in the attainment of the sustainable
development agenda, and engaging the United Nations
and its specialized agencies in the dissemination of a
strategic agreed counter-narrative. It is important to
note that any and all measures undertaken in this regard
should be in full accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, respecting the principles of sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and non-intervention in
domestic affairs.
When it comes to terrorist recruits, there is
no unified profile for law enforcement officials to
concentrate on. The age, gender, social background
and motivations of recruits vary on a case-by-case
basis, making standard solutions difficult to apply. The
international community should focus on addressing
the root causes of violent conflict. Conflict prevention
is the prerequisite for sustainable peace and respect of
human rights. Undercutting terrorist recruitment and
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

the spread of terrorism globally requires the adequate
and stable implementation of social, political and
economic conditions so as to put an end to long-lasting
regional conflicts.

active actors for development, thus contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In your concept note, Mr. President, you rightly
say that terrorist “propaganda exploits perceptions
of economic and political disenfranchisement among
young Muslim women and men” (S/2016/416, annex,
para. 5), leading to their radicalization and joining of
terrorist forces. As such, in promoting peace, stability
and socioeconomic development, it is important
to involve young people in the development of the
future we want. The promotion of civic engagement
programmes involving young people in the attainment
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), as well as the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, will empower
young people and provide them with a sense of
purpose. Furthermore, the promotion of education and
volunteering programmes will provide young people
with a sense of ownership in the implementation of
global sustainable development action, breaking them
away from the cycle of violence.

Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): On behalf of
the delegation of Thailand, I would like to express
our sincere condolences to the peoples and the
Governments of Egypt and Iraq for the recent senseless
terrorist attacks.

In our efforts to silence the extremist narratives
and distorted ideologies of terrorist groups and thereby
turn young people away from violence, it is important
that the global community speak with one voice. That
voice is best heard through the work and actions of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies.
In practicing preventive diplomacy, we must decide
on the core message of the United Nations, a message
that would resonate globally, yet apply comfortably to
local conditions. That message should be easy to spread
in the print media and over the Internet, and be in line
with the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover,
the content of the message should be integrated into
the work of the United Nations itself, with United
Nations staff members receiving clear communication
guidelines on how to inform the public about their work
more effectively.
Developing such a unified counter-terrorism
narrative could further strengthen the values of peace
embraced by the Organization. Naturally, those efforts
will require political and financial support so as to
enable effective global action. As such, capacitybuilding, technological capabilities and financing
should be ensured, so that less developed States can be

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
At the outset, I wish to congratulate the Arab
Republic of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. We
commend the initiative of the Egyptian presidency to
hold this important open debate on the issue before
us and thank the briefers for their insights. We also
welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6 today, reaffirming the Council’s
collective determination to fight terrorism.
Terrorism is an urgent global concern. Terrorist
activities are no longer concentrated in a single
geographical region, but transcend borders and
continents. We are unified in the firm belief that
terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, is totally
unjustifiable. It cannot and should not be associated
with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. As experience has shown, terrorism does not
discriminate among its victims, and its impact is felt
by people from all walks of life. That is why ASEAN
has consistently joined the international community
in condemning acts of terrorism in various parts of
the world.
We believe that the experiences and approaches
of our region can contribute to the global efforts in
addressing that problem. Interfaith dialogue and the
values of tolerance, mutual understanding, respect for
diversity and inclusivity, as embodied in the Langkawi
Declaration on the Global Movement of Moderates,
adopted last year at the twenty-sixth ASEAN Summit,
have played a significant role in sustaining peaceful
coexistence among the cultures and religions in our
diverse region.
As youth play an important role in building stable,
secure and prosperous societies, it is imperative to
raise awareness among young people of the risk of

16-1328679/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

radicalization. We believe that education is an effective
means to prevent our youth from falling prey to the
extremist narratives and unfounded ideologies of
terrorism. ASEAN countries continue to cooperate on
the new ASEAN Work Plan on Education 2016-2020
in order to strengthen access to and the quality of our
education systems so as to ensure an inclusive society.
Moreover, education leading to decent employment
will address grievances and lessen the perceived sense
of disenfranchisement on the part of the groups most
vulnerable to terrorism ideologies.
The ASEAN Convention on Counter Terrorism
has served as a framework for regional efforts since
2011. We therefore advocate the finalization of such a
legal framework at the international level and call on
countries to actively work together to finalize a draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
Special attention has also been accorded to
addressing the rise in radicalization and violent
extremism. Recent key initiatives in the region include
the East Asia Summit Symposium on Religious
Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration in April 2015,
the Special ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on the Rise of
Radicalization and Violent Extremism in October 2015
and the International Conference on Deradicalization
and Countering Violent Extremism in January this
year. Those initiatives emphasized the comprehensive
approach required to tackle the factors leading
to radicalization and terrorist activities, address
the rehabilitation and reintegration of individuals
influenced by terrorist narratives and strengthen
regional cooperation on the issue.
ASEAN has also worked with several countries
to enhance capacities with a view to developing
effective counter-terrorism and violent extremism
measures. That includes the convening of workshops
and seminars on issues such as criminal justice,
deradicalization and disengagement, media and
counter-radicalization and the role of youth. Trainings
for law-enforcement officials is also on the agenda. For
example, the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus
Maritime Security and Counter-Terrorism Exercise is
being held now in Brunei Darussalam and Singapore,
involving forces from all ASEAN countries and several
dialogue partners.
At the international level, while recognizing the
primary responsibility of States to tackle violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, the United Nations
80/94

11/05/2016

must be involved and take a coherent and multisectoral
approach. That message was clearly echoed during
the recent Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent
Extremism, co-hosted by the United Nations and the
Government of Switzerland on 7-8 April this year. In
addition, we take note of the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). I
am confident that further deliberations in June at the
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy will provide much needed inputs into the
international efforts against terrorism today, including
elements to counter narratives and ideologies.
We must put in place effective measures to prevent
the abusive use of the Internet and to harness the
constructive role of the social media in countering
the dissemination of terrorist propaganda and violent
ideologies. All measures should be conducted cautiously
so as to prevent their infringement of the freedom
of expression. We must continue to address terrorism’s
root causes, in parallel with intensive efforts to counter
it at all levels. Conditions such as poverty, the lack
of education, a weakened rule of law, prolonged and
unresolved conflicts, and political and social exclusion
can foster desperation and grievances that could lead to
violence and terrorist acts.
ASEAN fully supports the international efforts
to combat terrorism, including the full and effective
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Every terrorist act serves as a stark
reminder of our need to remain vigilant and resolute
in our fight against terrorism, which no longer consists
solely of a battle against terrorist acts but involves a
battle of ideas.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
timely debate. Poland aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add a few observations from my
national perspective.
Let me start by referring to the recent report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
that document, the Secretary-General very accurately
stresses that:
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7690

“Terrorism cannot be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Demonizing specific religions, ethnicities and
cultures is contrary to human rights, feeds into
violent extremist narratives and encourages
xenophobia, which can cause irreparable damage
to efforts to prevent violent extremism and counter
terrorism” (A/70/826, para. 43).

Nations system. Their full implementation, including
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
is an indispensable factor in combating terrorist
narratives. It should be highlighted that the incitement
to commit acts of terrorism is treated in some legal
orders, including Poland, as an ancillary offence that
can be punished, just as can the perpetration of a
terrorist act.

There is neither a political nor a religious justification
for terrorism. All terrorist acts must be condemned,
and all perpetrators should be held accountable.

We need to reach local communities to build positive
examples for the most vulnerable. The Hedayah Centre
in Abu Dhabi, working within the Global CounterTerrorism Forum and the Radicalization Awareness
Network, are good examples of such a responsible and
proactive stance.

Since the adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy 10 years ago, the world has
become more interrelated in terms of communications,
trade and economy. There has been a corresponding
increase in the dilemmas relating to the changing global
security environment. In today’s world, no clear line
can be drawn between zones of war and zones of peace.
Instead, there are conflicts where traditional divisions
between internal and external, defence and homeland
security, civil and military affairs are out of date.
The reality of rising terrorist threats is often
misshaped by distorted narratives and ideologies,
as rightly identified in the Egyptian presidency’s
concept paper (S/2016/416, annex). Religiously inspired
terrorist groups constitute one of the gravest threats
to international peace and security. Many of them
use false interpretations of Islam, for instance, to
justify their activities, attract supporters and recruit
fighters, especially from among youth. It is our joint
responsibility to take up the fight for the hearts
and minds of those who are most vulnerable to such
indoctrination. We should present an inspiring, positive
alternative for those who are looking for a purpose in
life. We should not leave a political, economic, social
or spiritual vacuum that can be filled by extremists,
and can result in, inter alia, the recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters.
In that regard, let me stress that predominantly
Muslim countries have a special capability and
responsibility to propagate a real, peaceful interpretation
of Islam. The international community must support
those efforts. We all need to do everything we can so as
not to allow one kind of radicalization trigger another
that is equally dangerous, namely, Islamophobia. For
that reason, deradicalization is our common aim.
During the past decades, several legal anti-terrorist
instruments have been elaborated within the United

As underlined in the concept note prepared by
the Egyptian presidency, countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorist groups is not a one-person
task. We should engage all possible stakeholders,
Governments, religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations and the educational sector in that task.
The international community has a duty to support the
world of Islam in that endeavour. That is a role for the
United Nations and for regional organizations. Poland
is ready to support the United Nations in that respect.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (the Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Sudan aligns itself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Kindly allow me to express our great appreciation
for Egypt’s initiative in convening this important
debate on an issue that concerns the international
community and requires our true will power and
immense determination to confront. I would also like
to express our heartfelt condolences to the victims and
families of the recent terrorist acts in Egypt and Iraq.
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations has
become an imminent threat to all of humankind. It
follows no rules. It is a global phenomenon that threatens
peace and security and forces the world to live in fear and
terror. The acts committed by terrorist groups have to
date killed thousands, destroyed institutions and spread
hatred, conflict and tension everywhere. The world is
called upon, now more than ever, to review the existing
strategies and plans, which have focused solely on the
security aspects, with a view to developing strategies to

16-1328681/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

deal with the socioeconomic and humanitarian issues
thought to be among the root causes of terrorism,
thereby taking effective steps to contain, combat and
prevent the phenomenon of terrorism.
The international efforts aimed at dealing with
terrorism, violent extremism and terrorist acts have not
yet achieved the desired impact. We have a duty to review
our actions aimed at putting an end to the phenomenon
and eliminating its destructive consequences. In that
context, the utmost priority should be given to efforts
at the national and regional levels, where the factors
and root causes of terrorism may be identified.
The Sudan reasserts the importance of the role
played by regional organizations and stresses the
need for coordination among them and international
organizations when focusing on the international factors
that give rise to the spread of terrorism. While efforts
at national and regional levels have been undertaken to
confront the national and regional causes of terrorism,
there must also be international efforts to address the
international causes of the phenomenon. Only in this
way can we truly confront all forms and manifestations
of violent extremism and terrorism.
Regrettably, terrorism is an ancient phenomenon
that has existed throughout the ages. Indeed, terrorism
has been present at every turn of human history. That
is not a reason, however, for us not to hold accountable
those who commit terrorist acts or encourage the
spread of terrorism. Terrorism should not be linked
to any religion, civilization or culture. We should be
bound to this perspective and make no exceptions to it.
Terrorism cannot be countered by terrorism. Reactive
terrorism begins with a state of mind that distorts
religious, cultural or intellectual groups and provides
terrorists with justifications, pretexts and excuses for
their acts. We have seen this time and again throughout
history.
I would now like to share with the Council some
of the Sudan’s efforts in the fight against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. In the context of
implementing our national plan of action to fight
terrorism, we have emphasized the importance of
coordination and cooperation with the international
community. Accordingly, and in cooperation with the
Muslim World League, on 28 and 29 April the Sudan
hosted the International Conference on Combating
Terrorism and Sectarian Extremism in Africa. Our
President, His Excellency Mr. Omar Hassan Al-Bashir,
82/94

11/05/2016

made an introductory statement at the conference in
which he called for greater coordination and cooperation
among all stakeholders in the fight against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and expressed the
readiness of the Sudan to fully cooperate in such an
effort. He also stressed the serious dangers that Boko
Haram poses in West Africa and the necessity of
finding effective ways and means for dealing with it.
The Conference considered the following issues:
terrorism in Africa: its causes and consequences;
communal extremism in Africa: the dangers and
consequences; countering terrorism and sectarian
extremism: responsibilities and efforts; and countering
terrorism and sectarian extremism in Africa: the means
and mechanisms. We will distribute the text of the final
document of the Conference to all States Members of
the United Nations, as we believe it would assist in
international efforts to combat this scourge.
Once again, we welcome today’s important debate
and thank the delegation of Egypt for its timely
initiative. We welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/6 and the collective message
it sent with regard to countering acts of terrorism. We
also welcome the practical recommendations contained
therein for dealing with the phenomenon of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, preventing terrorist
acts and cutting terrorists’ access to resources.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by congratulating Egypt on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also welcome its felicitous initiative to
convene today’s debate on an issue of crucial timeliness
and decisive importance for our work.
Terrorism remains today a serious challenge for
the international community. Cuba has been actively
involved in the efforts of the United Nations to combat
international terrorism. It is the Organization’s
responsibility to take the lead when it comes to
international efforts in this area. Our country has
fully endorsed the call of the United Nations to States,
international organizations and the international
community to collectively refrain from financing,
encouraging or supporting terrorist activities by any
means whatsoever or from providing training for them.
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We reiterate our rejection and condemnation of
all acts, methods and practices relating to terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, by whomever,
against whoever, wherever committed and whatever the
motivation, including State terrorism. Any Government
involved in an act of State terrorism must step up and
assume its international responsibility.
We strongly oppose actions carried out under the
pretext of combating this scourge, which violate the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles and
norms of international law. The fight against terrorism
can never be a justification for sullying the principles of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of States, nor can it be a justification for violating
human rights and international humanitarian law or
for carrying out torture, kidnapping, illegal detentions,
disappearances and extrajudicial executions.
Terrorism cannot be eradicated if double standards
and selectivity in addressing and confronting this
scourge prevailing are prevalent. It is unacceptable that
some terrorist acts are condemned while others are met
with silence, are tolerated, justified or manipulated
by others for narrow political or economic interests.
Similarly, claims by some who seek to associate
terrorism with a particular ethnicity or religion are
also unacceptable.
For decades, Cuba has suffered the consequences
of terrorist acts that have been organized, financed
and executed from abroad. The number of victims of
these criminal acts has reached 3,478 dead and 2,099
disabled for life. The degree of this human suffering
is incalculable.
As part of Cuba’s actions undertaken to fight
terrorism in the country we enacted Law No. 93, entitled
“Law against acts of terrorism,” of 20 December
2001, which is a specific criminal law that defines
and punishes criminal acts of a terrorist nature with
severe penalties. Cuba is a party to 18 international
conventions on terrorism, pursuant to which it has put
in place legal and institutional measures designed to
fight terrorism in an effective manner. Our country
strictly complies with its obligations under the Security
Council resolutions on the subject, and has participated
actively in discussions on the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee. It has also submitted, within
the prescribed time limits, the information requested
on the measures taken for the implementation of the
resolutions.

S/PV.7690

Member States will soon begin the process of
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In this regard, the United Nations should
devote their full attention to discussions on a future
convention on international terrorism. We consider the
adoption of the convention to be imperative. It must
be broad in scope and fill gaps and omissions in the
existing legal framework, which will permit coherent
international action against the scourge of terrorism.
An international convention on terrorism must
establish a clear and precise definition of the crime of
international terrorism that covers all aspects thereof
and includes State terrorism. Its adoption would help
to further the implementation of the Global Strategy
and the progress of the international community in
confronting this phenomenon. States must honour
their international obligations and ensure that victims
of terrorist acts, including the many victims of state
terrorism, enjoy their rights.
On 6 October we will mark the fourtieth year
since the mid-air explosion of a Cubana de Aviación
commercial airliner off the coast of Barbados. Seventythree people of different nationalities, including the
Cuban junior national fencing team, lost their lives in
that horrendous crime. Unfortunately, the notorious
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, who has acknowledged
his responsibility for that bombing, has never paid for
his crime. On behalf of the innocent victims, we will
not tire in demanding the compliance of States with
their obligations to prosecute or extradite all terrorists,
without exception.
In conclusion, Cuba reiterates its unwavering
commitment to the fight against terrorism. Multilateral
efforts to strengthen the full implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
its forthcoming revision, will enjoy our full support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Let me start by thanking
Egypt for organizing today’s timely debate and the
Deputy Secretary-General and the other two briefers
for their presentations. We also welcome the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6 this morning.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.
Slovenia condemns terrorism in all its forms, since
terrorism is a direct attack on the values of democracy,

16-1328683/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

human rights, tolerance, solidarity, humanity and peace.
We must strengthen our efforts in addressing conditions
conducive to and the root causes of radicalization and
violent extremism, which lead to terrorism. In this
regard, the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1) is crucial. We have to make efficient use of the
upcoming General Assembly review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and build
on the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
presented by the Secretary-General (A/70/674).
The concept of human security stands for a
comprehensive approach to security that broadly
encompasses the security of people and communities
from violence, freedom from fear, freedom from want,
and their right to live in dignity, which contributes to the
elimination of violent extremism. As a people-centred
and multisectorial approach, human security could
lead to the implementation of an all-of-United Nations
approach — one of the recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. Slovenia will assume the chairmanship of
the Human Security Network in June.
Slovenia supports the strong regional focus in the
Plan of Action. The Slovenian-led Western Balkan
Counter-Terrorism initiative was endorsed by the
Council of the European Union in December 2015.
The purpose of the initiative is to set up an integrative
and complementary approach of all international
partners involved in counter-terrorism activities in
the region that prevents duplication and overlapping,
creates synergies and enhances the efficiency of a
joint response. We hope that this model can contribute
to efforts in other regions as well. The early detection
and prevention of radicalization must remain the focus
of our attention. In January 2016, Slovenia launched
a project for the first-line practitioners dealing with
radicalization issues, focused on awareness-raising and
encouraging capacity-building in the Western Balkans.
The only effective way to combat extremist ideology
is with counter-ideology — namely, education and
intercultural dialogue. Recognizing this, the Sloveniabased Euro-Mediterranean University established the
Centre for Arab, Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies in
June 2015. The Centre aims to capitalize on cooperation
on science and culture in order to build trust and
promote intercultural and interfaith understanding
among European and Arab Muslim countries.
84/94

11/05/2016

Young people are especially susceptible to
radicalization. We need to look for positive alternatives
for the young, especially through education, jobs and
their active involvement in political processes. In this
regard, let me underline the importance of the recent
efforts of UNESCO to step up its action to prevent
violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Perović (Montenegro): We warmly thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s debate on countering the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism, and commend
Egypt’s strong commitment to this relevant issue.
We also thank today’s briefers for their remarkable
briefings.
Montenegro welcomes today’s adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, and aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would like, however, to add some
remarks in my national capacity.
We are too often faced with terrorist attacks and
tragic events across the globe that are stark reminders
of limited results in fighting terrorism, and thus call for
more resolve, unity, coordination and active engagement
from every single State Member of the United Nations.
The ability of the United Nations and the international
community to fight terrorism has been constrained
by the inability of States to agree on a comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, including the definition
of terrorism. Achieving a convention, including a clear
definition, is a political imperative and necessity.
In the wake of the rising numbers of terrorist
attacks, the evolving nature and growing complexity
of terrorism, and the ever-present threat of terrorist
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and others, Montenegro
considers it urgent to redouble our efforts in the fight
against terrorism, particularly in the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The United Nations should strive to do more to
provide political leadership to guide and encourage
international cooperation against terrorism. None of
us is immune to terrorist threats, and we need to work
together effectively. In order to increase efficiency,
Montenegro affirms that due attention has to be
given to ensuring counter-terrorism coordination and
cohesion within the United Nations system, including
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

by establishing a new position of United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator for all United Nations
activities in this area. It would also help to improve
United Nations interaction with external bodies, such
as Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.
Today’s violent conflicts and violent extremism
are rooted in weak institutions and governance; the
absence of respect for fundamental rights, rule of law
and justice; unemployment, marginalization, exclusion,
corruption and organized crime. It is important to keep
in mind that societies with effective, inclusive and
accountable institutions are more likely to withstand
crisis and peacefully manage disputes. The 2030
Sustainable Development Agenda (General Assembly
resolution 701/), particularly in Goal 16, offers an
invaluable opportunity to make substantial progress
and a difference in this area.
Measures to counter terrorism must be in line with
human rights standards and the rule of law. The peaceful
expression of views that are considered extreme should
never be criminalized unless they are associated with
violence. States should not misuse a poorly defined
concept of terrorism to suppress political opposition or
ideological dissent from mainstream values. Moreover,
in counter-terrorism operations, States have to comply
with international law and ensure the protection of
civilians.
Montenegro is of the view that the fight against
terror is a struggle to uphold the values of democracy
and human rights, and not to undermine them.
Counter-terrorist operations that are non-specific,
disproportionate, brutal and insufficiently supervized
violate the very norms that we seek to defend. They
also risk giving the terrorists a propaganda tool, thereby
making our societies neither free nor safe.
We have to do more to better understand the
underlying drivers of terrorism to be in a position to
confront this challenge more decisively. Engaging
citizens — including not only families, women, and
youth, but also religious community leaders — in public
conversations on the drivers of radicalism and violent
extremism would go a long way towards addressing
them.
We must be aware that individuals attracted to
terrorism are coming from vulnerable groups, and
only if we find a way to address the root causes that
led them to violent extremism and terrorism will we
succeed in our intention. Promoting economic, political

S/PV.7690

and social cohesion and inclusiveness and access to
justice for all must remain a priority. For Montenegro,
the focus should be placed on young people and their
empowerment, particularly through employment and
education, so that they can gain ownership of the
policies that affect them and all of us.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Cyprus.
Ms. Krasa (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to deliver short additional remarks
in its national capacity. We thank the presidency
for focusing the Council’s attention on countering
terrorist narratives and welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6, adopted today by the Security Council,
as well as its valuable and practical focus.
Countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism is a crucial aspect of our overall counterterrorism efforts. More than ever before, the
sad proliferation of terrorist attacks — with this
past week having no shortage of such deplorable
acts — has become a constant reminder that terrorist
organizations are successful in widely inciting and
recruiting new fighters. Faced with this reality, we
have come to recognize the need to counter-terrorism
in a comprehensive manner. It is clear that the holistic
approach required is both thematic and institutional.
This precept maintains that no issue can be tackled in
isolation or by individual actors working disparately.
We are certain that today’s discussion will garner
further momentum for the General Assembly’s
upcoming 10-year anniversary review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in the
context of which we also remain engaged in considering
the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
presented by the Secretary-General (A/70/674), which
we have welcomed. The Plan is of crucial relevance,
including when it comes to strategic communication and
building alternative narratives. We see today’s initiative
and what is mandated through today’s presidential
statement as complementary to such efforts.
In line with the necessary holistic approach,
our methodology for a globally devized solution to
countering terrorist narratives needs to follow the
principle of subsidiarity, empower action, and utilise
knowledge at the local level as much as possible.
In this vein, we fully agree with the emphasis in the
statement on the importance of enhancing coordination

16-1328685/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and cooperation with the private sector, civil society,
religious leaders and institutions, and educational
and cultural institutions, as well as of the recognition
of the role that victims of terrorism, among other
legitimate voices, can play in countering radicalization
to violence. Through criminal justice, information
exchange, education and youth participation,
intercultural dialogue, employment and initiatives for
social inclusion, we can build up the resilience of our
societies to terrorist narratives.
Today’s debate showcases our unwavering
determination to stand united, based on our shared
values and goals, in countering the narratives of
terrorism, in what is undoubtedly a long way ahead.
Such unity remains the only recipe for success.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
Egypt for its leadership of the Council this month and
for organizing this important debate.
Afghanistan aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the State
of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
Let me be brief and to the point. Much has been
discussed today about the internal factors involved in
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
While we agree with most of what has been said, let
me focus on the external factors, particularly in the
case of Afghanistan, and remind the Council that the
creation of the Taliban in Afghanistan in 1994 opened
the current tragic chapter of terrorism in the world.
Before the establishment of the Taliban, terror in its
current behaviour and form was little known to the
world. The Taliban came into existence before groups
like Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and Da’esh gained
notoriety. In a way, it was the Taliban and their backers
who characterized the kind of terror that we witness
today from various violent extremist groups around the
world.
In the current global climate of unspeakable
brutality committed by these terrorist outfits, let us not
forget that it was the Taliban who stoned women to death;
it was the Taliban who closed girls’ schools, thereby
denying millions of girls of their right to education; it
was the Taliban who prevented women from pursuing
a livelihood; and it was they who introduced suicide
86/94

11/05/2016

attacks on civilians and destroyed towns and villages in
Afghanistan. One can easily trace how the Taliban long
started promoting Al-Qaida and Da’esh-style divisive
and hateful ideology.
Since the Taliban mushroomed overnight in the
landscape of Afghanistan, mainly with foreign support,
our entire population has been brutalized at their
hands. The latest attack came three weeks ago, when
an indiscriminate brutal bombing in Kabul led to the
deaths of 68 people and wounded 350. But their vicious
bloodlust has never been limited to Afghanistan. Let us
not forget that it was under the Taliban that Afghanistan
became the jumping board for international terrorism
when thousands of young men received training and
logistical support in terrorist camps. This was the
precursor of today’s terrorists carrying out deadly
attacks in Asia, Europe, the United States, the Middle
East, Africa and elsewhere.
So the question is how and why did the Taliban come
into being? We need to ask ourselves how they learned
to drive tanks and fly jets overnight, stage conventional
warfare and capitalize on prolonged political conflict in
our country? Who trained them? Who provided them
with supplies? Who financed them? Who provided
them with safe havens and orchestrated their spring
offensives year after year?
Religious outfits and sloganism, as well as an
ability to take advantage of the weaknesses emerging
from the prolonged conflict in Afghanistan, were the
cheapest and easiest ways to recruit for the rank and
file of the Taliban. In this case, ideology and violent
behaviour were used in pursuit of political objectives
by circles within State structures outside our borders.
The question should be what motivated and still
continues to motivate those circles to use violence
through proxies in pursuit of political objectives at the
national, regional and global levels? Three causes can
be identified: first, negative State rivalry in the region
with excessive anxiety and suspicion on the part of one
State for the other’s intentions, resulting in the adoption
of misguided policies; secondly, the tension between
military and civilian control in politics, an inherent
struggle emerging from militarism in society; and
thirdly, a trust deficit between States that has prevented
constructive dialogue.
Hence, it is not, in our case, the ideology but the
initiatory, enabling and facilitating role of political
actors and their use of radical ideology for short16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

term gains that need to be addressed. Targeting the
promoters and drivers of such policies, who use
violence in pursuit of political objectives within the
State structures, especially in the security apparatus,
is absolutely crucial when dealing with the threats of
violent extremism. In that regard, it must be mentioned
that the differentiation between good and bad terrorists
is futile, since all forms of terrorism are inherently
appalling and must be condemned.
In Afghanistan, we have witnessed how terrorists
and violent extremist groups take advantage of
prolonged and unresolved conflicts, the lack of basic
peace and security, and most importantly, negative
competition between States to push forward their
brutal agendas. The world today is in dire need of
reducing State rivalries and addressing trust deficits.
In that regard, regional countries and international
actors bear particular responsibility to assist countries
experiencing strife in their efforts to restore peace.
In conclusion, Afghanistan reiterates its
commitment to engage constructively with the United
Nations and other international partners to discuss
counter-terrorism measures, including the upcoming
biannual review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We hope to achieve tangible results
at the end of the review process.

S/PV.7690

New York, Madrid, Bamako, Tunis, London, Istanbul,
Paris and Brussels, to name a few. No region, no
country is safe from extremist violence. It undermines
political stability, national cohesion, prospects for
development and indeed the very foundations of some
Member States. That is why this global threat requires
a global response.
In adopting the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy a decade ago, the United Nations
adopted an action plan that, in order to be effective in
the long term, requires that each State understand this
global threat better and implement a response strategy
that is adapted and constantly updated.
The State has a major role to play in the unstinting
fight that must be waged against terrorism, which, today,
has resources, networks, affiliates and unprecedented
means of destruction. This combat should, of course,
be conducted in compliance with the rule of law.
Strengthening security must be done through the
mechanisms of the rule of law. We believe that effective
counter-terrorism should not be achieved at the expense
of distorting the balance between security and freedom.

The Government of the Republic of Haiti has always
vigorously condemned terrorism, which can never be
justified, whatever its motivation or origin may be. We
are therefore pleased to participate in this discussion on
the terrorist threat, the attraction of terrorism’s hateful
and intolerant ideologies, and the measures to be taken
to counterbalance the ideological weight of the terrorist
discourse, with a view to defeating the terrorist network,
including global Islam-inspired terrorism.

The experience of recent years has shown that the
strategies to meet the challenge of terrorism simply
through a military or police approach are limited. In
considering the results of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, the Secretary-General rightly underscored
that the international community has been too inclined
to prioritize the military and police pillars of action. It
is fitting, of course, to welcome the results achieved in
the military response, which made it possible for the
international coalition to halt the galloping territorial
expansion of the jihadist terrorist movement in
Iraq and Syria, but that approach is far from having
definitively slowed its growth. Given the developments
related to this new type of terrorism, which attacks
nations without distinction, it is clear that a response
to terrorism cannot lie solely in repression. Repressive
action, as indispensable as it may be, must be
underpinned by prevention. That is why we support the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, which appropriately stressed the need to
refocus priorities and focus more on the reasons why
violent extremist groups are attractive.

Never has the threat been so formidable. It has
steadily grown in scope and severity, as evidenced by
the list of the major attacks and bloodshed that have
been encountered in several capitals in recent years:

Extremist political violence is often perpetrated
by ideologically motivated individuals. Based on
ideologies of hatred and intolerance, those groups
distort and exploit religion. They trample on basic

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): It is an honour
to participate in this open debate on countering the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism. I would like,
on behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Haiti, to welcome this timely initiative of
the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

16-1328687/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

human rights, attack universal democratic values ​​and
the very principles on which international peace and
security are based. The international community must,
therefore, carry the fight against terrorism into the
battlefield of ideas.
For that reason, the Republic of Haiti attaches the
utmost importance to the establishment of international
mechanisms, complete with resources and appropriate
cooperation mechanisms, to counter ideological
discourses that may lead to radicalization. It is
crucial to significantly reduce terrorism’s ideological
appeal, because, to a large degree, that is what gives
it its power. Strengthening international, regional and
subregional cooperation in that regard is vital. It is to
be hoped that the United Nations and its institutions
and specialized agencies, including UNESCO, will
support education and awareness programmes initiated
by States, including in the developing countries, with
the aim of raising consciousness of the risks and threats
posed by terrorist ideologies.

11/05/2016

The United Nations as a whole, and the Security
Council in particular, must continue to play their
driving role in this fight, because terrorism is primarily
a threat to international peace and security. But we must
not lose sight of the fact that the threat is global and
that the struggle must be for the long haul, based on a
multidimensional strategy, not the least part of which is
its ideological aspect. This fight is everyone’s business.
The Republic of Haiti believes firmly that
success in this fight will depend in large part on our
collective ability to build open, equitable, inclusive and
pluralistic societies, based on full respect for human
rights and offering economic opportunities for all,
as the Secretary-General has rightly reminded us. In
that spirit, the Government of Haiti will continue to
support all United Nations initiatives that seek to boost
international mobilization aimed at finding effective
solutions to the problems that fuel terrorism and
especially to reduce the attraction of the ideologies that
underpin it.

For its part, the Government of the Republic of
Haiti, which fully supports the fight against terrorism
within the framework of the rule of law, is working
to modernize its judicial system by strengthening the
provisions that will enable it to punish not only incitement
to acts to terrorism and their glorification, but also
the propagation of extremist ideas, the dissemination
of ideologically driven violence, and narratives of
religious intolerance and incitement to racial hatred.
Together with the State, all our social stakeholders will
be part of that strategy, including schools.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.

Lastly, we cannot ignore the close relationship
between the fight against terrorist ideologies and the
fight to eliminate the conditions that allow extremism
to thrive. The international community must be aware
that keeping terrorism and its supporting ideologies
in check also demands the settlement of protracted
regional conflicts and eliminating the sources of tension
that terrorist movements shrewdly exploit. Similarly,
persistent, even increasing, poverty, inequality and
social and economic difficulties, and the feelings of
exclusion and marginalization among peoples and
disadvantaged groups are all vulnerability factors,
particularly in societies in developing countries,
especially in fragile States. They cannot be ignored
in the ideological battle against the proponents of
violent extremism.

His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa of the
Kingdom of Bahrain is proud of the role and status of
the Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy in standing
up to and confronting alien ideological practices, and
of its moderate approach, serving as a beacon to the
Islamic world, a reflection of the tolerant spirit of Islam
and a vehicle for condemning all forms of extremism.
The rise of terrorism, the spread of terrorist groups
and the terrible threat that they pose to international
peace and security form a crucial issue that requires
the unflagging efforts of the international community.
The threat of terrorism is everywhere. It does not
differentiate between nations, regions or cultures, and
the scourge of terrorist groups is a universal concern.
Combating terrorism is therefore a collective and global
responsibility that demands international efforts, if we

88/94

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
am very pleased to be able to thank His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the brotherly Arab Republic of Egypt, and
the Egyptian delegation for organizing today’s open
debate on combating the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his briefing at the start of the meeting, welcome the
adoption today of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6.

16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

are to save the lives of innocent people and maintain
international peace and security.
Terrorist groups do not represent the teachings
of religion and decent human instincts. Arab Islamic
culture has always been based on the values of
moderation, openness and respect for the rights of
non-Muslim minorities. Dealing with terrorist groups
will require persistent effort in many areas, including
on the security, military and ideological fronts. In the
ideological arena, we must combat those extremist
ideologies, which go against human instincts, distort
the teachings of Islam and abuse its spirit.
Besides cutting off the sources of financing for
terrorist groups and limiting their ability to recruit, the
Kingdom of Bahrain continues to confront terrorism
and its organizations in accordance with its laws
and regulations, working from the list of terrorist
organizations that includes Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
Hizbullah, and from international and regional lists
of terrorists. The Kingdom of Bahrain has also taken
a number of initiatives and enacted laws aimed at
deterring terrorism. We have participated in the Global
Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and the Working Group on Countering the
Financing of Terrorism, and we are part of the liaison
group within the Global Coalition. In 2014, Bahrain
hosted the Conference on Combating the Financing of
Terrorism, which issued the Manama Declaration. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain has organized
a joint workshop for the member States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) and the United States of
America on countering Hizbullah’s criminal activities
through legal means. We also organized a joint GCC
and European Union (EU) workshop on combating
the financing of terrorism, which recommended the
exchange of information on the issue among financial
intelligence units and judicial and law-enforcement
authorities, as well as promoting cooperation between
the EU and the GCC on cutting off sources of financing
and promoting cooperation in international forums.
Lastly, I would like to affirm Bahrain’s established
position of principle rejecting terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, regardless of motive or the identity
of the parties supporting and financing it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I propose that the
Council invite the Permanent Observer of the Observer
State of Palestine to the United Nations to participate in

S/PV.7690

this meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the previous practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset. I wish to
warmly congratulate the brotherly country of the Arab
Republic of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month. I wish its delegation
all success in upholding its solemn responsibilities, and
I remain confident of its skilled leadership. We express
our appreciation to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Egypt, His Excellency Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry
Selim, for his presence at this important meeting
to address the grave issue of terrorism and its threat
to international peace and security. I also take this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation of Egypt’s
constant attention to and efforts on behalf of the issues
concerning our Middle East region, including in
particular the question of Palestine.
Countering the narratives and ideologies of the
terrorism that is plaguing our world and causing so
much suffering and trauma for civilians and destruction
in so many countries requires urgent, collective and
comprehensive action. Extremist takfiri ideology,
whereby religion is abused, distorted and maliciously
interpreted to achieve the political objectives of
terrorist groups such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram
and others must be completely rejected.
Those who espouse and promote extremist religious
terror ideologies, whether they are Muslim, Jewish or
Christian extremists, must not be permitted to continue
unopposed in spreading their violent views and actions
that are terrorizing millions of innocent civilians and
destabilizing peace and security in the Middle East and
around the world. Such terror groups and their false and
dangerous ideologies must be countered by responsible
efforts and cooperative actions based firmly in
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
While the Security Council must remain at
the forefront of that effort, eliminating the scourge
obviously requires the mobilization of all capacities in
the relevant realms of the international system, be they
political, legal or financial. In that regard, our collective
efforts must make a prioritity of genuinely redressing of
the root causes of the problems in our world — whether

16-1328689/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

political, security or socioeconomic —which are being
exploited by extremists to recruit cadres to their ranks
to serve their sinister objectives.
We are certain that respect for international law
and a zero-tolerance policy for impunity would have
averted the deepening of many of the grievances
exploited by extremists to advance their ideologies
and not allowed space for their fostering and growth.
That includes, of course, the open wound and longstanding injustice of the question of Palestine, which
continues to be cynically used by extremists to justify
their abhorrent ideologies and behaviour. Moreover, it
is imperative to undertake efforts to foster an honest,
open intercivilization and interreligious dialogue that
involves and reaches not only leaders and Governments,
but also the average civilian, including young people
and women.
Such a dialogue and cooperative efforts must
reaffirm international law as the necessary guiding
framework for international relations, rather than
power and might. It must reaffirm commitments on
that basis and respect for the law and human rights
in addressing major grievances, including ending the
destructive conflicts of our times and reasserting the
true tenets of the respective faiths, including tolerance,
peace and respect for humankind, so as to counter the
distractions, distortions and misinterpretations that are
being used by extremists to advance their ideologies
and recruit so many, especially disaffected youth, to
their ranks.
The State of Palestine adheres to the comprehensive
position of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation regarding
terrorism, as affirmed in numerous ministerial and
summit declarations. Terrorist acts constitute one of
the most flagrant violations of international law. Such
actions undermine human rights, including the rights
to life and security, and the fundamental freedoms
of peoples and endanger the territorial integrity and
stability of States, as well as national, regional and
international security and the economic and social
stability and development of States.
Violent, criminal actions intended to provoke a
state of terror among persons for any purpose, wherever
and by whomever undertaken, are unjustifiable in any
circumstance. There must be no exception or selectivity
in the application of that principle as we seek to
90/94

11/05/2016

confront extremist ideologies and groups and bring a
halt to their terror.
Lastly, we must reaffirm that terrorism should not
be equated with the legitimate struggle of peoples under
colonial domination or foreign occupation for selfdetermination and national liberation. In accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
struggle of peoples under colonial domination and
foreign occupation for self-determination and national
liberation, including the decades-long struggle of the
Palestinian people for freedom and justice, does not
constitute terrorism and any such characterization or
analogy must be rejected.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Thein (Myanmar): It is my honour to speak
at this important debate on countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism. My delegation would like
to associate itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We congratulate Egypt on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and for
convening this debate. My delegation welcomes the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6 today.
Myanmar is equally concerned with the violence
and instability across much of the Middle East and
North Africa, as well as the possibility of encountering
such incidents in other parts of the world, including our
own region. Myanmar resolutely opposes any act of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We share
the sympathy for the victims of the terrorist acts that
took place today in Iraq and for all of the victims of the
narratives of terrorism in our time.
Today, we are facing an extraordinary form
of terrorism that surpasses all traditional and
non-traditional threats across the globe, as it intends to
shake up the very fabric of civilized society and inject
its violent and extreme ideologies into the hearts and
minds of younger generations. On the extremist front,
terrorism preys on vulnerable groups, such as women
and children, and even soft targets such as medical
facilities and health-care personnel. Terrorism ignores
geographical and ethical boundaries.
The Internet and social media have also made it
possible to spread the ideologies of terrorism and hatred
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

in ways that are difficult to follow. Therefore, States
must take every possible measure to track and deter
such cyberelements on the Internet, using appropriate
technological means. We must also holistically
address the root causes, in addition to security and
law enforcement retaliation, including by way of the
political, social and economic means necessary to
prevent such threats.
The role of women is important in participating in
the decision-making process on all political, economic
and social platforms. Children and young people must be
cared for and provided with educational opportunities
throughout their lives, with a view to knowing right
from wrong, as a form of preventive immunization
from the threats of terrorism and crime.
Myanmar enacted its domestic law on combating
terrorism on 4 June 2014. We criminalized various
forms of terrorism, as well as the financing and abetting
of terrorism. We have also enacted domestic legislation
to suppress the financing of terrorism and moneylaundering, as well as legislation to provide mutual legal
assistance in criminal matters. On the structural side,
the necessary central control bodies and the Financial
Intelligence Unit have also been established.
Myanmar reaffirmed its dedication to peace and
security and to countering terrorism by signing the
Additional Protocol to the International Atomic Energy
Agency Safeguards Agreement in 2013 and by ratifying
the Biological Weapons Convention in 2014 and the
Chemical Weapons Convention in 2015. National
implementation measures, in cooperation with the
relevant treaty bodies and technical support agencies,
such as the Chemical, Biological, Radiological and
Nuclear Risk Mitigation Centres of Excellence, are
being carried out pursuant to the provisions of the
relevant Conventions.
Myanmar respects and adheres to all resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular those relating to
the fight against terrorism, and cooperates fully with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and other concerned
United Nations agencies. We welcome the vision of
establishing a comprehensive international framework
by 2017 to address the terrorism issue. To date, Myanmar
is a State party to 11 international instruments relating
to countering terrorism.
We are an active member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Convention on
Counter Terrorism, which represents the collective

S/PV.7690

regional efforts being made by ASEAN countries since
2011. We continue to work on the new ASEAN Work
Plan 2016-2020 and seek to strengthen access to quality
educational systems. The Special ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting on the Rise of Radicalization and Violent
Extremism in October last year strengthened regional
cooperation on that issue.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the 2015 Paris
Agreement on Climate Change have created guiding
frameworks for Member States to implement and build
strategic partnerships, which could help us create
societies that do not tolerate any act of terrorism while
leaving no one behind in achieving those goals. The
role of the United Nations is relevant to the preventive
measures that can be taken to sustain peace and prevent
violent extremism. The United Nation system can help
Member States by providing technical assistance in
national capacity-building so that they can address
those issues in the areas and according to the priorities
indicated by Member States.
In conclusion, Myanmar would like to reaffirm
its commitment to engaging with the various agencies
of United Nations, the United Nations system itself
and Member States in order to address the threats of
terrorism through available frameworks, including the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674) and other relevant frameworks.
Myanmar will continue to work actively with
regional and international partners to prevent and
counter terrorism. Terrorism transcends religious,
ethnic, cultural and territorial boundaries, as it threatens
peace, stability and the development of all humankind.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The presidency
has received requests by several delegations to make
further statements. It is my intention to accede to those
requests. However, I would ask each delegation to limit
itself to one additional statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to make a further statement.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for requesting the floor at this late
hour. However, my delegation would like to respond
to statements made by the representatives of the
regimes in power in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey.
Their statements included a collection of claims,

16-1328691/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

11/05/2016

falsifications and propaganda, in which they seek to
present themselves as playing a certain role in fighting
terrorism.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Islamic Republic of Iran
to make a further statement.

However, those three regimes are deeply involved
in spreading savagely cruel terrorism and hateful
extremism, as well as barbaric Wahhabism. They are
also financing and arming terrorist groups and providing
them with platforms for propaganda. They have also
endorsed many of the terrorist attacks that have been
witnessed by Member States of the Organization. They
are bringing foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries
from all over the world to my country to serve their own
interests, thus increasing the suffering of the Syrians,
delaying the solution of the crisis and undermining
political efforts.

Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I also
apologize for requesting the floor at this late hour.
My delegation would just like to react to some of the
baseless accusations levelled by the Ambassador of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia against my country.

United Nations reports indicate the presence of
more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters in Syria and
Iraq. We in Syria would like to affirm that there are, in
fact, many more than 30,000. In addition to the 24,500
terrorists of Saudi nationality alone who have joined
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other
Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist groups, many thousands
more are present in other Member States of the
Organization. They are all the product of the extremist
religious teachings that they have received and are the
ones responsible for committing all sorts of abhorrent
terrorist acts around the world. Their actions have
nothing to do with Islam, nor do they have anything
to do with civilization. The role of those regimes in
supporting terrorism is no longer a secret to anyone.
Today, we have heard affirmations by States Members
of the United Nations regarding the Turkish role in
preparing and transferring foreign terrorist fighters to
my country. As the Council is well aware, through its
support for terrorist groups on Syrian territories Turkey
has also interfered militarily. The Erdoğan regime is
directly and indirectly involved in terrorism through its
trading in oil and in stolen Syrian artifacts with Da’esh.
The practices of those three regimes represent acts
of aggression in flagrant violation of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the Security
Council resolutions on terrorism. We once again call
upon the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
by condemning the practices of those regimes and by
showing zero tolerance for their practices, with a view
to making them put an end to their support for terrorism
and criminal acts.
92/94

It was ironic that he accused Iran of fanning the
flames of sectarianism and that he preaches against
it. Despite what he claimed, it is common knowledge
where the takfiri ideology comes from and what its
objectives are. It is also common knowledge who is
putting that ideology into practice. The example of the
inflammatory statements against various Islamic sects
by influential Saudi clerics and officials, including the
Government-appointed imam of the Grand Mosque
in Mecca, clearly shows who is spreading sectarian
rhetoric and inciting sectarian hatred. Indeed, a recent
sermon, delivered on 31 March 2015 by Abdul Rahman
Al-Sudais, the Government-appointed imam of the
Grand Mosque of Mecca, contains hate speech and
incitements to violence against Shiites.
“Our war with Iran, say that out loud, is a war
between Sunnis and Shiites. Our war with Iran . .
. is truly sectarian. If it was not sectarian, we will
make it sectarian. . . . Our disagreement with the
Rafidha will not be removed nor will our suicide
to fight them . . . as long as they are on the face of
the Earth”.
It is quite clear who consider themselves to be the
only true believers and who have set out to destroy
and annihilate the other sects in the Islamic world,
including those outside the Islamic world.
In that respect, a cursory look at history books will
easily reveal that the proponents of the takfiri ideology
began their sectarian drive in the year 1805, when they
launched an attack against the holy shrines in Najaf and
Karbala and set them ablaze. A criminal sectarian act
of that kind was committed in June 2014, when they
horrifically massacred 1,700 Iraqi air force cadets in
Tikrit, simply because the cadets were of a different
Islamic sect.
We can agree that creating centres and financing
organizations aimed at fighting terrorism is a good
thing. But there should be no doubt that action is
needed to weed out the elements that incite hatred and
16-13286

11/05/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

intolerance against those who are different. We believe
that action against those who spread hateful takfiri
ideology and against their proponents inside Saudi
Arabia constitutes a necessary action that needs to be
carried out in that country.
The Saudi Ambassador also referred to Hizbullah
as a sectarian, terrorist organization. Here, too, it is
common knowledge that Hizbullah forms part and
parcel of the Government and parliament of a United
Nations Member State. It is the group that helped drive
the Israeli occupiers out of Lebanon and, in numerous
cases, stood up to and fought the Israeli regime that
is occupying the Palestinian lands. It is astonishing
that an Islamic country finds common ground with the
Israeli regime and issues exactly the same claims as do
the heads of that regime.
Such statements run contrary to the interests of
the Islamic world and damage the unity that we need
to build in order to advance the well-being of Muslim
people everywhere.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The delegations of Ukraine and Georgia have
made a number of anti-Russian insinuations that have
nothing to do with today’s topic. We reject them as
baseless and irrelevant.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Ukraine has requested the floor to make a further
statement..
Mr. Lisuchenko (Ukraine): In its right to reply, the
delegation of Ukraine would like to raise the following
points. We are deeply disappointed that, instead of
finally confessing to committing aggression against my
country, the Russian delegation has resorted to repeating
false insinuations that do not convince anybody. What
we have just witnessed is nothing but just another
Russian attempt to divert our attention from its efforts
to export terrorism to Ukraine. It represented a classic
smear scenario employed by experienced criminals to
shift blame and shield themselves from prosecution.
When we speak about the support that Russia is
providing to terrorist organizations, that involves not
only the financing of information campaigns aimed at
cultivating hatred, resentment and radicalism, but also
the fostering of terrorist propaganda in the occupied

S/PV.7690

territories of Ukraine, the Donbas and Crimea. It also
involves direct governance, military support and the
supervision of terrorist activities.
I would just mention the situation in certain areas of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, which the
pro-Russian propaganda refers to the so-called Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republic as “new Russia”.
In that respect, the 29 March issue of the reputable
German magazine Bild highlighted that the Russian
side had established an inter-ministerial commission
for humanitarian support of the affected areas in the
south-east areas of Donetsk and Luhansk. Through that
commission and its six working groups, the Russian
Government is steering all affairs of the mentioned
occupied areas. The said regions are being treated as
parts of Russian territory, and the Russian Federal
Security Service supervises each working group.
Despite statements issued by the Russian Federation
on the future integration of those regions with Ukraine,
the Russian side plans to secure the long-term existence
of those territorial organizations under full Russian
control. It also plans to create a puppet State whose
future will be decided exclusively in Moscow.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Turkey to make a further
statement.
Mrs. Özkan (Turkey): I apologize for taking the
floor once again at this late hour, but I was compelled
to do so, given the allegations just made by one
delegation. We categorically deny the allegations made
by the representative of the Syrian regime, which long
ago lost all legitimacy.
What Turkey does for the brotherly people of Syria,
in close cooperation with international organizations,
including the United Nations, takes place before the
eyes of the international community. Turkey is hosting
more than 2.5 million Syrians, offering them shelter,
protection, health care and education. As the suffering
and destruction caused by the regime continues, as
seen by the latest appalling attack targeting a camp of
internally displaced persons in Idlib province, I just
would like to emphasize that Turkey will continue to
stand by the people of Syria.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested the floor to
make a further statement.

16-1328693/94

S/PV.7690

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I apologize for taking the floor again. However
I will be very brief. Our previous comments apply
fully to the comments just made by the representative
of Ukraine.

94/94

11/05/2016

The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
I thank the interpreters, the Secretariat and the
Security Council members for their cooperation.
The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

16-13286
