General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

190

bodies, agencies and institutions involved in the advancement of women,
Also recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/27 of 4 May 1982, in which the Council, inter alia,
took note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on developments relating to the organizational aspects of the Institute 53 and the report of the Board of Trustees
of the Institute on its second session54 and expressed its
satisfaction with the approved programme and activities of
the Institute for 1982-83,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the progress made in
the implementation of the programme of work of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Endorses the network concept to be developed in
stages with the organizations of the United Nations system
and regional and national institutions as a mode of operation
for the implementation of the programme of the Institute;
3. Reiterates the need for the Institute to carry out research and training which lead particularly to a better understanding of the role of women in development, more
effective methods for enhancing the role of women in development and an increase in activities for the fuller participation of women in development, especially in the field
of technical co-operation;
4. Reaffirms that the research and trammg activities of
the Institute should aim at strengthening the links between
issues affecting women and mainstream development activities at all levels;
5. Calls upon the regional commissions, the specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to continue to co-operate with the Institute
and to ensure its participation in the activities relevant to
women in development;
6. Stresses the need for all Member States to consider
contributing financially to the United Nations Trust Fund
for the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women or co-operating in other ways with
the Institute in order to assure its regular and effective
financing so as to facilitate the implementation of its
programme;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the programme activities of the Institute;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women".

90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/57.

Integration of women in development55

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraphs 190 to 196 of the World Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 56 in which the relevant agencies
of the United Nations and intergovernmental, interregional
and regional bodies were called upon to scrutinize all ex isting plans and projects with a view to extending their
53 E/1982/33.
54 E/1982/11.

"See also sect. X.B.4, decision 47/449.
56
Repon of the World Conference of the International Women's Year.
Mexico City, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV. I), chap. II, sect. A.

sphere of activities to include women and to develop new
and innovative projects to include women,
Bearing in mind that development is one of the themes
of the United Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling paragraphs 233 and 234 of the Programme of
Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women, 57 in which it was recommended that numerous
actions should be taken in the areas of technical co-operation, training and advisory services,
Also recalling paragraph 51 of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Natio~s Dev~l«?pm~nt
Decade, 58 which stated that full and effective part1c1pattot1
by the entire population at all stages of the development
process should be ensured,
Looking ahead to the world conference on women t~ be
held in 1985, at which the achievements of the Umted
Nations Decade for Women and the need to continue such
achievements beyond the end of the Decade will be reviewed
and appraised,
Convinced of the importance of integrating women fully
into all areas of development, both as participants and as
beneficiaries,
A ware that greater co-ordination and knowledge of activities in this area within the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and the regional commissions and by Member States and non-governmental organizations would facilitate an exchange of experiences and concepts and be
beneficial to all,
Expressing its appreciation to those organizations which
have made regular reports on the implementation of the
objectives of the World Plan of Action and the Programme
of Action,
l. Calls upon the Secretary-General to encourage specialized agencies and regional commissions which have not
yet done so to develop a comprehensive policy regarding
the concerns of women, both as participants and as beneficiaries, in technical co-operation and development activities and to develop a strategy to ensure that women are an
integral part of these activities;
2. Urges those organizations to take every appropriate
action within existing resources to monitor the implementation of the above-mentioned policies and strategies and to
help disseminate this information upon request to Member
States and other interested parties;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out all the
activities called for in the present resolution within existing
resources and to submit a progress report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session for its consideration,
bearin_g in mind Assembly resolution 36/127 of 14 Decem6er 1981 entiffed-''Consideration within the United Nations
of questions concerning the role of women in development".
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/58.

United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New In" Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, I 4-30 July 1980
(United Nations puhlication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap.
I. sect. A.
'"Resolution 35156. annex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

ternational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international ecm1omic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 35/136 of 11 December 1980
and 361126 of 14 December 1981 , in which it endorsed the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Womf .,, 57
Affirming the role of the i.. rntre for Social Development
and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as the focal point
for the organizations of the United Nations system with
regard to activities undertaken in implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling also its resolution 36/ 128 of 14 December 1981
on the establishment of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1982/27 of 4 May 1982 concerning the programmes and activities of the Institute,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for
Women, 59 on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women6() and
on the programmes and activities of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women, 61
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women; 62
2. Welcomes the steps taken by Governments and by
the organizations of the United Nations system, including
the regional commissions, to achieve progress towards the
effective realization of the objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
3. Calls upon Governments, the organizations of the
United Nations system, including the regional commissions,
intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations to pay increased attention to the need to take practical
measures to implement the relevant recommendations of the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women and, in particular, to expand
technical co-operation activities which would ensure women's full and equal participation, as agents and as beneficiaries, in all sectors and at all levels of development;
4. Emphasizes the continuing role of the Centre for
Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs as the focal
point for the organizations of the United Nations system
with regard to activities undertaken in implementation of
the Programme of Action;
5. Notes with satisfaction the contribution made by the
Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women
to the implementation of the Programme of Action, mainly
through innovative and experimental projects at the grassroots level;
6. Notes with satisfaction the commencement of the
work of the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women and invites it to continue
contributing to the objectives of the Decade;
1. Notes with satisfaction that, as at I November 1982,
forty-five Member States had ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women; 63
•• Ai37/421.
A/37/349 and Add. I.
61 F11982/33.
62 A/37/458 and Add. I.
63 Resolution 34/180, annex.

60

191

8. Invites all States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention;
9. Welcomes the commencement of the work of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, which held its first session at Vienna from 18 to
22 October 1982;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the steps taken
to implement the present resolution;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the status
of the Convention;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-eighth session the item entitled "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace".
90th plenary meeting
3 December /982

37/59.

Improvement of the situation of women in rural
areas

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling its resolution 35/136 of 11 December 1980, in
which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Second
Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 57
Reaffirming the importance attached in the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade58 to the need to improve the status of women
and ensure their full participation in the development process
as agents and beneficiaries of development,
Reaffirming further the importance attached in the Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations
Decade for Women, as well as in the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 63
to the need to improve the situation of women in rural areas
in many parts of the world,
Recalling the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, 64 particularly with
regard to the integration of women in rural development,
Bearing in mind that a majority of women, particularly
in developing countries, live and work in rural areas and
suffer most from the exploitation of agricultural labour, in
particular by transnational corporations,
Convinced that the eradication of apartheid, all forms of
racial discrimination, colonialism, neo-colonialism, aggression and foreign occupation and domination is essential to
the further improvement of the situation of rural women,
Considering that the strengthening of international peace
and co-operation is one of the most important conditions
for further improving the situation of rural women,
Convinced also that the effective implementation of fundamental human rights is essential for the improvement of
the situation of rural women,
Recognizing the urgent need to take additional appropriate
measures aimed at further improving the situation of women
in rural areas,
Recognizing also the importance of exchanging experiences in this field among States,
64 See Report of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development. Rome. /2-20 Julv 1979 (WCARRD/REP).
