A /71/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

61st plenary meeting

Monday, 12 December 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/71/670)
The President: The Assembly has before it the
report of the Credentials Committee circulated in
document A/71/670, containing a draft resolution
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 12 of its
report. The draft resolution reads as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the report of the
Credentials Committee and the recommendation
contained therein,
“Approves the report of the Credentials Committee.”
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee,
Mr.
Necton
Mhura,
Permanent
Representative of Malawi, to introduce the report of the
Credentials Committee.
Mr. Mhura (Malawi), Chair of the Credentials
Committee: On behalf of the Credentials Committee, I
have the honour to introduce the report of the Committee
concerning the credentials of the representatives of
Member States to the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, contained in document A/71/670.
Having considered the credentials of the
representatives at its meeting on 8 December, the

Credentials Committee adopted without a vote a draft
resolution accepting the credentials. The Committee
also recommended to the plenary of the General
Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution concerning
credentials of representatives to the current session of
the General Assembly, contained in paragraph 12 of the
report of the Committee.
I should like to note that, since the meeting of the
Credentials Committee, formal credentials in the form
required by rule 27 of the rules of procedure were
received by the Secretary of the Credentials Committee
regarding Uganda. The General Assembly is therefore
requested to adopt the draft resolution approving the
report of the Credentials Committee.
Finally, I should like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Committee and to the Secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The President: The General Assembly will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Credentials of representatives to the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly”, recommended by the
Credentials Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/132).
The President: The representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has asked to speak in explanation
of position on the resolution just adopted. I remind

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-43158 (E)

*1643158*

A/71/PV.61

members that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus on the resolution
just adopted. However, I should like to express my
delegation’s reservation on those parts of the report
contained in document A/71/670 and the resolution that
may be construed as recognition of the Israeli regime.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 3?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of seven members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/641)
The President: Pursuant to General Assembly
decision 42/450, of 17 December 1987, and upon
nomination by the Economic and Social Council, the
Assembly elects the members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
In that connection, the Assembly has before it a
note by the Secretary-General contained in document
A/71/641, which contains the nominations by the
Economic and Social Council to fill the vacancies
in the Committee that will occur as a result of the
expiration, on 31 December 2016, of the terms of office
of Benin, China, Ethiopia, Haiti, Japan, Morocco and
the Republic of Korea. Those States are eligible for
immediate re-election.
I should like to remind members that, after 1 January
2017, the following States will remain members of the
Committee: Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cuba, Equatorial Guinea,
France, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Italy, Namibia,
Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, the Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Zimbabwe. Therefore, those
25 States are not eligible in this election.
2/28

12/12/2016

I should now like to inform members that the
following States have been nominated by the Economic
and Social Council: Egypt, Eritrea and Senegal for
the three seats among the African States; Bangladesh,
China and the Republic of Korea for the three seats
among the Asia-Pacific States; and Haiti for the one
seat among the Latin American and Caribbean States.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot and there
shall be no nominations. However, I should like to
recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly decision
34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing with the
secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs when the
number of candidates corresponds to the number of seats
to be filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The President: The number of States nominated
from among the African States, the Asia-Pacific States
and the Latin American and Caribbean States is equal to
the number of seats to be filled in each of those groups.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes to
declare those States nominated by the Economic and
Social Council, namely, Bangladesh, China, Egypt,
Eritrea, Haiti, the Republic of Korea and Senegal,
elected members of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2017?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate the States that have
been elected members of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination.
Members are reminded that the Economic and
Social Council postponed the nominations of one
member from the Western European and other States
for a term beginning on the date of election and
expiring on 31 December 2017, and one member, also
from the Western European and other States, for a
term beginning on the date of election and expiring on
31 December 2018. The General Assembly will be in a
position to act on those vacancies upon nomination by
the Economic and Social Council.
16-43158

12/12/2016

We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 114.
Agenda item 88
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/322)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.35)
The President: I now invite Mr. Yukiya Amano,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, to introduce the report of the Agency for the
year 2015.
Mr. Amano (International Atomic Energy Agency):
Let me begin by offering my warmest congratulations
to Mr. António Guterres, who was sworn in today as
United Nations Secretary-General. I wish Mr. Guterres
every success in his important new role, and I look
forward to working closely with him. I also pay tribute
to the outgoing Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon. I
wish him health and happiness in future.
This year, the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) began celebrating its sixtieth anniversary.
From the 26 countries that ratified the Statute of the
IAEA in 1957, we have grown into an organization
with 168 member States that spans the globe. Our
mission is “Atoms for Peace and Development”, and
our membership continues to grow. The Agency has
helped to improve the health and prosperity of millions
of people by making nuclear science and technology
available in health care, energy, food and agriculture,
industry and other areas. IAEA inspectors contribute
to international peace and security by verifying that
nuclear material is used only for peaceful purposes.
Over the years, we have dealt with some of the most
critical issues on the international agenda. Those include
nuclear verification in Iraq, Iran and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. I will say more about that
important area of our work in a moment. First, let me
note that the past 60 years have demonstrated that
nuclear science and technology play a significant role in
supporting the goal of sustainable development. Today
the Agency is active in helping countries to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals, including those
concerning poverty and hunger, human health, energy,
climate change and the protection of the oceans.
Our Technical Cooperation Programme is the
primary mechanism for the delivery of IAEA services to

A/71/PV.61

Member States. This year, our work included assisting
countries in the Western Hemisphere in responding to
the outbreak of the Zika virus. Our research into the
ways of adapting the sterile-insect technique against
the Aedes mosquito, which transmits Zika, has been
intensified. Last month, I visited Brazil to learn
about its efforts to combat Zika and the impact of the
assistance that the IAEA is providing.
Improving access to effective cancer treatment in
developing countries remains a high priority for the
IAEA. Through activities such as our Programme of
Action for Cancer Therapy, we help countries to devise
comprehensive cancer-control programmes. Real
progress has been made in the availability of cancer
treatment in recent years in Africa. In particular,
new specialist cancer centres have been established.
Radiation oncologists and medical physicists return
home after receiving intensive training abroad with
the support of the Agency. However, the needs remain
great, and the Agency will maintain its focus on
cancer control. We are an active partner in the United
Nations Joint Global Programme on Cervical Cancer
Prevention and Control, which aims to reduce cervical
cancer mortality in participating countries by 25 per
cent by 2025. Our role in that important programme is
to improve access to radiation therapy.
The first international conference on the IAEA
Technical Cooperation Programme will take place in
Vienna from 30 May to 1 June next year. The aim is to
ensure greater understanding of our work on assisting
sustainable development. I encourage all countries
to participate.
Capacity-building is of vital importance in all
areas of the work of the IAEA. Since 1958, more
than 48,000 scientists and engineers have held
fellowships and scientific visitor positions through
the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, both at
the Agency’s laboratories and in the facilities of our
partners around the world. Many of those scientists and
engineers went on to play a key role in capacity-building
in nuclear science in their countries. In recent years, I
have reported to the General Assembly on our plans
to modernize our nuclear applications laboratories near
Vienna. The laboratories are the engine of much of the
technical support that we provide to Member States. I
am pleased to inform the Assembly that the construction
of the first of two new buildings, the Insect Pest Control
Laboratory, has begun. The construction of the second
will start soon.

16-431583/28

A/71/PV.61

When I first took office, I stated that nuclear power
should not be the preserve of developed countries and
that developing countries should also be able to use
it. Nuclear power can make a significant contribution
to reducing greenhouse-gas emissions and improving
energy security, while also delivering energy in the
large and growing quantities needed for development.
There are now 450 nuclear power reactors in operation
in 30 countries, and 60 reactors are under construction.
Approximately 30 developing countries are considering
introducing nuclear power. If countries opt for nuclear
power, then we will support them actively at every step
of their journey so that they can use it safely, securely
and sustainably. The first of four nuclear power reactors
in the United Arab Emirates is expected to go online in
2017.
The Agency participated in side events at the United
Nations Climate Change Conference in Marrakesh,
Morocco in November. In addition to highlighting
the benefits of nuclear power in reducing greenhouse
gases, Agency experts explained the support that we
provide to Member States in using nuclear and isotopic
techniques to tackle serious environmental challenges,
such as soil erosion, pollution and deteriorating water
quality. An IAEA ministerial conference on nuclear
power in the twenty-first century will take place in
Abu Dhabi from 30 October to 1 November 2017. The
construction of the IAEA low-enriched uranium bank
in Kazakhstan is proceeding on schedule. Kazakhstan
expects that the storage facility will be commissioned
and ready to receive low-enriched uranium in the
second half of 2017.
Turning now to nuclear safely, we have begun
work on the Nuclear Safety Review 2017, which will be
presented to our Board of Governors in March 2017. It
will reflect lessons learned from experience in nuclear
safety and identify priorities for our future work in order
to strengthen safety. We plan to give increased attention
to issues such as the safety of radioactive sources used in
industry, health care and other non-power applications.
There is widespread recognition that the world can
never be complacent about nuclear safety and that a
robust safety culture must be maintained everywhere.
The IAEA is the global platform for strengthening
nuclear security. Countries increasingly seek our help
in minimizing the risk of nuclear and other radioactive
material falling into the hands of terrorists. Last week,
the second IAEA International Conference on Nuclear
Security took place at the ministerial level in Vienna. It
4/28

12/12/2016

brought together around 2,000 participants, including
more than 40 ministers from more than 130 Member
States. The Ministerial Declaration that they adopted
welcomed the positive impact of the IAEA’s increasing
nuclear security efforts.
A key nuclear security instrument, the Amendment
to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, finally came into force in May — 11 years
after it was adopted. I encourage all countries to adhere
to the Convention and its amendment.
I will now turn to nuclear verification. The IAEA
implements safeguards in 181 States, 174 of which
have Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements in force.
As Director General, I have encouraged countries to
implement the additional protocol, which is a powerful
verification tool that gives the Agency greater access
to information and locations. The number of countries
with Additional Protocols in force has risen from 93 in
2009 to 129 today.
The Agency worked from 2003 onwards to
verify Iran’s nuclear programme. Our work was
indispensable in paving the way for the diplomatic
breakthrough achieved last year in the form of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). It is a
very important agreement that represents a clear gain
for nuclear verification in Iran. We are now verifying
and monitoring Iran’s implementation of its nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA. That work will
continue for many years. In order for the agreement to
be successful, the full implementation by Iran of its
nuclear-related commitments is essential.
I remain seriously concerned about the nuclear
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, which has conducted two more nuclear tests
this year. I again call upon the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to comply fully with its obligations
under Security Council resolutions, to cooperate
promptly with the Agency and to resolve all outstanding
issues. The Agency maintains its readiness to play an
essential role in verifying the nuclear programme of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In the case of Syria, the Assembly may recall that,
in May 2011, I reported that it was very likely that a
building destroyed at the Deir ez-Zor site was a nuclear
reactor that should have been declared to the Agency
(see A/66/PV.48). I again urge Syria to cooperate fully
with the Agency in connection with unresolved issues.
16-43158

12/12/2016

In recent years, the Agency has demonstrated its
ability to successfully manage large-scale projects. We
have responded swiftly to crises, such as the Ebola and
Zika viruses. We significantly increased the proportion
of women in senior positions. Nonetheless, more needs
to be done in that area.
Work is now well under way on the Agency’s
programme and budget for 2018-2019. We remain very
conscious of the continued financial constraints of many
Member States and have been actively implementing
efficiency measures in order to ensure optimal use of
our limited resources. Nevertheless, new and growing
demand from Member States for the Agency’s services
will require a modest increase in our budget.
The IAEA will face many challenges in all areas
of its work in the coming years. I am confident that,
thanks to the high calibre of our staff and the strong
support of our member States in providing the resources
we need, we will continue to deliver the high standards
of service that our member States expect.
The President: I thank the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency for introducing
the Agency’s report.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.35.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me first start by
thanking the outgoing Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his sterling work at the helm of the United
Nations. I also welcome Mr. António Guterres and
pledge our support and commitment to working with
him as he leads the Organization.
We fully welcome the statement you made,
Mr. President, at the outset of today’s proceedings,
which ably underscored the importance of the General
Assembly and its role in the world today. I would also
like to express my delegation’s sincere appreciation
to the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano, for his
succinct presentation of the IAEA 2015 report (see
A/71/322) and for providing valuable updates on the
Agency’s 2016 activities.
South Africa fully supports the priorities and
work of the IAEA, including the progress achieved
by the Agency during the 2015 period. In that regard,
South Africa has always maintained that the Agency’s
nuclear applications in areas such as agriculture,
crop production, food security, human health, water

A/71/PV.61

resource management, nuclear technology and
animal health contribute to achieving socioeconomic
development in developing countries, which assist
those countries — particularly African States — in
their efforts to implement the Sustainable Development
Goals. In that context, South Africa reiterates the
support shared by many Member States for the IAEA
to continue to assist developing countries, particularly
in Africa, to enhance the benefits that could be derived
from the peaceful use of nuclear science and technology.
Furthermore, South Africa wishes to underscore
the central role played by the Agency in implementing
its safeguards verification system, which plays an
essential role in verifying the peaceful nature of
nuclear energy programmes. As the only country to
voluntarily dismantle its nuclear-weapons programme,
with the assistance and under the guidance of the IAEA,
South Africa can attest to the indispensable role of the
Agency’s safeguards system.
South Africa is extremely honoured to chair the
Board of Governors of the IAEA this year, represented
by Mr. Tebogo Seokolo, our Ambassador based in
Vienna. It is my pleasure, under agenda item 88, to
introduce to the General Assembly the draft resolution
entitled “Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency” (A/71/L.35).
My delegation conducted two consultations, one
in Vienna on 21 November and the other in New York
on 29 November. The draft resolution is presented
with only technical updates from last year’s resolution
70/10. This draft resolution, which is adopted by the
General Assembly annually, is based on a longstanding
cooperation agreement between the United Nations and
the Agency, which was entered into in 1957.
It is my delegation’s view that the purpose of the
discussion today — the current draft resolution — gives
the general membership of the United Nations a unique
occasion to be kept abreast of the activities the Agency
has undertaken during the reporting year, as well as an
opportunity to pledge their support for the continued
work of the Agency.
In conclusion, the draft resolution, inter alia, takes
note of the decisions adopted by the IAEA General
Conference at its sixtieth annual regular session,
from 26 to 30 September. The draft resolution further
reaffirms the indispensable role of the Agency in
encouraging and assisting in the development and
practical application of atomic energy for peaceful

16-431585/28

A/71/PV.61

uses, in techonology transfer to developing countries
and in nuclear safety, verification and security matters.
Lastly, the draft resolution calls on Member States “to
continue to support activities of the Agency”.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Association
countries Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
We are pleased to support the draft resolution
(A/71/L.35) on the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), a report that again reaffirms
the indispensable role of the Agency with regard to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and in assisting
the development and practical application of atomic
energy for peaceful uses, as well as in technology
transfer and in nuclear verification, safety and security.
We also note with satisfaction the amount of strong
support that was expressed for the Agency’s work.
The EU is fully committed to promoting
universal adherence to nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament agreements. We regard the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as
the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime, as the essential foundation for the pursuit of
nuclear disarmament in accordance with article VI of
the NPT and as vital for further development of nuclear
energy applications for peaceful purposes. We call
upon States that have not yet done so to join the Treaty
as non-nuclear-weapon States.
The EU reaffirms its full support for the
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems in the Middle
East, as agreed by NPT States parties in a resolution
on the Middle East during the 1995 Review Conference
and as agreed in the 2010 NPT outcome document.
The IAEA safeguards system is a fundamental
component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the
6/28

12/12/2016

NPT. We underline the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in cases of non-compliance. The EU
further recognizes the serious proliferation challenges
that continue to be a threat to international security and
the need to find peaceful and diplomatic solutions to
them.
More than a year after the conclusion of the
historic agreement between the E3/EU+3 and Iran
on Iran’s nuclear programme, the EU welcomes the
ongoing implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). This agreement highlights
the importance of effective multilateralism and
international cooperation, conducted within the
framework of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
IAEA Board of Governors resolutions and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Côte d’Ivoire), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The EU reiterates the need for Iran to strictly
adhere to all its commitments under the JCPOA and
to cooperate fully and in timely manner with the
IAEA. The EU restates that the early ratification of the
additional protocol is essential. The EU fully supports
the IAEA’s long-term mission of verification and
monitoring of Iran’s nuclear related commitments and
recalls the importance of ensuring the necessary means
for the Agency to carry out its role.
The EU is deeply concerned about the protracted
and serious challenges to the non-proliferation regime
posed by the Syrian Arab Republic and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The latter is the only State
to have conducted nuclear explosive tests in the twentyfirst century, the most recent one on 9 September, which
the EU condemned in the strongest terms. Its illegal
activities seriously undermine peace and security in
and beyond the region and aggravate tensions on the
Korean peninsula to the detriment of all. We urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply with
all the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013), 2094
(2013), 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016).
The
comprehensive
safeguards
agreement,
together with the additional protocol, constitutes the
current IAEA verification standard. We call for their
universalization without delay. The EU supports the
continued efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of
Agency safeguards through the further development
and application of the State-level concept, enhanced
16-43158

12/12/2016

capabilities of analytical services information analysis
and technologies. In particular, the EU is convinced
that the consistent and universal application of the
State-level concept further strengthens the efficiency
and effectiveness of the IAEA comprehensive
safeguards system, and therefore contributes to global
non-proliferation efforts.
The EU and its member States attach the utmost
importance to the highest standards of nuclear safety
being implemented and continuously improved in the
EU and promoted internationally. The Council of the
European Union adopted several directives to strengthen
the safety framework for nuclear installations, and
they continue to be implemented by the EU and its
member States. The Vienna Declaration on Nuclear
Safety sets forth principles similar to the principles of
our Nuclear Safety Directive, and we will give serious
attention to the implementation of the decisions taken
in the Vienna Declaration, inter alia, in the preparation
for and participation in future review meetings of the
Convention on Nuclear Safety. The EU and its member
States emphasize the importance of the implementation
of the report entitled Building on the Action Plan on
Nuclear Safety. A clear sense of nuclear safety priorities
will help the Agency ensure that its work adds value
where it is most needed, does not duplicate activities
undertaken elsewhere and makes the best use of its
resources.
In the framework of its strategy against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the EU is
actively supporting Security Council resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1887 (2009), as well as other international
initiatives, such as the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, the Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction
and the informal Nuclear Security Contact Group,
which contribute to strengthening nuclear security as
the EU was supportive of the Nuclear Security Summit
process. Out of €260 million dedicated to chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) risk
mitigation worldwide, more than €100 million for the
period from 2014 to 2020 has been allocated to the EU’s
regional CBRN Centres of Excellence Initiative.
The EU strongly supports IAEA activities in the
area of nuclear security and is, together with its member
States, among the main contributors to the Nuclear
Security Fund. In that connection, €40 million from EU
funds and another €45 million from EU member States
have been contributed to the Nuclear Security Fund

A/71/PV.61

to date, to the benefit of approximately 100 countries.
We intend to continue to support the IAEA’s work by
adding another €9 million for the coming three years
through a EU Council decision.
Effective physical protection is of the utmost
importance to prevent nuclear material from falling
into the hands of terrorists and proliferators and
protect nuclear facilities against malicious acts. The
EU welcomes the entry into force, in May, of the
2005 amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, which is an important
milestone on the path to strengthening nuclear security
globally. As a priority, we will focus our efforts on the
effective implementation of the amended Convention
and its universalization. The entry into force of the
amendment should have its adequate reflection in the
IAEA’s nuclear security plan and in the future activities
of the Agency. The EU further calls on States that
have not yet done so to make a political commitment
to use effectively the recommendations set out in the
IAEA Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of
Radioactive Sources, and supplementary Guidance on
the Import and Export of Radioactive Sources.
The EU remains firmly committed to the benefits of
multilateral approaches and welcomes the fact that the
Agency has started with the procurement process for the
low-enrichment uranium (LEU) acquisition required
for the establishment of the IAEA LEU Bank. We are
therefore pleased to announce that, on 15 November,
the Council of the European Union adopted a decision
in support of the IAEA LEU Bank amounting to an
additional contribution of €4.3 million, in addition to
the €20 million already contributed, for the purpose of
acquiring LEU.
Finally, the European Union attaches the utmost
importance to the Agency’s Technical Cooperation
Programme and the role of the Agency in the responsible
development of the peaceful applications of nuclear
technology in the areas of, inter alia, human health, food
and agriculture, water resources, the environment, the
preservation of cultural heritage, nuclear and radiation
safety and nuclear energy. The IAEA’s nuclear science
and applications laboratories in Seibersdorf, Austria,
contribute to essential work in that respect, and we
welcome the Director General’s initiative with regard
to the modernization of the laboratories.
The EU also recognizes the valuable contribution
that nuclear technology can provide in achieving the

16-431587/28

A/71/PV.61

Sustainable Development Goals. The EU supports both
the IAEA and IAEA member States in the peaceful
uses of nuclear technology with a total amount of
approximately €150 million per year, as well as through
technical expertise. The EU has allocated €225 million
over the period from 2014 to 2020 for the promotion of
nuclear safety, radiation protection and the application
of efficient and effective safeguards of nuclear material
in third countries.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation congratulates Mr. António Guterres
on his taking office as Secretary-General. We express
our gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his dedication and outstanding work in the service of
the United Nations.
The Chinese delegation welcomes the report (see
A/71/322) presented by Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), on the work of the Agency.
Over the past year, the IAEA has effectively
fulfilled its obligations under its Statute and has made
great progress in promoting the use of nuclear energy
and technology, strengthening nuclear safety and
security and maintaining nuclear non-proliferation.
China appreciates the hard work of the Agency.
As we speak, there is a growing momentum in
the global development of nuclear energy and an everbroadening application of nuclear technology, which
has benefited an increasing number of countries.
Global nuclear governance has spread. Meanwhile, the
international community is still facing many challenges,
such as balancing the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and
strengthening nuclear safety and nuclear security in
practical ways. China looks to the Agency to fully carry
out its duties in accordance with the objectives of the
Statute of the IAEA and focus on the following aspects.
First, to promote technical cooperation in the
nuclear area and share the outcomes of nuclear-energy
development, the Agency should increase its investment
of resources, deepen cooperation on nuclear energy and
nuclear technology, and further increase its technical
assistance to Member States, especially developing
countries. All Member States, particularly developed
countries, should lend further support to technical
cooperation so as to ensure that adequate resources are
made available to the Agency.
8/28

12/12/2016

Secondly, to maintain the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and continue to reinforce the
comprehensive safeguards system — as the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime is currently
confronted with severe challenges — the international
community should resolutely reject double standards
and safeguard the authority of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime. The Agency should continue
to consolidate the comprehensive safeguards system
and ensure its universality and effectiveness on the
basis of ensuring fairness and objectiveness. We hope
that the IAEA secretariat will continue dialogue and
the exchange of information with Member States on the
implementation of safeguards at the State level.
Thirdly, to play the core leading role in promoting
global nuclear safety and nuclear security, the Agency
should serve as a solid platform for international
cooperation on nuclear safety and nuclear security.
China welcomes the Agency’s continued leadership at
the heart of relevant international processes through
coordinating and integrating relevant resources and
serving Member States with its unique expertise.
Fourthly, the IAEA should uphold objectivity and
justice and take a responsible attitude in the process
of addressing regional hotspot nuclear issues. China
commends the Agency for its active role in facilitating
the conclusion and implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
issue. We support the Agency in playing a constructive
role in the peaceful resolution of other regional nuclear
issues through dialogue and consultation, strictly in
line with its mandate.
China has all along been committed to promoting
global nuclear governance. Our cooperation with the
Agency has deepened over the past 30 years and yielded
fruitful results. At the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit,
Chinese President Xi Jinping elaborated on China’s
proposition for enhanced nuclear security from four
points of view, namely, strengthening political input,
State responsibility, international cooperation and
nuclear security. He put forward China’s initiative aimed
at deepening global cooperation and further facilitating
the creation of an international nuclear security system
that takes into account fairness and cooperation that
benefits everyone. Guided by President Xi’s remarks,
China will continue its unwavering efforts to upgrade
its nuclear security, and to join hands with the Agency
and other Member States to realize the goal of benefiting
humankind though nuclear energy development.
16-43158

12/12/2016

Mrs. Bruell-Melchior (Monaco) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to add its voice in sincerely
congratulating the new Secretary-General-designate,
Mr. António Guterres. We would like to assure him
of our full support. We also pay tribute to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his outstanding dedication
over the past 10 years.
My delegation would like to commend the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano, for his presentation of the
Agency’s activities during the past year. The Agency’s
continued role in nuclear safety and security and the
peaceful use of nuclear power is central in the context
of the new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the implementation of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. Indeed, the contribution of the
IAEA is essential in agriculture, food security, health
care, drinking-water management, energy and soil
management. For that reason, the theme of the sixtieth
IAEA Scientific Forum this year focused on the theme
“Nuclear technology for sustainable development”,
a very relevant topic. At the forum, Prince Albert II
recalled his commitment and that of the Principality to
build a peaceful and better world by harnessing nuclear
applications for sustainable development.
The Principality hosts the IAEA’s Environmental
Laboratories. Together with the Agency, we share the
conviction that science will inevitably contribute to the
attainment of global objectives. The Environmental
Laboratories also host the Ocean Acidification
International Coordination Centre (OA-ICC). Ocean
acidification, which is one of the consequences of
climate change and rising ocean and sea temperatures,
particularly affects marine species, such as corals and
shell organisms and limestone skeletons. The effects
of ocean acidification are undeniable, especially for
coastal populations and for global food security.
Since 2010 the IAEA, its OA-ICC and the Scientific
Centre of Monaco have been convening international
workshops in the Principality specifically dedicated to
the socioeconomic impacts of ocean acidification. The
issues relating to fisheries, aquaculture, tourism and the
socioeconomic adaptation of coastal populations have
been particularly highlighted. The fourth workshop
will be held from 15 to 17 October 2017.
Marine pollution is another major challenge to the
health of our oceans and seas. Within the framework
of the United Nations Environment Programme

A/71/PV.61

Mediterranean Action Plan, two courses have
been organized by the IAEA at its Environmental
Laboratories in Monaco to support national marine
pollution monitoring programmes in our region. The aim
of those courses was to strengthen analytical capacities
to detect the presence of pollutants in marine samples.
Public-health issues, particularly the fight against
cancer, are also priorities for the Agency, as the Director
General mentioned. Monaco is therefore making a
financial contribution to the IAEA Programme of
Action for Cancer Therapy.
In conclusion, Member States may rest assured
of our commitment to fully support both the Agency
and the Environmental Laboratories. My delegation
will once again co-sponsor draft resolution A/71/L.35,
which was introduced earlier.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We commend the leadership
and contribution of Director General Amano to the
work of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and thank him for presenting its annual report
(see A/71/322). Pakistan is one of the sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.35, which will be adopted later today.
For almost six decades, the IAEA has worked
successfully as a catalyst for enhancing the contribution
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity
throughout the world. The Agency deserves appreciation
for helping Member States advance their development
priorities, while ensuring that nuclear technology is
used in a safe, secure and sustainable manner.
We note with interest the Agency’s projections for
2030, which have been readjusted vis-à-vis projections
made in 2014. Those projections, coupled with the fact
that the global generating capacity of nuclear energy
had reached 382.9 gigawatts by the end of the year
2015, reinforce the trend of increasing global nuclear
power capacity. We share the Agency’s assessment that
nuclear energy will continue to be a preferable source
of viable, safe and sustainable alternative, particularly
in countries with fast-growing energy needs.
Pakistan is a strong advocate of utilizing nuclear
technology for peace, progress and prosperity for all. As
the sixth most-populous nation in the world, Pakistan
has made socioeconomic development a major priority
for its Government. For more than 55 years, we have
sought to enhance the application of nuclear technology
for socioeconomic development. The IAEA has been
a valuable partner in those efforts, including through

16-431589/28

A/71/PV.61

its Technical Cooperation Programme. For our part,
we have also contributed to the Programme in the form
of training, the provision of experts and the hosting of
seminars and workshops.
Civil nuclear-power generation is an imperative
necessity for Pakistan in order to meet its exponentially
increasing energy needs and to support sustained
economic growth and industrial development in the years
to come. Our energy requirements are expected to grow
over the next two decades; therefore, our national goal
is to expand our nuclear power capacity significantly.
With more than five decades of a safe, secure
and safeguarded civil nuclear programme behind it,
Pakistan has always focused on developing a strong
safety and regulatory infrastructure. We continue
to improve nuclear safety and physical protection
measures at our nuclear power plants and research
reactors in accordance with the best international
standards, including the IAEA’s own safety standards
and security guidance.
Pakistan believes that the focus on nuclear safety
and security should further enhance international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
Confidence in the safety and security of nuclear and
radiological materials and associated facilities should
facilitate collaboration in health, industry, agriculture
and other sectors.
Our four decades of experience in safely securing
and operating nuclear power plants have not made
us complacent. On the contrary, we remain mindful
of safety and security and consider them highly
important. All of our nuclear power plants are under
IAEA safeguards.
Pakistan’s ratification of the 2005 amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material is another manifestation of our confidence in
our national nuclear security regime — a regime at par
with contemporary international standards. Pakistan
is also party to the Nuclear Safety Convention, the
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident
and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a
Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency.
We have been consistent supporters of the objectives
of resolution 1540 (2004) and have regularly reported
on national implementation of its related obligations.
Those reports detail the measures taken by Pakistan on
nuclear and radiological security, as well as controls over
10/28

12/12/2016

transfer of sensitive materials and technologies. Pakistan
has also been an active partner of the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism since its inception, in
2007, and has contributed to the development of its
guidelines. We are planning to host an Initiative event
in the near future. We also voluntarily contribute to the
IAEA information resources, including its Incident and
Trafficking Database, and actively participated in, and
contributed to, the Nuclear Security Summit process.
It was useful in enhancing awareness and articulating
voluntary political commitments.
Over the past decade, Pakistan’s nuclear regulatory
mechanism has grown into an effective system,
underpinned by a robust infrastructure. The Pakistan
Nuclear Regulatory Authority (PNRA) has based
its regulations on the IAEA safety standards. The
Authority also offers itself to independent peer reviews.
The PNRA is closely associated with the IAEA, both
as a recipient and as a contributor. The Authority has
established a nuclear institute of safety and security for
facilitating national and regional training courses on
nuclear security. The institute is equipped with state-ofthe-art laboratories for training in nuclear radiation
safety, nuclear security and physical protection.
Since 2014, Pakistan’s centre of excellence on
nuclear security has become an important regional
hub for imparting training and sharing best practices
in the realm of nuclear security. Earlier this year, the
centre hosted the annual meeting of the International
Network for Nuclear Security Training and Support
Centres, the first time the meeting was held outside
IAEA headquarters. That was a reflection of our robust
partnership with the Agency and our strong credentials
in the realm of nuclear security. We also hosted an
IAEA regional training course that was attended by
participants from 13 regional countries. With the
IAEA, our aim is to further develop and expand those
training programmes to cover other technical areas
with broader participation.
Besides nuclear power, Pakistan has harnessed
nuclear technology for socioeconomic development.
In the health sector, the Pakistan Atomic Energy
Commission is providing diagnostics and treatment
through its network of 18 oncology hospitals, where
80 per cent of the country’s cancer patients are
treated every year. More such hospitals are planned.
Pakistan has also established educational and training
programmes in radiation oncology, nuclear medicine
and medical physics. We are taking part in the IAEA’s
16-43158

12/12/2016

A/71/PV.61

programme of inter-calibration of radiation standards
and are providing expert and analytical services in the
field to IAEA member States in the region.

draft resolution on the report of the IAEA (A/71/L.35).
I would like to make three brief points on the Agency’s
work.

For a country of more than 180 million people,
food security is critical. Four agricultural centres have
been engaged in a variety of research and development
activities, leading to higher yield of better quality
agricultural products and livestock. With a sizeable
civilian nuclear programme and decades of experience
in nuclear operations in power generation, health,
medicine, agriculture, biotechnology and industrial
applications, Pakistan is uniquely placed to offer
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to
developing countries under the IAEA safeguards.

First, Singapore reaffirms the IAEA’s indispensable
role in ensuring a strong and sustainable nuclear-safety
framework worldwide. This is an issue of concern to all
States, not merely to States with nuclear installations,
because nuclear accidents know no boundaries. We
therefore welcome the Agency’s commitment to
strengthening IAEA safety standards and assisting
Member States in building up the necessary capabilities.
However, Member States themselves must also invest
in the never-ending effort to maintain and strengthen
nuclear safety. Singapore will cooperate with the IAEA
and Member States, where we can, to that end.

Pakistan recognizes the important role played by
the IAEA verification regime. We share the view that
all States should fully comply with their respective
safeguards obligations. We have fully complied with our
obligations pursuant to our Safeguards Agreement with
the IAEA. Implementation of the regulatory aspects of
the Agency is an important area in which safeguards
play a key role. At the same time, the promotional
activities of the Agency are of the highest priority
for developing nations. Equitable allocation of extrabudgetary resources is needed for both the safeguards
and technical cooperation programmes of the Agency.
As a State with strong nuclear-supplier capabilities
and an effective national export-control regime,
Pakistan has applied for membership in the Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG). Pakistan views its membership
in the export-control regimes, particularly the NSG, as
a mutually beneficial proposition. Pakistan’s exportcontrol regime is on par with the standards followed
by the NSG, the Missile Technology Control Regime
and the Australia Group. Pakistan has also declared its
voluntary adherence to NSG guidelines. We therefore
reiterate our call for an equitable, non-discriminatory
and criteria-based approach to promote civil nuclear
cooperation and membership of export controls
regimes, in particular that of the NSG.
Mr. Khoo (Singapore): On behalf of my delegation,
I thank Director General Yukiya Amano for the
comprehensive annual report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (see A/71/322).
Singapore has consistently supported the three
pillars of the IAEA’s work, namely, safety and security,
science and technology and safeguards and verification.
We are pleased to once again be a sponsor of this year’s

Secondly, Singapore supports the IAEA’s central
role in fostering international cooperation to enhance
nuclear security. We welcome the good progress over the
past year in strengthening the global nuclear-security
framework and the international non-proliferation
regime. One significant milestone was the entry into
force of the 2005 amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, in May.
Singapore is committed to fully implementing the
amended Convention. We also support the IAEA’s
efforts in implementing the amended Convention.
We are committed to supporting international
counter-proliferation efforts. To that end, we opened
our first border laboratory, the Protective, Analytical
and Assessment Facility, in July. The facility conducts
radiological and nuclear detection analysis to strengthen
our capacity to interdict illicit activities at our border.
Director General Amano was among the first visitors
to the facility during his working visit to Singapore
in August.
We also welcome the progress of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We encourage
all parties to continue fulfilling their respective
obligations in good faith, because the full and effective
implementation of the JCPOA for the entire duration
of the agreement is critical not just for the signatories,
but for the entire international community. We also
reiterate our full support to the IAEA in its monitoring
and verification of Iran’s nuclear commitments set out
in the JCPOA and Security Council resolution 2231
(2015).
Thirdly, Singapore values the IAEA’s activities in
delivering technical assistance for the peaceful uses

16-4315811/28

A/71/PV.61

of nuclear technology in a safe and secure manner and
with safeguards, in particular to developing countries.
We commend the IAEA’s sustained efforts in making
nuclear science and technology available to help
Member States achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and overcome challenges such as the
spread of the Zika virus. Singapore supports the
IAEA’s efforts through the enhanced Singapore-IAEA
third-country training programme memorandum of
understanding, signed by Director General Amano
in 2015. We have hosted two regional workshops
since the signing of the enhanced memorandum. The
first workshop was on the sterile-insect technique in
November 2015, to help regional countries control
mosquito populations. The second workshop was held
on nuclear law in June 2016, to enhance the capacity of
regional countries to strengthen regulatory frameworks
for nuclear-related issues.
We also welcome the continued technical
cooperation between the IAEA and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Network of Regulatory Bodies
on Atomic Energy (ASEANTOM). ASEANTOM is
working closely with the IAEA on a regional technical
cooperation project to support the establishment of a
regional environmental radioactivity database and an
emergency preparedness and response framework.
Singapore looks forward to making further contributions
to capacity-building activities in the region, in areas
such as nuclear safety and emergency preparedness and
response, including through regional training events
hosted under our third-country training programme
memorandum of understanding,
Sixty years have passed since the establishment of
the IAEA. The IAEA is sometimes unfairly pigeonholed
into a nuclear watchdog role. But the IAEA is much
more than that. We should capitalize on the sixtieth
anniversary of the IAEA to build on Director General
Amano’s emphasis on atoms for peace and development,
and advance the positive contributions of the IAEA,
particularly to development and the Sustainable
Development Goals. Singapore stands ready to deepen
our cooperation and engagement with the IAEA to help
achieve that goal.
Mr. Hahn Chong-hee (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. Yukiya Amano, for the Agency’s 2015 report (see
A/71/322). As a founding member of the IAEA, the
Republic of Korea attaches great importance to the work
12/28

12/12/2016

of the IAEA and welcomes Director General Amano’s
continued service for an additional term of office.
Given the emphasis of the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session on accelerating the implementation
of the Sustainable Developments Goals (SDGs), my
delegation notes with satisfaction the IAEA’s ongoing
efforts to align its work with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. In particular, we appreciate
that the Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme
is well positioned to contribute actively to Member
States’ efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals in areas such as agriculture, human health, clean
air and water, affordable and clean energy, industry
and innovation, and climate change. As a contributor
to both the Technical Cooperation Fund and the extrabudgetary contributions for the Programme of Action
for Cancer Therapy, the Republic of Korea stresses the
need for sufficient funding of those programmes in
order to maximize their contribution to the achievement
of the SDG targets.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the fact that the
global nuclear community made further progress in
strengthening and improving nuclear safety in 2015.
The Director General’s report on the Fukushima Daiichi
accident, along with its five technical volumes and
the reports published on, and in connection with, the
IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, provides a rich
knowledge base and many lessons learned to aid us in
that essential endeavour. We hope that the data will be
applied by operators and regulators all over the world,
to their own circumstances. The Republic of Korea has
proposed a North-East Asia nuclear safety consultative
body to promote nuclear safety cooperation at the
regional level. The Korean Government will continue
to pursue that initiative with neighbouring countries.
With a substantial stake in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, the Republic of Korea strongly supports
the central and indispensable role of the Agency in
nuclear security. This is an important year for nuclear
security, with the entry into force of the amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, the successful hosting of the fourth and final
Nuclear Security Summit and the IAEA International
Conference on Nuclear Security in December. As
a Chair of the ministerial meeting of the 2016 IAEA
International Conference on Nuclear Security, as well
as the host country of the 2012 Seoul Nuclear Security
Summit, Korea is committed to working closely with
the international community to channel that resolve
16-43158

12/12/2016

into actions in order to ensure that the highest standards
of nuclear security are applied globally.
The conference addressed the evolution of nuclear
security in response to emerging threats such as
cyberterrorism. The Republic of Korea emphasizes
the importance of strengthening information security
at nuclear facilities and welcomes initiatives such as
the International Conference on Computer Security.
In that regard, the Republic of Korea will contribute
approximately €2.5 million to the IAEA’s cybersecurity
projects over the next three years.
Nuclear verification is a central pillar of the
Agency’s work and helps create the conditions for
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Given the vital
contribution of IAEA safeguards to international
peace and security, the Republic of Korea notes
with satisfaction that in 2015 the Agency continued
to enhance safeguards through, inter alia, the
implementation of State-level safeguards approaches.
We are encouraged by the growing acceptance of the
State-level concept and the Secretariat’s efforts to
update and expand the implementation of that approach
under integrated safeguards.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the progress
towards the resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue.
We note Iran’s continued implementation of the
transparency measures and its provisional application
of the Additional Protocol. We hope Iran will continue
to provide the level of cooperation necessary for the
Agency to conclude that all nuclear material in Iran is
limited to peaceful activities.
The Republic of Korea continues to urge Syria to
cooperate fully with the Agency in connection with
unresolved issues related to the Deir ez-Zor site and
other locations. My delegation remains particularly
concerned by allegations of a link between North Korea
and Syria’s undeclared construction of a nuclear reactor
at Deir ez-Zor. The object and purpose of safeguards to
assure the exclusively peaceful nature of Syria’s nuclear
programme demand that such serious allegations be
addressed by the competent safeguards authority.
This year North Korea conducted its fourth and
fifth nuclear tests, in disregard of the repeated warnings
of the international community. As noted in the IAEA
Director General’s report this year, North Korea has
refused all IAEA safeguards and inspections since
2009, while continuously pursuing the advancement
of its nuclear capabilities, including the activities in

A/71/PV.61

relation to the 5-megawatt reactor at Yongbyon and the
reprocessing campaign, which are in clear violation of
Security Council resolutions.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption by
consensus of the resolution on the implementation
of safeguards in North Korea at the sixtieth IAEA
General Conference, held this year, which condemned
North Korea’s five nuclear tests in the strongest terms.
We also welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016), which send a
further strong and unequivocal message against North
Korea’s nuclear development. The path North Korea
must take is clear: abandon all nuclear weapons and
existing nuclear programmes in a complete, verifiable
and irreversible manner, in accordance with the relevant
international norms.
In the light of its enduring support for the IAEA
work to achieve our common goal of atoms for peace
and development, the Republic of Korea is pleased to
mark the Agency’s sixtieth anniversary by joining the
other sponsors of draft resolution A/71/L.35, on the
report of the IAEA.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his
report (see A/71/322).
The Islamic Republic of Iran once again underlines
the role and responsibility of the IAEA in facilitating
the full realization of the inalienable right of all
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in the development,
research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, including their right to participate
in the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials
and scientific and technological information for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Recalling the statutory functions and primary
responsibility of the Agency to assist Member States
in the research on and practical application of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes, and appreciating its
related activities, Iran stresses the need for further
enhancement of such activities, particularly to meet
the expectations of developing Member States. In
that context, while taking into account the growing
applications of nuclear energy and the role it plays
in the socioeconomic development of societies, Iran
is determined to vigorously continue to exercise
its inalienable right to its development, research,

16-4315813/28

A/71/PV.61

production and use of nuclear energy, including the
development of a full national nuclear fuel cycle for
peaceful purposes.
With regard to the role and functions of the IAEA
in implementing the NPT Safeguards Agreements, Iran
would like to stress that all such activities should be
carried out in full conformity with the relevant legally
binding instruments and take into account the concerns
and interests of Member States, in particular by strict
observance of the principle of confidentiality.
With regard to the IAEA verification and
monitoring activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Director General of the IAEA, in all his past
four reports to the Board of Governors in 2016, has
certified Iran’s full compliance with its Safeguards
Agreement obligations and the complete fulfilment of
its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). While the Islamic Republic of Iran
has fully implemented its commitments, as verified by
the IAEA and acknowledged by all JCPOA participants,
other parties are also obliged to genuinely carry out all
of their commitments under the JCPOA and to refrain
from any action inconsistent with its letter, spirit and
content. The recent action by the United States in
extending sanctions against Iran clearly runs counter to
its commitments under the JCPOA. We urge the United
States Administration to swiftly resolve concerns that
that action has caused.
Iran has been, and will remain, fully committed
to the JCPOA as a multilateral instrument. However,
it is crystal-clear that ensuring the ongoing viability
of the JCPOA requires the full and timely fulfilment
by all JCPOA participants, not just Iran, of their
commitments. Indeed, it is in the interests of the
international community and all JCPOA participants.
Mrs. Mills (Jamaica): At the outset, my delegation
wishes to thank the Director General for his statement
and for his able stewardship of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). He can be assured of my
delegation’s continued full support.
As the first English-speaking country in the
Caribbean to join the IAEA, more than 50 years ago,
Jamaica greatly values its relationship with the Agency.
Since 1965, we have had a long and fruitful tradition
of cooperation with the IAEA, in keeping with the
importance we attach to the promotion of the peaceful
uses of nuclear technology and the application of a
safeguards regime for verification, safety and security.
14/28

12/12/2016

That cooperation has grown from strength to
strength and affords my Government an opportunity to
benefit from technical expertise of the IAEA in priority
areas related to our sustainable development efforts
in education, health and research. Those include, but
are not limited to, training courses, the development
of the Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy, the
re-establishment of nuclear medicine capacity in the
public sector and the conversion of the Safe LowPower Critical Experiment reactor in Jamaica from
highly enriched uranium to low-enriched uranium. The
commitment to working with Jamaica was reaffirmed
through a series of visits to Jamaica by senior IAEA
officials, including the Director General, whom we
had the pleasure of hosting for a series of ministerial
meetings earlier in 2016.
We are heartened by the increased membership of
Caribbean small island developing States in the Agency
and the continued willingness of the Agency to support
the sustainable development of the region, which
is closely linked to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We are confident that the level of
interest that has been shown bodes well for the further
deepening of that relationship.
The interlinked and mutually reinforcing nature
of the Sustainable Development Goals provide much
scope for the Agency’s vision for the peaceful use of
nuclear technology for sustainable development. My
delegation therefore reaffirms the commitment given
by our Minister of Science, Energy and Technology at
the sixtieth IAEA General Conference and its Scientific
Forum in 2016, of Jamaica’s continued cooperation and
support for the Agency’s work towards the fulfilment
of its mandate.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): Ukraine supports
the activities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in promoting the use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes. Our State positively views
the Agency’s activities in all main statutory areas:
nuclear safety and security, technical cooperation,
safeguards and nuclear verification. The Agency
contributes significantly to the achievement of global
development goals.
Nuclear power will remain an important option
to achieve energy security and the Sustainable
Development Goals in the twenty-first century.
Ukraine supports countries’ decisions to develop or
further expand civil nuclear-power programmes. In
16-43158

12/12/2016

our view, the main prerequisite for the peaceful use
of nuclear energy is the State’s commitment to the
non-proliferation regime and to the highest standards
of nuclear safety and security.
Ukraine, which currently has 15 operational
power units at four Ukrainian facilities, attaches great
importance to the worldwide implementation and
continuing improvement of the highest standards of
nuclear safety and security. Let me inform the Assembly
that over the past two years, Ukraine has approved and
significantly strengthened the national regime for the
physical protection of its facilities and material by
developing and introducing at all Ukrainian facilities
comprehensive plans of action in case of sabotage or
a crisis. We are also developing projects to modernize
the physical protection systems of nuclear facilities and
nuclear waste management facilities, which, inter alia,
have been incorporated in Ukraine’s integrated nuclear
security support plan for 2016-2018. Thus, Ukraine is
taking all measures necessary to ensure the highest
level of physical protection for its nuclear facilities and
material, fully assumes its international obligations in
the area of nuclear safety and security, and remains a
reliable partner in the nuclear sphere with one of the
largest nuclear-power programmes in Europe.
Ukraine reiterates its strong support for the Agency’s
Technical Cooperation Programme and values its role
in the responsible development of peaceful applications
of nuclear technology in the areas of human health, food
and agriculture, water management and strengthening
nuclear and radiation safety. The Technical Cooperation
Programme serves as a powerful tool for exchanging
nuclear knowledge and for capacity-building in member
States. Proceeding from the interests of Ukraine and
the European region, we believe that nuclear safety,
nuclear medicine, decommissioning, radioactive waste
management and nuclear security will be priority
thematic areas of IAEA technical cooperation in the
near future.
The Agency’s regional and national technical
cooperation projects have significantly contributed
to nuclear safety and the improvement of the overall
effectiveness of the peaceful use of nuclear energy in
Ukraine. In 2016 and 2017, Ukraine will implement
a number of the Agency’s national projects in
thematic areas such as improving the safety-related
non-conformity management system; establishing a
national centre of competence in biological dosimetry;
rendering assistance in decommissioning and

A/71/PV.61

radioactive waste management at the Chernobyl nuclear
power plant, as well as strengthening capabilities in
conducting a State review.
On 26 April, Ukraine and the world commemorated
the thirtieth anniversary of the accident at the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant, paying tribute to those
who mitigated the consequences of the catastrophe and
to its victims. Ukraine has declared 2016 as the year
of remembrance of the liquidators and victims of the
Chernobyl disaster. The disastrous implications of
the explosion rippled across Ukraine’s entire territory
and far beyond. More than 2,300 towns and villages
were contaminated with radioactive material. More
than 1.9 million Ukrainians have been recognized
as having suffered, including more than 418,000
children and 108,000 disabled persons. Over 35,000
Ukrainian families are receiving pensions because of
the Chernobyl-related loss of a breadwinner.
In that respect, I would like to announce that, in
order to decrease the nuclear contamination from
the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, on 29 November
Ukraine completed the installation of the arch over the
shelter object of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank our
international partners that have contributed funding
and assistance in finalizing the project.
The Chernobyl anniversary offers an important
opportunity to sharpen attention on the complex
problems of recovery, including the needs of the
affected areas, and mobilizing international assistance
to complement national mitigation efforts. It also serves
as an important reminder of the possible tragic results
and consequences of technological failure involving
human activity. Chernobyl’s catastrophe introduced
essential changes in many spheres of human activity
not only in Ukraine, but also on a worldwide scale.
The disaster had a serious political impact and changed
attitudes towards nuclear energy all over the world.
International regulations and standards for radioactive
protection, and national strategies for nuclear energy
development, nuclear safety and radioactive waste
management have been substantially revised.
The most important lesson learned from the
Chernobyl accident of April 1986 is the need to ensure
lasting improvements in nuclear and radiation safety
globally. Practical and theoretical knowledge gained
after the disaster at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant
was widely used by the expert community to address

16-4315815/28

A/71/PV.61

12/12/2016

the causes and consequences of the accident in 2011 at
the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in Japan.

recognized borders, including the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol.

Today Ukraine continues to cooperate with the
Agency on Chernobyl-related issues. In particular,
Ukraine is implementing a number of important national
projects in the framework of the 2016-2017 Technical
Cooperation Programme, including the project to
assist in the decommissioning of and radioactive waste
management at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant
site. Among regional projects for 2016-2017, Ukraine
attaches significant importance to implementing the
project to support radiological management of the areas
that were abandoned following the Chernobyl accident
and the dissemination of information related to the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant.

We recognize the Secretariat’s professional work
in preparing the IAEA annual report for 2015 (see
A/71/322), based on the norms of international law, the
Agency’s statute and respective safeguards agreements.
Ukraine believes that the annual report for 2015, prepared
by the Agency and approved by the Board of Governors
in June, remains consistent with international law and
with resolution 68/262, of 27 March 2014, concerning
the territorial integrity of Ukraine. We strongly object
to any steps, including within the framework of the
IAEA, to legitimize the temporary occupation of a part
of the sovereign Ukrainian territory of Crimea by the
Russian Federation.

Ukraine stands ready to actively cooperate with
the Agency on Chernobyl-related issues for the next
Technical Cooperation Programme project cycle
for 2018-2019 by further implementing, inter alia, a
national project aimed at supporting decommissioning
and radioactive waste management at the Chernobyl
nuclear power plant site and within the exclusion zone.

Mr. Perren (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Of
the many challenges the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has had to face this year, I would like to
highlight in particular the topic of nuclear security. Our
response to this challenge can be successful only if we
address nuclear security through a comprehensive and
exhaustive approach. The Agency is the best platform
for enhancing the plethora of efforts in nuclear security
and the many existing initiatives due to its almost
universal membership and unique expertise.

Ukraine recognizes the Agency’s leading role
in the nuclear non-proliferation regime. We reaffirm
our support for the activities of the Agency aimed at
strengthening the effectiveness and improving the
efficiency of the safeguards system and welcome the
efforts of the Agency with a view to preventing the
diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to
military purposes. Ukraine is and will remain committed
to the objectives of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and to fulfilling its obligations in
accordance with Ukraine’s Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and Additional Protocol thereto.
As a result of the productive cooperation between
the Government of Ukraine and the Agency throughout
2015, including Ukraine’s commitment to fulfilling
its international obligations and the State system for
accounting and control that was effectively introduced
in my country, the Agency was able to draw a broad
conclusion for Ukraine in 2015, in particular by
establishing the fact that all nuclear material in
Ukraine remained confined to peaceful activities. For
our part, Ukraine is determined to continue to fulfil its
obligations under the Agreement between Ukraine and
IAEA in accordance with the norms of international law
relating to all nuclear facilities and material located in
the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
16/28

After the latest Nuclear Security Summit in
Washington, D.C., this year, the Agency had the
opportunity to maintain the political momentum
and address the remaining gaps in the global nuclear
regime through its second International Conference
on Nuclear Security in December. In our view, the
ministerial declaration adopted at that conference after
long months of intense and difficult negotiations only
partially succeeded in sending a clear, ambitious and
forward-looking message.
While recognizing the fundamental responsibility
of States for nuclear security, we cannot ignore one
of its essential components, namely, the security of
the nuclear material used for military purposes. That
military material constitutes the vast majority — around
83 per cent — of all nuclear material worldwide and
consists largely of the most sensitive material, including
highly enriched uranium and reprocessed plutonium.
Yet such military material is not covered by any
multilateral agreement. We regret the absence of any
specific reference to military material in the ministerial
declaration, which sends the wrong message to the
international community that where nuclear security is
16-43158

12/12/2016

concerned, the 17 per cent of nuclear material used for
civilian purposes is the only issue worth addressing.
Switzerland will remain committed to continuously
maintaining and further strengthening the security
of all nuclear material, whatever its purpose. We will
continue to support the important work done by the
Agency in that field, and it is my pleasure to announce
that my country will make a special contribution to the
Nuclear Security Fund.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me begin by thanking
Director General Yukiya Amano for introducing the
annual report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (see A/71/322). Japan would also like to
warmly welcome Turkmenistan as a new member of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
For the past 60 years, the IAEA has supported the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) regime by promoting peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and working to secure nuclear non-proliferation.
Under Mr. Amano’s strong leadership, the Agency
has played a critical role in monitoring and verifying
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), addressing North Korea’s nuclear
and missile development and advancing development
goals through the Atoms for Peace and Development
initiative. In order to continue those efforts, the
Government of Japan supports the re-election of
Mr. Amano as Director General of the IAEA.
Japan strongly supports Director General Amano’s
Atoms for Peace and Development and commends the
IAEA for its contribution to global socioeconomic
development through its unique expertise in the
application of nuclear science and technology. We hope
that those activities of the IAEA will help to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. Japan has been
a proud supporter of the IAEA technical cooperation
programmes. In 2015, Japan pledged $25 million over a
five-year period to the IAEA’s Peaceful Uses initiative.
Our contributions are steadily helping to fund a wide
range of projects, including projects aimed at combating
the Zika virus outbreak and strengthening veterinary
diagnostic laboratories in Africa.
Achieving and maintaining a high level of
nuclear safety and non-proliferation are never-ending
challenges. As the number of nuclear power plants
increases, strengthening international nuclear safety
and IAEA safeguards is becoming more important.
Japan will continue to work with the IAEA in promoting

A/71/PV.61

the universalization and efficient implementation of
relevant conventions, developing human resources and
supporting IAEA in improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of safeguards.
The Nuclear Security Summits, launched in 2010,
have raised international awareness and facilitated
various activities. Japan believes that it is now the
IAEA’s turn to build on those achievements and play
a central role in global efforts to promote nuclear
security. In that regard, Japan congratulates the IAEA
on its successful International Conference on Nuclear
Security last week, and will support its work and efforts
in strengthening nuclear security.
Japan continues to support the JCPOA, as it will
strengthen the international non-proliferation regime
and lead to stability in the Middle East region. Japan
emphasizes the importance of the full implementation
of the JCPOA by all relevant actors. Japan welcomes
the essential role of the IAEA in the monitoring and
verification of the JCPOA and will continue to actively
support and contribute to its steady implementation.
North Korea’s provocations, such as two nuclear
tests and repeated ballistic-missile launches this year,
represent a grave challenge to the international security
and the nuclear non-proliferation regime and a new
level of threat. It is important that the international
community ensure the effectiveness of the sanctions
against North Korea through strict implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2321 (2016), which was adopted unanimously
on 30 November.
Japan urges North Korea to take concrete steps
towards denuclearization without delay. In particular,
North Korea is required to abandon all of its nuclear
weapons and existing nuclear programmes, including
any uranium enrichment activities, in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner; immediately cease
all related activities; return to compliance with the NPT;
and act strictly in accordance with its IAEA Safeguards
Agreement. Japan, in that regard, fully supports the
continued involvement of the IAEA in that issue.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
adoption of the IAEA statute. As a responsible member
of the international community, Japan expresses its
firm determination to further contribute to ensuring
and promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to
strengthening nuclear non-proliferation.

16-4315817/28

A/71/PV.61

Mr. Kumar (India): India is pleased to be a sponsor
draft resolution A/71/L.35, on the activities of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We are happy to note that the IAEA is celebrating
its sixtieth anniversary this year. This is an important
occasion to reflect upon the critical role it has played
in discharging its mandate and supporting countries
in their pursuit of nuclear power in a safe and secure
way, and its technical cooperation activities in bringing
nuclear applications to its member States. We support
the new motto of Atoms for Peace and Development,
as announced by Director General Mr. Yukiya Amano.
India has consistently emphasized that nuclear
power is an important option to meet the challenges of
increased energy demand, as well as its concerns about
climate change and the security of the energy supply.
With an agreed international programme to combat
climate change finalized at the twenty-first session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris,
the time is ripe for an ever stronger role for the IAEA
in the expansion of safe nuclear power. We appreciate
the Agency publication Climate Change and Nuclear
Power 2015, which describes how nuclear energy is
one of the low-carbon energy sources available today
and can help meet the climate-energy challenge. We
encourage the Agency to remain engaged in activities
that present a balanced picture of nuclear power and its
mitigation potential against greenhouse gas emissions.
India attaches great importance to the Agency’s
work in the various fields of nuclear science. We
contribute to those activities through participation in the
technical meetings and coordinated research projects.
The Agency’s programme and achievements under
nuclear applications in food and agriculture, human
health and nutrition, water resources management,
protection of the environment and industry are most
helpful in meeting the needs of developing countries.
We would also wish to compliment the Agency for
successfully organizing the second Nuclear Security
Conference from 5 to 9 December in Vienna. India
supports the central role of the IAEA in the area of
nuclear security. The ministerial declaration issued
at the conference highlights the threats of nuclear
terrorism and emerging threats to nuclear security,
including in the cyberdomain and how technology
can be used to mitigate those threats. India remains
committed to supporting the work of the IAEA.
18/28

12/12/2016

Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to clarify its position
regarding the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (see A/71/322), on the agenda of this meeting,
which reflects a deeply distorted picture of realities
on the nuclear issue over the Korean peninsula. The
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula is the product
of the hostile policy of the United States towards the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
If the United States had not been hostile to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, threatening
the country with its nuclear weapons, the nuclear issue
would not have been created on the Korean peninsula,
which would not have turned into a global hotspot. The
root cause of the nuclear threats consistently prevailing
on the Korean peninsula, with the situation so often
spinning out of control, lies in the United States hostile
policy towards the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
possesses a nuclear deterrent to protect itself from the
constant nuclear threats coming from the United States;
it is just a self-defence measure. In disregard of such
realities, the IAEA submits reports full of prejudice
and unfairness to the General Assembly every year,
siding with the United States hostile policy towards the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The report is part of the extremely reckless pressure
of the United States on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea after its successful nuclear warhead explosion
test. While not referring at all to the nuclear threats and
blackmail of the United States towards the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the report unilaterally
takes issue with someone else’s nuclear programme.
It is of no help towards the resolution of the nuclear
issue on the Korean peninsula. If the IAEA truly hopes
for peace and security on the Korean peninsula, it
should take issue with the United States first, which is
threatening the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
with nuclear weapons.
It was none other than the IAEA that brought
up the suspicion regarding the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s peaceful nuclear facilities in the
1990s, under the instigation of the United States, and
compelled the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to leave the Agency and withdraw from the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The Democratic
16-43158

12/12/2016

People’s Republic of Korea has never recognized the
annual reports of the IAEA or the resolutions of its
Board of Governors, which are full of distortion and
prejudices, and categorically rejects them all.
The extremely hostile policy of the United States
towards the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is driving the situation on the Korean peninsula to
the brink of war. Despite the serious concerns of the
international community, the United States continues
to stage aggressive joint military exercises every year,
targeting the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
while bringing its strategic assets, including nuclear
strike means, into South Korea. It is a steadfast policy
and line of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to bolster its nuclear capability to a high degree in order
to protect the State and social system from the United
States nuclear war threats.
The extremely outrageous nuclear intimidation of
the United States is resulting only in the steady increase
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
capability. As the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has publicly stated, the standardization
of its nuclear warhead will enable the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to produce as many as it
requires of a variety of smaller, lighter and diversified
nuclear warheads.

A/71/PV.61

and self-restraint, we will respond with tough, resolute
counter-measures. As a nuclear-weapon State, fully
armed with substantial means capable of countering
the United States nuclear hegemony, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will respond to the nuclear
weapons of tyranny with nuclear weapons of justice.
Mr. Mutawa (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on the
sixtieth anniversary of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and its success in promoting the peaceful uses
of nuclear technology. This year marks the sixtieth
anniversary of the United Arab Emirates membership
in the IAEA. The United Arab Emirates recognizes
the critical and pivotal role played by the IAEA in
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology in
developing national nuclear energy programmes and
other peaceful applications.
The IAEA continues to play a key role in promoting
the exchange of scientific knowledge and nuclear
expertise among its members. In that regard, the
United Arab Emirates reaffirms its position regarding
the importance of close work and coordination, in
accordance with the standards of the IAEA and the
nuclear policy principles of the United Arab Emirates.

Perplexed by the rapid strengthening of the
strategic nuclear armed forces in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the United States is
clumsily trying to put pressure on our Republic by
mobilizing follower forces in international forums
such as the United Nations. Although the United States
makes every vicious attempt, running about from place
to place, it is nothing but the ridiculous wriggling of a
defeated man being driven into a corner in an all-out
confrontation with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We have gained the option of self-defence with
a powerful nuclear deterrent and continue to forge the
nuclear sword of justice with a sharper blade, in keeping
with the simultaneous line of our party, with a view to
preventing the danger of nuclear war being forced by
the United States and to safeguarding the peace and
security on the Korean peninsula and in the region.

The United Arab Emirates is one of the States
members of the IAEA that are working on developing
a nuclear energy programme for civil purposes, and
it expects to operate its first nuclear reactor in 2017.
Since it began its national peaceful nuclear energy
programme, the United Arab Emirates has achieved
significant progress in the construction of the project
and its infrastructure, and more than 70 per cent of the
construction work for nuclear reactors in the Barakah
nuclear power plant is complete. More than 90 per
cent of the construction work on the first reactor is
completed. The United Arab Emirates values its
successful partnership with the IAEA in achieving that
progress; we follow its guidance and receive support
from the Agency, which contributes to developing its
work through the United Arab Emirates expertise in
implementing its programme.

As long as the United States persists in frantic
manoeuvres of sanctions and pressure against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, instead of
recognizing the strategic status of our Republic as a
dignified nuclear Power and maintaining prudence

The United Arab Emirates continues to benefit from
the review services provided by the Agency. Since 2011,
the United Arab Emirates has received six major review
missions and is planning five more in the coming two
years. As we get closer to the commissioning phase of

16-4315819/28

A/71/PV.61

the national nuclear power project, the Agency review
missions are looking into several aspects, including
nuclear infrastructure, nuclear security, emergency
preparedness and nuclear safety.
We appreciate the efforts of the IAEA in
supporting the responsible development of nuclear
energy globally, including by convening high-level
conferences on nuclear energy, which is an important
part of the Agency’s work. In that context, the United
Arab Emirates looks forward to hosting the IAEA
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Power in the Twentyfirst Century, which is to be held in Abu Dhabi in 2017
and is expected to be instrumental in highlighting the
contributions of nuclear energy to achieving long-term
sustainable development. In that regard, we emphasize
our readiness to use our long-standing and successful
experience in hosting international and high-level
events to ensure the success of the Conference and
achieve its objectives.
The United Arab Emirates also commends the
central role played by the IAEA in the transfer of
technology and knowledge, with the aim of supporting
the development needs of member States. The Agency’s
Technical Cooperation Programme contributes to
the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals. We also commend the efforts
of the Department of Technical Cooperation and its
engagement with and valuable support to the United
Arab Emirates, including its efforts to strengthen
cooperation through the exchange of best practices and
strategic partnerships.
The Agency has made significant efforts to promote
nuclear safety in the world, and my country supports
the central role of the Agency in that regard, since
the achievement of the highest standards of nuclear
safety is a fundamental element in the successful and
sustainable use of nuclear energy. The United Arab
Emirates also believes in the vital role of the Agency in
promoting nuclear security by encouraging cooperation
and exchanging of best practices, where the IAEA is
considered to be the most appropriate forum for the
coordination of international efforts. My country also
attaches great importance to the Convention on Nuclear
Safety and its peer review mechanism. In that context,
the United Arab Emirates calls on all States with
extensive nuclear activities that have not yet acceded
to the Convention to join and implement it as soon
as possible. In that regard, the United Arab Emirates
welcomes the entry into force of the Amendment
20/28

12/12/2016

to the Convention on the Physical Protection on
Nuclear Material.
On the other hand, my country recognizes the
important role of the IAEA safeguards system as a
mechanism for ensuring the peaceful and exclusive
use of nuclear materials and facilities. The Additional
Protocol serves as a valuable tool for the Agency to
achieve that goal, and we encourage countries that
have not ratified the Additional Protocol to do so as
soon as possible. In that regard, I would like to refer
to countries with concerns surrounding their nuclear
activities and emphasize that they should take all the
required steps to address international concerns and
restore confidence in the exclusive peaceful nature of
their programmes. In that context, we call on Iran to
fulfil its international obligations in order to dismiss any
suspicions surrounding its programme. We also express
our concern regarding North Korea’s development of its
nuclear and ballistic capacities and call on it to refrain
from conducting any nuclear tests.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates looks
forward to continuing to work with the IAEA and the
international community to ensure the responsible,
safe and transparent use of nuclear activities. We also
express our appreciation to the Director General of the
IAEA and to the Secretariat for their achievements.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me first
express my sincere appreciation to the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for preparing the comprehensive report of the
IAEA for 2015 (see A/71/322) and for his statement.
My delegation appreciates his competent leadership
in advancing the invaluable contribution of nuclear
science and technology to peace and prosperity, as well
as the Agency’s continuing effort to extend assistance
and support to member States.
On technical cooperation, Indonesia welcomes
the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and notes with interest that 13 out of 17
Sustainable Development Goals are directly linked to
the Agency’s area of competence. We believe that the
Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme plays an
essential role as the main vehicle for the Agency to
fulfil those goals. We therefore underscore the fact that
the Technical Cooperation Fund should be supported
by sufficient, assured and predictable funding.
Since becoming a member of the Agency in 1957,
Indonesia has been resolute in its commitment to the
16-43158

12/12/2016

Technical Cooperation Programme, and we have
benefited greatly from cooperation with the Agency in
the areas of food and agriculture, health, water and other
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We are positioning
ourselves as a provider of technical cooperation to other
developing countries. The establishment of Indonesia’s
National Nuclear Energy Agency as an IAEA
Collaborating Centre for Non-Destructive Diagnostics,
Testing and Inspection Technologies, located in Jakarta,
is meant for that purpose, among others.
As part of our commitment to the Technical
Cooperation Programme in the Asia-Pacific region,
Indonesia launched a regional capacity-building
initiative in 2015, aimed at promoting resource
mobilization and optimizing the use of regional
resources for capacity-building. We extend our sincere
appreciation for the support of member States and the
IAEA secretariat for the successful implementation
of the initiative. Indonesia welcomes the organization
of the first international conference of the Technical
Cooperation Programme, to be held in May 2017. The
Agency may rest assured of our support and contribution
to the event, in particular in promoting partnership for
capacity-building in the Asia-Pacific region.
On nuclear applications, we also welcome several
developments in the promotion of nuclear science and
technology in the areas of food, agriculture, health,
industry and the environment. A prime example
includes the modernization of the Agency’s laboratories
in Seibersdorf, which are essential to maintaining
assistance and support to Member States, particularly on
the aspect of coordinated research activities. Indonesia
appreciates the work of the Friends of Renovation of the
Nuclear Applications Laboratories in that regard and
stands ready to continue working with them.
In 2015, Indonesia established one national science
and technology park and three agro-techno parks to
stimulate the advancement of science and technology.
We have hosted trainings and fellowships for other
Member States on mutation breeding and on irradiated
food programmes for relief management agencies and
industrial applications.
On nuclear safety, Indonesia has seen an increase
in national confidence and public acceptance of
nuclear energy power as it embarks on a nuclear energy
power programme, which includes the development of
non-commercial power reactors. We are pleased with
the number of nuclear safety activities being carried out

A/71/PV.61

in Indonesia in cooperation with the Agency to support
that programme, including the Site and External
Events Design Review Service, conducted in the fourth
quarter of 2016. We also recently funded an Emergency
Preparedness Review Service to evaluate our national
nuclear-preparedness system.
On nuclear security, Indonesia welcomes the
adoption of the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit’s
communiqué and action plans. It is our hope that the
outcome of that summit and previous summits can be
implemented in support of the Agency as the leading
entity for the advancement and coordination of nuclear
security goals and activities. In fulfilling its nuclear
security commitments, Indonesia has successfully
converted high-enriched uranium (HEU) into lowenriched uranium in August 2016, in collaboration with
the United States Government. That success marked
a milestone for Southeast Asia as a HEU-free zone,
and is proof of Indonesia’s commitment to improving
nuclear security.
We have also inaugurated the Indonesia Centre
of Excellence on Nuclear Security and Emergency
Preparedness as a centre of excellence in nuclear
security and emergency preparedness. As part of the
implementation of counter-terrorism-related treaties,
we ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and its Amendment in 2009, and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism in 2014.
We continue to support the Agency’s role on nuclear
safeguards, particularly as it relates to verifying the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) between Iran and the E3+3. We hope
that all parties will faithfully implement this landmark
agreement and reiterate our call for the international
community to support the JCPOA’s implementation.
However, we note with regret that the application of
safeguards in several parts of the world has yet to be
achieved. Indonesia strongly supports the Agency’s
role in carrying out that mandate, which is believed
to contribute to the maintenance of global peace
and security.
We will continue to observe further developments
regarding the implementation of the JCPOA. We trust
that in successfully implementing that agreement in the
future, the Iranian nuclear programme will eventually
be treated in the same manner as that of any other

16-4315821/28

A/71/PV.61

non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
On management, Indonesia notes the efforts of
the IAEA secretariat to increase the representation
of underrepresented countries in the recruitment of
Agency staff, especially at professional and managerial
levels. Those efforts should be redoubled, and we
appeal to the Director General to continue that effort as
a matter of priority and to ensure gender balance in the
Agency’s personnel and programmes.
As a committed member of the IAEA, Indonesia
continues to contribute its resources in many ways
in support of the Agency, including by becoming the
external auditor of the IAEA for the 2016-2017 period.
We reiterate the Agency’s important role in fostering
international cooperation over the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and technology, nuclear safety and
security. We fervently hope that cooperation between
Indonesia and the Agency can be further expanded
and developed. Furthermore, we hope the Agency
will provide greater collaboration and support in
the application of nuclear science and technology in
the region.
We once again extend our deep appreciation for
the Agency’s indispensable role in encouraging and
assisting the development and practical application of
atomic energy for peaceful uses; technology transfer to
developing countries; and nuclear safety, verification
and security. Indonesia is therefore pleased to join
others in sponsoring the draft resolution on the IAEA
report (A/71/L.35), and we stand ready to continue our
support to the successful work of the Agency.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): My delegation also
joins others in warmly congratulating SecretaryGeneral-designate Mr. António Guterres and conveying
its sincere appreciation and gratitude to the outgoing
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
Bangladesh thanks the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
presenting his 2015 report (see A/71/322) and takes
this opportunity to reiterate its congratulations on the
sixtieth anniversary of the Agency’s establishment. We
look forward to the Agency’s sustained efforts towards
achieving its objectives, as enshrined in its Statute.
Bangladesh values its partnership with the IAEA.
We have been efficiently using nuclear techniques
for peaceful purposes for quite some time. However,
22/28

12/12/2016

our initiative for nuclear power generation is fairly
recent. Bangladesh considers nuclear energy to be a
safe, environment-friendly and economically viable
source of power generation that meets the increasing
demand of electricity and, thus, unlocks our potential
for development through enhanced productivity and
sustained growth. Our aim is to generate at least 4,000
megawatts (MW) of electricity from nuclear sources
by 2030, which will be 10 per cent of our 40,000-MWgeneration target for 2030. In order to reach that
target, we have started construction on the Rooppur
Nuclear Power Plant, the first power plant of its kind
in the country.
In recent developments, the Bangladesh Atomic
Energy Regulatory Authority issued a site licence for the
project this year, after conducting a year-long thorough
review and assessment of all the required regulatory
documents, pursuant to the relevant IAEA guidelines.
A reference power plant design concept has been
selected for the Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant Project,
in line with the fundamental design selection concept
that the IAEA promotes for a newcomer country.
In the meantime, a follow-up Integrated Nuclear
Infrastructure Review Missions reviewed with
satisfaction the demonstrable progress made by
Bangladesh, in the light of the recommendations and
suggestions made in 2011. The relevant authorities have
prioritized the regulation and oversight of all safety
aspects and the physical protection of nuclear materials
and installations, and are focusing on waste safety,
transport safety, the protection of radioactive materials
and emergency preparedness and response.
The IAEA has long been our main partner for the
promotion of safe and secure applications of nuclear
science and technology for peaceful purposes, by way
of technical cooperation programmes and in line with
the Regional Cooperative Agreement. We have received
sustained cooperation for developing capacities in
the application of nuclear science and techniques. In
addition, Bangladesh has benefited from the framework
of the Agreement. We hope that such support by
the IAEA will continue in future, in response to the
evolving needs and demands on the ground.
Bangladesh wishes to further enhance its
engagement with the IAEA in the days to come, with a
view to collectively enhancing global nuclear security
and safety and promoting the application of nuclear
science and technologies for peaceful purposes. We
16-43158

12/12/2016

consider those to be of utmost importance for realizing
a number of relevant Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Everyone here — including the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Amano — is aware that the issue of nuclear
non-proliferation represents one of the pillars of the
national priorities of Syria, both in word and action. At a
very early date, in 1968, my country began its accession
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). We were a step ahead compared with
some European Union (EU) countries, for example, that
claim interest in the non-proliferation regime today.
However, at the same time, several EU
countries — Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and
Italy — as well as Turkey, have, as NATO members,
nuclear weapons deployed on their soil, in flagrant
violation of the NPT provisions. Moreover, Syria signed
its Safeguards Agreement with the Agency in 1992 and,
on 27 October 2003, when we were a Security Council
member, my country submitted a draft resolution on
behalf of the Group of Arab States that remains in
blue to this day, haunting the corridors of the Security
Council. Its aim was to establish a nuclear-weapon-free
zone and a zone free of weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East. The credibility of our national
commitment to the non-proliferation system is clear
and unequivocal. Furthermore, that draft resolution
was in line with the IAEA’s goals and provisions,
but it met with objections from the United States of
America in the Security Council, and its delegation
threatened to veto it.
Some continue to deny the fact that the only real
nuclear threat in the Middle East is that represented
by Israel’s possession of nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery. Israeli nuclear missiles, with a range
of 5,000 kilometres, are able to reach the most remote
areas of our region. Those same individuals continue to
deny those facts and establish fictitious fronts to divert
attention from the real Israeli threat to the peoples of
the region and the world because the range of Israel’s
nuclear missiles is 5,000 kilometres and above. The
question therefore is: why and for whom has Israel
prepared these nuclear weapons with a range of more
than 5,000 kilometres? It is that same attitude, lacking
in both impartiality and objectivity, that demonstrates
the falseness of the claim of the European countries
mentioned of favouring the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East.

A/71/PV.61

Those same European countries have for decades
provided weapons to Israel that have allowed it to
achieve nuclear-Power status, including state-of-the-art
German submarines capable of launching nuclear
missiles. Europeans have done everything, including
the absurd, to ensure that Israel’s nuclear weapons
were not considered at the 2010 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, or at the 2015 Review Conference,
held in New York. They did their utmost to ensure that
the 2012 Review Conference was a failure in order to
allow Israel to continue to develop nuclear weapons
at the cost of the security and safety of the people of
our region. That demonstrates the selective and double
standards that are in play.
The Security Council and the IAEA failed to
condemn Israel’s military aggression in 2007 and its
refusal to cooperate with the Agency and to allow its
inspectors to verify the probable source of Israeli nuclear
pollution around Deir ez-Zor. The continuing failure
of Israel to cooperate with the IAEA and its ongoing
development of its military nuclear capacity outside
international control are clear. Many appeals have been
made to make the Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free
zone, but all those appeals have been ignored. That
undermines the credibility of the non-proliferation
regime and threatens the stability and security of the
countries and peoples of the Middle East. All of this
has been documented, and the IAEA is aware of it. We
should have liked the Director General of the IAEA to
cover those points in his statement rather than resort
to vague expressions such as “it is quite possible”, and
the like.
Member States are committed to respecting the
statutes of the IAEA. The United States of America
should have informed the IAEA of the information
that it possessed before it destroyed a certain building,
rather than several months later. The same applies to
Israel, which provided no information to the IAEA.
If such information is to be credited, what actually
occurred was a military incursion in Syrian territory
and Turkey’s air space. The IAEA has not intervened
pursuant to its mandate, nor has the Agency taken
actions under its prerogatives and responsibilities
in the face of the Israeli violation of its international
commitments. I shall read out a paragraph from the
memoir of Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, former IAEA
Director General, entitled The Age of Deception:
Nuclear Diplomacy in Treacherous Times:

16-4315823/28

A/71/PV.61

(spoke in English)
“One of the strangest and most striking
examples of nuclear hypocrisy, multilateral and
multifaceted, must surely be Israel’s bombing of
the Deir ez-Zor installation in Syria in September
2007, and the aftermath of that attack. Speculation
began almost immediately that the site had housed a
nuclear facility. Syria denied the accusations. Israel
and the United States remained officially silent,
although American officials talked anonymously
on the subject to the media. I spoke out strongly,
noting that any country with information indicating
that the bombed facility was nuclear was under a
legal obligation to report it to the IAEA. But no one
came forward with such a report. For the six weeks
following the bombing — the most crucial period
in terms of our seeing inside the facility — we were
unable to obtain any high-resolution imagery from
commercial satellites.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Most of the conclusions reached by the IAEA with
regard to the attack on Deir ez-Zor are based on the
photographs and analyses provided by the Central
Intelligence Agency of the United States. That raises
many questions with regard to the credibility of the
information received by the IAEA and the supporting
documentation, given the fact that the latter was
submitted by a country that — as we know — has an
anti-Syrian agenda. It is also surprising especially when
we consider the precedents linked to the disastrous
Iraqi dossier that, through its errors, led to the invasion
of Iraq, the destruction of its infrastructure and the
spread of terrorism in that country and the region. The
outcome appeared only some years later, in 2008, when
the report of the United Nations Special Commission
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 687
(1991) was hidden in a secret vault that we will only be
able to open 60 years later. The reason is that the report
confirms that the Commission did not find weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq.
The most recent report of the Director General
of the IAEA (see A/71/322) includes non-crucial
findings based on information lacking credibility
and comprehensiveness. That assessment completely
contradicts that of Mr. Amano’s predecessor,
Mr. ElBaradei. That raises questions concerning
the impartiality that we demand of the Director
General in answering those questions and providing
24/28

12/12/2016

clarifications. It is clear that ambiguity surrounds
the difference between everything that constitutes
the legal commitment of a Member State pursuant
to its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
the voluntary procedures to accede to the Additional
Protocols, while a legal basis is completely lacking.
We therefore ask all countries that cover for Israel
in its possession of nuclear arms, the Director General
of the IAEA, and the IAEA itself what they have done
to implement Security Council resolution 487 (1981),
which was adopted more than 30 years ago. I will read
out the fifth paragraph of the resolution:
(spoke in English)
“The Security Council calls upon Israel urgently
to place its nuclear facilities under the safeguards
of the International Atomic Energy Agency.”
(spoke in Arabic)
That was written 30 years ago, but Israel has done
nothing since then.
In conclusion, the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute, which plays an extremely important
role in advocating disarmament and international
security, has devoted an entire chapter to what it refers
to as the Israeli nuclear Power and has not written one
word concerning what has been called the Syrian nuclear
programme. From this rostrum, I therefore call on the
Director General of the IAEA to read that chapter and
draw the lessons to be learned from it. I urge him to act
immediately on the issue of Israeli nuclear weapons that
threaten the life, security and health of all peoples of the
region in compliance with the resolutions of the IAEA
itself, the General Assembly and the Security Council,
concerning Israel’s possession of such weapons.
Mr. Hansen (Australia): Australia commends
Director General Amano for his report (see A/71/322)
on the activities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in 2015. We are pleased to be a sponsor
draft resolution A/71/L.35. The IAEA’s activities have
spanned nuclear safety, security and safeguards, as well
as those equally important activities that the Director
General has called Atoms for Peace and Development.
Australia is a strong and committed supporter of the
IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme. Australia
also regularly makes in-kind and extra-budgetary
contributions to the IAEA’s work, including under the
Peaceful Uses Initiative. Australia is active in helping
16-43158

12/12/2016

secure the global supply of potentially life-saving
radiopharmaceuticals, including our new export-scale
molybdenum-99 radiopharmaceutical manufacturing
plant. When it comes on line in 2017, that plant will have
the capacity to meet 20 to 25 per cent of world demand.
Australia’s production of radiopharmaceuticals remains
fully based on low-enriched uranium technology for
both nuclear fuel and targets. The co-located innovative
Synroc waste treatment plant will demonstrate Synroc’s
viability for immobilizing radioactive waste from
molybdenum-99 production and other intermediate and
high-level radioactive waste streams. We were pleased
to welcome Director General Amano to the site during
his recent visit to Australia.
Australia continues to encourage all countries to
develop and implement effective safeguards and, for
those that have not yet done so, to bring into force the
Additional Protocol. Australia will continue to support
the effective implementation of safeguards through
forums such as the Asia-Pacific Safeguards Network
and the Australian Safeguards Support Program. We
support the Agency’s efforts to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of the safeguards system.
Australia remains concerned that the Agency has
not been able to implement any verification measures
in North Korea since April 2009. We welcome the
Security Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2321 (2016) in response to North Korea’s fifth nuclear
test on 9 September. Australia joined 49 other nations
in sponsoring the resolution, thereby reaffirming that
the international community stands firm and will not
tolerate the threat that North Korea poses to peace and
stability in our region. It is vitally important that North
Korea abandon its nuclear and missile programmes
and abide by its international obligations to ensure the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Finally, Australia appreciates the work of the
Director General and his staff in monitoring and
verifying the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action agreed by China, France, Germany, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the United
States, with the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the
Islamic Republic of Iran (E3+3).
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for his statement and commend

A/71/PV.61

his work in heading the Agency. The annual report
submitted to the General Assembly (see A/71/322)
attests to the work of the Agency carried out in support
of its members and its growing contribution to peace
and security through its initiatives.
Morocco takes this opportunity to reiterate its
support for the initiative envisioned by the side event of
the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly — entitled
Atoms for Peace and Development: The IAEA and
the Post-2015 Development Goals — which allows
developing countries to benefit from the contribution
of atomic energy in areas of strategic importance for
sustainable development. It is an important instrument
for the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes. Morocco welcomes the IAEA’s readiness to
contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, as well as its participation in the twenty-second
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
held in Marrakech, which helped the Agency to promote
its role in the implementation of the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change and sustainable development. In
that context, the IAEA was able to show that nuclear
energy can serve as a crucial technology for mitigating
climate change.
Morocco attaches particular importance to the
inalienable right of States parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to
develop research on, the production and the use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. That right must
be fully respected and exercised in full compliance
with obligations in the area of non-proliferation and in
conformity with the far-reaching safety and security
standards of the IAEA. Through its verification
activities, the Agency plays a fundamental role in
safeguarding peace and security in the world with its
comprehensive safeguards system, which is the very
bedrock of the non-proliferation regime. Through its
safeguards system, the IAEA seeks to assure member
States of the peaceful use of nuclear activities covered
by the safeguards agreements. Morocco also welcomes
the various IAEA activities to prevent proliferation,
such as the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank, which
aim to ensure supply of nuclear fuel.
Morocco, which has been a party to the NPT
since 1970 and has had a Safeguards Agreement and
an Additional Protocol in force since 1975 and 2011,
respectively, respects its non-proliferation obligations
and fully cooperates with the Agency in that regard.

16-4315825/28

A/71/PV.61

Morocco calls for the universalization of the
comprehensive safeguards agreements under the NPT,
particularly in the Middle East, so as to contribute to
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
region. In that context, Morocco, as a State party to the
NPT, deplores the fact that the implementation of the
resolution on an IAEA safeguards regime in the Middle
East has not progressed in recent years.
As a State party to the NPT, Morocco regrets the
fact that the implementation of the IAEA resolution on
the implementation of its safeguards in the Middle East
has seen no progress for many years. The Kingdom
deeply regrets the deadlock in efforts to establish a
zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East, and the failure of the
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the
NPT, which was unable to agree on specific measures
regarding the Middle East. Furthermore, Morocco calls
for intensified efforts to achieve the goal of a nuclearweapon-free world through a transparent, verifiable
and irreversible nuclear disarmament process as the
ultimate safeguard against the proliferation and access
to those weapons by non-State actors, particularly
terrorists groups.
Morocco welcomes its exemplary partnership
with the Agency, which has led to the establishment
of infrastructure and human capacities that have
allowed Morocco to enjoy the benefits of nuclear use
in vital sectors, such as agriculture, health, water
resources management, environmental protection and
nutrition. The Director General’s visit to Morocco in
2014 and the visit of the Deputy Director General for
Technical Cooperation in 2015 gave further impetus
to the fruitful cooperation between the Agency and
the Kingdom. Thanks to Agency support, Morocco
has developed national expertise in various areas,
including water resources management, as attested
by the designation of the National Centre for Nuclear
Energy and Technology an IAEA cooperation centre
for water resources management.
Morocco is also a major regional player in technical
cooperation, particularly within Africa. Morocco hosts
four regional centres of excellence in the framework
of the African Regional Cooperative Agreement
for Research, Development and Training related to
Nuclear Science and Technology (AFRA). Thanks
to the scientific and technical support of the Agency,
the centres allow us to strengthen capacity and share
knowledge at the regional level in the areas of training
26/28

12/12/2016

in radiation protection, cancer research, nutrition and
water resources management. As Chair of AFRA for
2015-2016, Morocco has demonstrated its commitment
and contribution to capacity-building in African
countries, particularly by organizing numerous training
courses and scientific visits, which have benefited 19
African countries.
Morocco welcomes the IAEA’s contribution to​​
nuclear safety and security, while reiterating that the
main responsibility for security in a State lies first
and foremost with that State itself. The standards
established by the Agency and its assistance to member
States helps them improve their infrastructures for the
safe use of nuclear energy. Similarly, the efforts of the
IAEA in the implementation of its Nuclear Security
Plan 2014-2017 and its various initiatives for enhancing
nuclear security were welcomed in the ministerial
declaration issued by the International Conference on
Nuclear Security, held in Vienna on 5 and 6 December.
Morocco is cooperating fruitfully with the IAEA
in those areas as well and enjoys the valuable support
of the Agency for the implementation of its laws and
its regulations, particularly the law relating to nuclear
and radiological security and the establishment of the
Moroccan Agency for Nuclear and Radiological Safety
and Security. In that context, Morocco welcomes the
conclusive results of the IAEA report on the integrated
nuclear infrastructure review, conducted in Morocco
in October 2015, which led to a comprehensive
assessment of the national nuclear capacities necessary
for a nuclear power programme. I retierate Morocco’s
thanks to the Agency for its support in implementing
the recommendations made at the end of that visit.
Morocco participates in initiatives that promote
nuclear security, such as the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Nuclear Security
Summits. Those initiatives serve as a framework for the
political promotion and encouragement of exchanges of
experiences and building national capacities, thereby
complementing multilateral efforts. I underline
the importance of the IAEA’s role as a coordinator
of international cooperation, as recognized by its
initiatives and highlighted in the ministerial declaration
of 5 December.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me
to thank Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his
insightful briefing on the annual report of the Agency
16-43158

12/12/2016

(see A/71/322), which covers the period from 1 January
to 31 December 2015.
As we commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of
the establishment of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the theme “Atoms for Peace and Development”
fully attests to the central role of the Agency in
promoting the global, safe, secure and peaceful uses of
nuclear technologies. The Agency’s continuous support
and cooperation in the various fields are indispensable
in helping to bring member States closer to achieving
their development goals and priorities.
Malaysia appreciates the assistance provided by
the Agency in nuclear technology, specifically in
energy assessment services, including energy planning
studies. Those studies continue to build member
States’ capacities for conducting nuclear energy system
assessments, according to the methodology developed
by the Agency’s International Project on Innovative
Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles.
Malaysia also recognizes the significant gains
made through joint cooperation in improving and
strengthening the nuclear safety framework. We
believe that joint cooperation is a continuous process,
an effort to improve nuclear, radiation, transport
and waste safety. We appreciate the assistance and
support provided by the Agency to Malaysia in the
areas of research reactor safety, the strengthening of
radiological emergency environmental monitoring, and
the promotion of the Joint Convention on the Safety of
Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive
Waste Management. In that regard, my delegation
appreciates IAEA recognition of our joint cooperation
through the convening of the thirteenth edition of
the Malaysia-IAEA postgraduate education course
in radiation protection and the safe use of radiation
sources. My delegation also looks forward to receiving
regular reports on priority aspects and evolving issues
of nuclear safety at the upcoming Board meetings in
2017 in relation to the IAEA Director General’s report
on measures to strengthen international cooperation in
nuclear, radiation, transport and waste safety, building
on the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety.
Malaysia has always believed in, and wishes to
reiterate once again, the central role of the IAEA in
the international nuclear security architecture. The
IAEA’s role as the only international organization
with the capacity to address the policy, technical and
regulatory aspects of nuclear security is significant.

A/71/PV.61

The international community therefore has a collective
responsibility to jointly cooperate with the IAEA to
ensure that related activities on nuclear security comply
with the international standards.
The contribution of nuclear security towards the
broader goal of strengthening international peace and
security remains paramount. The entry into force of
the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material on 8 May and the
successful conclusion of the IAEA International
Conference on Nuclear Security on from 5 to
9 December are the results of our continuous efforts
in that regard. The Conference clearly reflects the
central role of the Agency in facilitating international
cooperation on strengthening nuclear security within
the framework of the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan for
2014-2017. The Conference reaffirms the responsibility
of every Member State to maintain and strengthen
effective nuclear security measures, in accordance with
their respective national and international obligations.
In that regard, we look forward to the drafting of the
next Nuclear Security Plan for the 2018-2021 term.
My delegation continues to accord importance to
the verification activities undertaken by the Agency.
Those activities aim to facilitate the implementation of
Member States’ safeguard obligations, through capacitybuilding activities that are carried out in consultation
with Member States. Those efforts are, without a
doubt, instrumental to global nuclear non-proliferation
efforts and to the Agency’s central role in promoting
the worldwide safe, secure and peaceful use of nuclear
technologies. In order to ensure that the Agency meets
the objective, as mandated in article II of the IAEA
statute, Malaysia strongly emphasizes the need for all
Member States to give equal priority and consideration
to the Agency’s activities and programmes, particularly
those related to promotional activities.
On
the
Agency’s
Technical
Cooperation
Programme, Malaysia remains firmly committed to
supporting that crucial framework and its key role as
a driver for Member States in their efforts to achieve
sustainable socioeconomic development. We believe
that the resources for the IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programme must be sufficient in order to ensure that
planned activities can be implemented effectively.
Hence, we encourage all Member States to collectively
fulfil their financial obligations in a full and timely
manner in order to ensure sufficient, assured and
predictable resources for the Agency.

16-4315827/28

A/71/PV.61

I would like to conclude by expressing Malaysia’s
ongoing support for the work of the IAEA, and we
continue to hope that Member States with the capacity
to do so will continue to facilitate the Agency’s work by

28/28

12/12/2016

providing the support and backing that it deserves. It is
with that in mind that we co-sponsored draft resolution
A/71/L.35, on the IAEA report.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

16-43158
