S/2007/294

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 May 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 18 May 2007 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to an exchange of letters between my predecessor and the
President of the Security Council in October 2004 (S/2004/797 and S/2004/858)
relating to the extension of the mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) for three years, from 1 January 2005 to 31 December 2007, subject to a
midterm review in July 2006.
In this connection, I attach hereto a report prepared by an independent
consultant appointed by UNOWA in consultation with the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, which reviews the activities and performance of UNOWA (see
annex). The review was conducted from 22 September to 30 November 2006 and
included visits by the consultant to United Nations Headquarters in New York and
UNOWA premises in Dakar.
The review provides an assessment of progress made in carrying out the main
functions assigned to the Office as spelled out in its mandate, contained in the annex
to the Secretary-General’s letter to the President of the Security Council of
14 December 2005 (S/2005/16), as well as additional tasks the Council requested
the Office to carry out. The review also reflects feedback from the Economic
Community of West African States and several other key international partners of
the West African subregion, including the various United Nations entities with
regional offices in West Africa, on the work of UNOWA. The Office, headed by
Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, my Special Representative, has enjoyed the full
cooperation of the host Government (Senegal) in carrying out its mandate.
I wish to inform the members of the Security Council that the substantive
conceptual concerns raised by the consultant regarding the enhancement of
synergies and complementarities, especially with respect to the mandates of the
Department of Political Affairs and UNOWA, are being addressed with a view to
maximizing the collective contribution of the Organization to the improvement of
conditions in West Africa, particularly in the area of peace and security.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-34476 (E) 220507

*0734476*

S/2007/294

Annex
Independent review of the United Nations Office for
West Africa
The concept of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
surrounding reality
1.
The United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), 1 which is also the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa
(UNOWA), was established in Dakar for a three-year period pursuant to the
recommendation of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa, conducted from 6 to
27 March 2001, that “a mechanism for systematic and regular consultations among
entities of the United Nations system for defining and harmonizing national and
subregional policies and strategies should be established” (S/2001/434, sect. IV.B)
and the subsequent exchange of letters between the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council (S/2001/1128 and S/2001/1129).
2.
The present independent midterm review 2 was envisaged in the SecretaryGeneral’s letter S/2004/797, in which the Security Council was requested to extend
the mandate of UNOWA to the end of 2007. The terms of reference of the review
ask that it:
(a)

Identify results and progress made;

(b) Explore the strengths and constraints of UNOWA and the risks and
opportunities it faces;
(c)

Highlight good practices and lessons learned;

(d)

Offer recommendations for future policy and practice.

3.
The overall rationale for the establishment of UNOWA is peace and security in
West Africa. The area has seen much conflict over the last 20 years, and many
sources of conflict remain. UNOWA was intended to take a subregional approach to
the issues and causes of conflict that transcend the problems facing individual States
and societies and to draw on, and involve, all the relevant capacities of the United
Nations system in the area.
4.
The United Nations has several special political missions and peacekeeping
missions in the subregion, 3 each dealing with the problems of a specific country.
Many such problems extend across borders, and conflict in one country can breed
turmoil in others. UNOWA has a mandate to address these issues from a subregional
point of view. In doing so, it has added a new vantage point from which to address
political issues and causes of conflict.
__________________
1 UNOWA was established as a Department of Political Affairs Office away from United Nations

Headquarters and was the first Department of Political Affairs experience of a decentralized
regional political office. Though financed through the assessed budget for special political
missions, UNOWA is not a typical special political mission. For the mandate of UNOWA see
S/2005/16.
2 The review took place from 22 September to 30 November 2006, principally in New York and
Dakar, with short visits to Guinea and Ghana. For the main achievements of UNOWA identified
in a previous internal review by UNOWA staff, see S/2004/797, annex, para. 52.
3 In Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

2

07-34476

S/2007/294

Additionality of the Office
5.
All over the world the United Nations works to prevent conflict and build
peace. It does so principally at two levels, global and country: at the country level
through its country teams, or in some cases special political and peacekeeping
missions, and globally from United Nations Headquarters through the Department
of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the new
Peacebuilding Commission, all located in New York.
6.
UNOWA adds a new and interesting dimension as a decentralized capacity
located in the subregion. Each United Nations country team and/or special mission
may face a wide range of issues and problems that intersect with, and are relevant
to, conflict prevention and the promotion of peace. Regardless of how senior and
astute their leadership may be, the teams and missions face limitations in terms of
the issues they can address within a country and the strength of the positions they
can take while retaining a working relationship with the Government concerned and
other relevant parties. Yet the issues with which they are wrestling, while very
significant locally, may not be sufficiently important globally to merit the attention,
let alone the intervention, of the United Nations departments in New York
concerned with conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Thus, there has been a gap
where United Nations country-level capacity to respond ends and before attention
and intervention by United Nations Headquarters are practical. UNOWA potentially
contributes to filling this gap in West Africa.
7.
The idea that United Nations country teams 4 could now have access to the
resources of a subregional facility such as UNOWA to address the increasing
political and conflict-related parts of their work is innovative and attractive. There
are considerable advantages, both for country teams or special missions and for the
United Nations Secretariat, in having the option to call on a political and intellectual
resource that, while located outside the country, is still geographically proximate,
that knows the country and the subregion well and whose good-offices role has a
chance to succeed. It gives both the team or special mission and United Nations
Headquarters access to additional wisdom and advice. It also provides a sounding
board to check ideas and proposed initiatives. This resource may be called on to
intervene in instances in which embroiling the local United Nations presence deeply
in local political conflict, with the risks that such involvement entails, 5 would be
unproductive.
8.
The use of Special Representatives by Secretaries-General to address conflict
is almost as old as the United Nations itself. However, as of September 2006,
UNOWA was the only subregional unit with a conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
mandate that was up and running. 6 The Office is therefore an experiment that may
add significantly to the means that the United Nations Secretariat and the
international community can bring to bear on issues of conflict prevention and
__________________
4 Particularly if constituted as recommended by the High-level Panel on United Nations System-

wide Coherence.
5 These issues are explored in somewhat greater depth in the recent United Nations Institute for

Training and Research publication On Being a Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
6 Terms of reference for an analogous unit for East Asia, to be based in Singapore, have been

prepared, and the review team understands that the Department of Political Affairs plans to
proceed to establish it soon. There has been consideration of a facility for the Central Africa/
Great Lakes region.

07-34476

3

S/2007/294

peacebuilding. Such an experiment merits attention and analysis to see what lessons
can be drawn from it. This has not happened so far, and there is no indication that
either the Department of Political Affairs, upon which UNOWA depends
substantively, or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which administers it,
have given much thought to that need.
9.
The Department of Political Affairs has a Planning Unit. However, the
leadership of that Unit has acknowledged that its focus to date has been on
establishing the mediation support function with which it is charged. Thus, less
attention has been available to address questions of forward planning and drawing
on the lessons of the past. Unlike the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs has no formal lesson-learning mechanism. Given the
delicate nature of its responsibilities, this may be appropriate. But the apparent
absence of any method for collecting and analysing information about experience in
the field, recording lessons learned and then diffusing that learning with appropriate
discretion within the Department 7 is noteworthy, and places an undesirable
limitation on the utility a subregional facility such as UNOWA can offer.
10. The very notion of a decentralized capacity such as UNOWA presupposes
certain centralized functions that work well. Remembering, and being able to have
easy access to and learn from, both the analyses made of past situations and the
approaches that the United Nations and the international community took to them,
would appear to be one of those functions. However, on the basis of the limited
view of the workings of the Department of Political Affairs and UNOWA offered by
the present review, it appears that more work is needed in both, in order for them to
be able to use monitoring or evaluation activities as tools to help improve
performance. If this preliminary impression turns out to be accurate, under more
serious and prolonged scrutiny it may merit action by both the Department of
Political Affairs and UNOWA, with support from the Office of Internal Oversight
Services.

Reasonable expectations
11. It was asked that the present review address the choice of strategic priorities
by UNOWA and the interaction between the activities it chose to implement and the
strategy it chose to follow. It is too early to make a definitive statement on that
question for several reasons. Firstly, any new departure such as UNOWA is by its
nature experimental, and because it operates in the sphere of political affairs and
conflict prevention, its strategy has to be flexible enough to respond to emerging
circumstances. Secondly, any office that has to exercise a good-offices function
needs to be opportunistic, as political problems arise and conflicts may become
imminent because of forces over which it has little influence. Indeed, part of the
point of having such an office is its ability to respond quickly and sensitively to
unforeseen situations that emerge suddenly.
12. However, the most important reason why it is too early is that reasonable
expectations for UNOWA have not yet been laid out. Headquarters departments
concerned and interested Member States may wish to contribute to a refinement of
__________________
7 Also for disseminating those lessons appropriately throughout the United Nations system and to

the international community.

4

07-34476

S/2007/294

the mandate that does so for future phases of its existence. This could be part of an
overall clarification of reasonable expectations for all United Nations special
political and good-offices missions and of conflict prevention and peacebuilding at
the global, subregional and national levels. Such a clarification could be a logical
consequence of the recent Office of Internal Oversight Services report on the audit
of the management of special political missions by the Department of Political
Affairs. 8
13. What should have been done for UNOWA, but has not been done, was to
monitor the experiment using a few simple indicators. Such indicators do not have
to be measurable. 9 If measurement is possible (and cost-effective) it should, of
course, be used. But it is misleading to pretend to measure what cannot be
measured, 10 particularly when dealing with issues as important as conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. What is needed now is for seasoned practitioners of
conflict prevention to consult together and suggest some basic qualitative and/or
experience-based indicators for monitoring the overall performance of UNOWA.

Strategic focus within the mandate of the Office
14. UNOWA has implemented its mandate of enhancing the contribution of the
United Nations to the achievement of peace and security priorities in West Africa by
carrying out the five functions assigned to it under that mandate. However, it was
asked that the review also consider how UNOWA has gone about defining the
strategic priorities that guide its work, whether it has effectively identified the niche
of comparative advantage of and within the United Nations and what the key driving
forces have been for this process of strategic planning. It is not clear that this is the
most appropriate way to address the issue at this stage.
15. Strategic planning has declined from the status it acquired in the mid-1960s,
because it is not the same as strategic thinking. Planning is about analysis, breaking
a goal down into steps, formalizing those steps and articulating the expected
consequences. Strategic thinking is about synthesis. It involves intuition and
creativity. The outcome of strategic thinking is an integrated perspective, a not-tooprecisely articulated vision of direction that must be free to appear at any time and
at any place in the Organization. 11 While the role of strategic planning in the work
of UNOWA is basically unclear as yet, and perhaps not really what the situation
requires, there is evidence of strategic thinking.
16. Guidance from and interaction with the Secretary-General’s office appear to
have been significant factors in determining where the good-offices work of
UNOWA is to be directed. That is as it should be. Strategic thinking is apparent in
the choice of the substantive studies undertaken and how they have been used.
Following the visit of the Security Council to West Africa and its recommendation
__________________
8 A/61/357.
9 See E/AC.51/2006/4, para. 66.
10 “The first step is to measure whatever can be easily measured. This is okay as far as it goes. The

second step is to disregard that which can’t be measured or give it an arbitrary quantitative
value. This is artificial and misleading. The third step is to presume that what can’t be measured
easily really isn’t very important. This is blindness. The fourth step is to say that what can’t be
easily measured really doesn’t exist. This is suicide” (Daniel Yankelovich).
11 See The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning, Henry Mintzberg, Free Press, 1994.

07-34476

5

S/2007/294

that UNOWA report on cross-border issues, UNOWA produced a report, in
consultation with United Nations regional presences and peacekeeping entities in
the region, and a matrix that indicates which agency or partner is to take action. This
was followed by work aimed at addressing some of the specific issues raised, among
them disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and youth unemployment.
17. The report on youth unemployment 12 addresses issues such as transforming
the business environment through greater transparency, vocational training for the
maintenance of electronic products, including mobile phones, and the importance of
apprenticeship schemes. It has been coupled with and followed up by advocacy
work, the raising of resources from interested donors and collaboration with the
Youth Employment Network, a joint secretariat in Geneva set up following the
Millennium Summit by the International Labour Organization, the United Nations
and the World Bank. UNOWA appears to be patiently but persistently inserting the
issue of youth unemployment as a conflict-promoting factor into the agenda of
different players in the region and in that way encouraging a slow harmonization of
the efforts of Governments, civil society and the international community, including
United Nations country teams. 13 As part of its evolving strategy, UNOWA is also
conducting a study on the relationship between fast urbanization and security in the
region. It is too early to tell what that will yield, but it appears to be a sunrise rather
than a sunset issue, affecting the potential for conflict in West Africa.
18. The studies appear to have begun to focus the minds and therefore the agendas
of allies within the United Nations system, Governments in the region, civil society
and the international community, including some major non-governmental
organizations. The studies do not necessarily represent fundamentally new
departures in research in these areas. If they did, they would risk duplicating the
efforts of capacities already well established in the United Nations system. They are
novel and important because they are advocacy analysis: conscious experiments,
using analysis to try to harmonize the approaches of different partners and to
contribute to the subregional agenda for conflict prevention.
19. UNOWA asserts that it is identifying emerging issues relevant to prevention of
conflict, increasing attention to specific problems and addressing issues in an
action-oriented manner. It claims that it has achieved those results by enhancing
coordination and information-sharing, and most of all by promoting an integrated
subregional approach. UNOWA does indeed appear to be acquiring and exercising at
least some of the competencies needed to respond to current and evolving
challenges related to crisis prevention and recovery.
20. To date, the good-offices role has been very successful, according to all signals
received in the context of this review. However, the performance of the Office has
__________________
12 Available on the UNOWA website (http://www.un.org/unowa/unowa/studies/yunemp-v2-en.pdf).
13 Using bilateral donor resources, UNOWA has enabled the Youth Employment Network to assign

a long-term specialist in youth unemployment to UNOWA to follow up its efforts so far. This is
a tribute to the success of UNOWA in inspiring confidence within the donor community, but
here also lies a potential danger for the future. UNOWA is not an operational entity, nor should
it try to become something for which it does not have the capacity. Part of its additionality lies
in the intelligent use of advocacy analysis, its ability to raise issues and place them, in a
coherent and actionable form, on the agendas of agencies that implement programmes, as well
as those that think about them. There is a tension between the demands of launching issues and
the temptation to go too far down the path of implementation. UNOWA needs to manage this
tension carefully. Future reviews of UNOWA need to examine this wisely.

6

07-34476

S/2007/294

been hampered by sub-optimal interactions with, and support from, United Nations
Headquarters. This may explain the apparent lack of an overall workplan and an
unclear sense among some staff of what is expected of them and their Office. Part of
the problem is the start-up pains of a new initiative, part, long overdue for solution,
is managerial, 14 and part stems from the lack of overall clarity as to what to expect
of such a new departure.
21. As to the principal areas recommended for UNOWA to focus on for the next
three to five years, the first requirement is to define clearly the minimal core of
competencies that a facility with a subregional vocation has to have in order to
achieve an acceptable level of performance. Currently, UNOWA has within it,
beyond its ability to carry out the good-offices role, some capacity for political
analysis and for gender and human rights, and associated with it, but unfortunately
not located within it, for humanitarian affairs. It also has military and security
affairs capacity. This may be an appropriate mix going forward, and, a priori, it is
plausible, but a hard, searching look is needed to see whether it is the optimal mix
for an innovative initiative and how to weld that mix into a cohesive and costeffective whole.
22. The current staff of UNOWA appear to have been so deeply engaged in their
many demanding tasks that they have not been required to reflect much on these
issues. They should suggest, in the light of their experience so far, a minimal critical
mass of essential competencies 15 with which UNOWA should be endowed, along
with its good-offices and Special Representative function. They and other relevant
stakeholders should be encouraged to complete this process in the near future, and
certainly before a new submission is made to the Security Council for a renewal of
the UNOWA mandate.
23. The next focus area should be the drawing up, and the use as a living
management tool, of an overall Office workplan. When asked about this, Office staff
responded that they have individual workplans, which is correct, and that the budget
document provided an overall framework for their work. 16 Such a document does
indeed exist, and it contains both goals and indicators of accomplishment. However,
its scope is for one year, and it does not contain a long- or even medium-term vision
of conflict prevention and peacebuilding for West Africa. Such a vision would draw
together the various components of UNOWA work, tying them to indicators that are
measurable, or at least observable to informed observers. Progress towards the
achievement of those indicators would guide the daily, weekly and monthly work of
the various individual workplans and parts of the Office.
24. The budget document, in line with recommendations of past Office of Internal
Oversight Services evaluations of peacekeeping missions, includes an exit strategy
for the Office. For special political and peacekeeping missions in individual
__________________
14 A Director was appointed from, and paid for by, the United Nations Development Programme to

run the Office but left in April 2006, when resources ran out. A post was then added to the
UNOWA budget but has not yet been filled.
15 Currently there are four: political analysis, humanitarian affairs, human rights/gender and
military and security matters.
16 They also note that one of the advantages of UNOWA is that while indeed each staff member is
the focal point in charge of specific issues, they all work together, and consultations and
exchanges are a part of daily business. This allows a continued assessment of situations and
strategies with a view to long-term peace and security.

07-34476

7

S/2007/294

countries, consideration of such a strategy is appropriate. However, UNOWA, facing
a larger subregional problematic, should plan and operate with an awareness of
consequences over a longer time frame and a wider geographical and political
scope. Its performance should be assessed in that context. In such circumstances,
stressing the importance of an exit strategy appears to be premature.
25. Many managerial lacunae and the handicaps emerging from the lack of an
overall Office workplan could be redressed if the post of Deputy Director were
filled. Previously the post was provided and paid for by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and was occupied by a senior individual until
April 2006. Since then, UNDP resources have not been available, so a post for a
Deputy Director has been included in the Office budget, but it is still vacant. The
review team was advised informally that a qualified individual has been identified
within the United Nations Secretariat but has not been reassigned, allegedly because
of the difference in contractual status enjoyed by Headquarters and UNOWA staff.
Apparently, UNOWA staff are limited to contracts as staff of UNOWA only, and
therefore cannot move easily to other posts within the United Nations Secretariat.
26. If this is what is holding up filling that post, it appears to be an instance of
bureaucratic procedure triumphing over serious substantive need. That need is,
firstly, to provide an experienced and tough-minded manager capable of ensuring
that the various parts of UNOWA work smoothly and synergistically, taking the
burden of the day-to-day running of the Office off the shoulders of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whose good offices and diplomatic skills
have been, and likely will be, very much in demand, and, secondly, to associate with
that manager a cadre of experienced staff who have reasonable and normal career
prospects within the United Nations, in departments and assignments that would
benefit from the very useful exposure and experience they would acquire while
working with UNOWA. Assigning some Department of Political Affairs staff to
work in the Office would appear to be a helpful way of providing them with
essential field experience.
27. As to whether there are specific additional types of activities or interventions
in which UNOWA should engage, it is perhaps too early to add them to the current
mandate and the way that it has been interpreted. For example, the production of the
studies that UNOWA has already undertaken is an innovative way of combining
analysis and advocacy. The study papers have been or are being shared with an array
of relevant agencies and entities, both national and subregional, and they contribute
to the agendas of meetings relating to conflict prevention and peacebuilding
attended by relevant actors. In this way, the issue of youth unemployment as a
conflict-promoting factor appears to be gaining traction.

Results and results focus
28. Some positive results at the country, regional and global levels to which
UNOWA has contributed include:
(a) The effective deployment of its good offices, as attested to by numerous
privileged and well-informed observers within and outside the United Nations
system;

8

07-34476

S/2007/294

(b) Harmonizing the work of the various special political and peacekeeping
missions in the subregion, both at the level of Special Representatives and at the
level of the military advisers for such missions;
(c) Advocacy analysis of youth unemployment, easy availability of small
arms, cross-border problems and associated security and developmental problems of
frontier areas, and peaceful and constitutional transfers of power;
(d) The work of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, which is seen to
have made a significant contribution to resolving the boundary issues between the
two countries.
29. The factors contributing to these positive results include the good-offices
capacity, which appears to have been deployed wisely in close contact with the
Office of the Secretary-General and which is widely appreciated. In addition, the
staff of UNOWA appear to be dedicated to their tasks and to the principles of United
Nations service, so they work very hard, mitigating if not entirely eliminating the
managerial lacunae referred to above. Furthermore, the Office is quite small, which
encourages an awareness in all staff of current demands and allows a certain
nimbleness in its ability to respond.
30. The Office has had a useful harmonizing effect within the United Nations
system, working with a delicate touch to provide a regular forum and meeting
ground for the special political and peacekeeping missions in the subregion to
discuss issues that go beyond borders and problems of common concern in the
management of such missions, including their military components.
31. UNOWA has officially issued its study on the peaceful alternation of power. 17
Raising this issue dovetails neatly with the discussion in a joint Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)/UNOWA policy seminar on the
evolving security architecture in West Africa, held on 30 and 31 October 2006 in
Accra. Here is one area where UNOWA may wish to build on its existing work and
develop the role of elder statesmen in conjunction with, and in support of, the good
offices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
32. The Office notes that, taking into account its mandate, it has enhanced
linkages with United Nations entities and partners promoting the subregional
approach and facilitating coordination and exchange of information, holding regular
meetings with (a) Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, (b) Force
Commanders, (c) the Inter-Mission Cooperation Working Group, (d) heads of the
human rights components of United Nations missions and (e) United Nations
regional presences in Dakar (the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the World Food Programme
(WFP), etc.). During the meetings, issues with subregional impact have been
discussed. In addition, it has carried out good offices and special assignments in
countries as needed, and provided Headquarters with first-hand, well-informed
background information on political and security-related developments in the
subregion.
33. One factor worthy of attention in the context of learning lessons from its
experience is its collocation with the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission. Part of
__________________
17 Life after State House: Addressing Unconstitutional Changes in West Africa, UNOWA issues

paper, Dakar, March 2006.

07-34476

9

S/2007/294

the success of UNOWA may have come about because of this association and
integration with the work of the Mixed Commission. It may be that the close
association of the immediate tasks of a special political and conflict-prevention
mission, with a parallel capacity for reflection on and analysis of the conflictprevention experience that has a much longer perspective, creates some positive
synergy. The Mixed Commission is seen as having contributed significantly to the
resolution of the boundary dispute between the two countries, notably over the
Bakassi peninsula. The present review is limited to the work of UNOWA, but it is
apparent that there has been considerable interaction between the staff of the two
offices to the benefit of both. This needs to be explored further and monitored to see
if there are lessons for future initiatives of this nature. 18
34. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs maintains a separate
office in Dakar, linked with but not integral to UNOWA. Initially they were
collocated, but when the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs office
grew, the Humanitarian Adviser had to find new premises. The Regional Director
remains the adviser to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
humanitarian issues. Both UNOWA and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs maintained that the separation was not detrimental to either
their collaboration or their effectiveness. They have not as yet offered any
significant evidence supporting their positions on this issue. This review team is not
convinced that separate facilities are the most cost-effective configuration.
35. Past experience demonstrates a tendency for new capacities of the United
Nations system to seek autonomy for themselves once they achieve sufficient
critical mass. Thus, the question is whether, when budgetary resources are sufficient
to support the existence of separate offices for gender, human rights, children in
conflict or environment and conflict, separate offices should indeed be created, and
whether this would lead to a more coherent and effective subregional approach. It
seems doubtful, especially when a former leader of ECOWAS 19 stressed forcefully
to the review team at the Accra seminar 20 that the original impetus for approaching
the Secretary-General to create UNOWA had been a powerful desire for the United
Nations system to work in a coherent fashion to address the complex problems of
the region, something that had not yet been attained.
36. The Department of Political Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and UNOWA should come to a common
accord on, and approach to, this issue. The recent report of the High-level Panel on
United Nations System-wide Coherence, while aimed at country-level operations,
would appear to have at least some relevance in both its analysis and its
recommendations as regards subregional interventions.
__________________
18 After an International Court of Justice ruling, the two parties were encouraged by the Secretary-

General to set up a mixed commission, chaired and serviced by the United Nations, in order to
implement the ruling (i.e., withdrawal of troops) and also confidence-building measures. This
was seen by some as a new paradigm for low-cost and effective conflict resolution. This
example has not yet been followed elsewhere in the world. But there was innovation not only in
the concept behind it, but also in one key area of implementation: the use of civilian monitors
(at a fraction of the cost of United Nations military observers) to monitor the withdrawal. This
appears to be a key development, one that could well be emulated elsewhere.
19 Now the Prime Minister of Guinea.
20 See box entitled “Meetings”.

10

07-34476

S/2007/294

37. Some areas where UNOWA has not made much of an impact are (a) children
affected by war, an issue addressed in the original Security Council report but not
extensively by UNOWA, 21 and (b) the effect of environment and resourcemanagement issues on conflict prevention. UNOWA does not have substantive
capacity in either area, and the staff appear to have been more than fully occupied
with the tasks they already had, but, lacking that reflection called for in paragraph
22 above on what essential competencies UNOWA should have, it is reasonable to
ask whether these areas are not aspects of conflict prevention and peacebuilding that
are as important as the ones that were actually chosen.
38. This is not a criticism of the choices that the UNOWA leadership has actually
made; they are plausible and quite consistent with the mandate. Furthermore, an
intelligent opportunism in the choice of problems addressed is a useful, perhaps
essential, characteristic for an innovative initiative. However, the fact that the issue
can be raised reinforces the case for serious examination by relevant stakeholders as
to the most important priorities in the subregion and how they are evolving. It also
implies that a more serious job of learning from this experiment should have been
undertaken by the Office and by the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Given the staffing shortage under which
UNOWA has laboured, that is not a very telling critique of them, but it is something
that could be usefully addressed by all three of them going forward.

Impact at the regional level
39. One question in considering the subregional impact of UNOWA is whether its
support is reaching national and regional counterparts (intergovernmental,
governmental and non-governmental) and whether its existing structures and
procedures are optimally geared to meeting their needs. The principal regional
counterparts are ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and the West African Economic
and Monetary Union (WAEMU).
40. There is already collaboration between UNOWA and ECOWAS. Another major
player in this partnership is the European Union, which has been enthusiastic both
about an enhanced role for ECOWAS in regional peacekeeping and about UNOWA
support for strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS to fulfil that role. There are
regular meetings at the ministerial level of the European Union/ECOWAS/UNOWA
“troika”. UNOWA was a participant in a joint European Union/United Nations
assessment mission of ECOWAS capacities and needs in the area of peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. That assessment mission was carried out pursuant to the
recommendation of the Security Council mission to West Africa, in July 2003, that
the international community give concrete expression to the repeated call for
increased international support for the role of ECOWAS and that UNOWA
undertake a comprehensive study of ways in which the international community can
increase its cooperation with, and assist in strengthening, ECOWAS capacity.
41. This is a positive evolution, as there was a lack of clarity at the outset
regarding the respective roles of the Department of Political Affairs in New York,
__________________
21 To be fair, child trafficking was one of the subjects addressed at the Sikasso meeting (on

common problems of border areas) in 2005 jointly organized by UNOWA, the Club du Sahel
and ECOWAS. Also, UNOWA representatives did raise the issue at many West Africa regional
meetings held by UNICEF in the last four years.

07-34476

11

S/2007/294

ECOWAS and UNOWA. This uncertainty has been commented on by sources within
the Department of Political Affairs, within ECOWAS and from among qualified
observers from United Nations organizations in the field. What appears to have been
at issue was who should report to the Secretary-General on political developments
in the region, and how Resident Coordinators should communicate with, and obtain
political support and guidance from, the United Nations Secretariat. This uncertainty
appears to have been resolved, and Resident Coordinators in the subregion have
indicated that they do benefit from interaction with UNOWA, while welcoming the
greater clarity emerging on the respective roles of the Department of Political
Affairs and UNOWA.
42. The burgeoning collaborative programme that has been initiated between
ECOWAS and UNOWA and the European Union is a testament to UNOWA efforts
to establish itself as a viable political resource for its stakeholders. But it needs
sufficient capacity to play its part in those partnerships, and/or it needs some
supporting alliances within the United Nations system to assist in the delivery of the
ECOWAS/European Union programmes. In this connection, the observation by the
European Union/United Nations assessment mission that UNOWA is considering
seconding a staff member to Abuja to serve as a liaison with the ECOWAS
secretariat may need active follow-up.
43. It appears that the strengthening of the capacity of ECOWAS requires
continued support. While there are ample resources available both from the States
concerned and from the international community, notably the European Union, some
programmes have a way to go before full implementation and the creation of
sustainable capacities are achieved. The UNDP approach to managing cost-sharing
contributions to programmes it implements in Latin America may have some
relevance to ECOWAS/UNOWA collaboration. Current inflexibility in the United
Nations Secretariat’s financial and administrative procedures for programmes in the
field and for trust fund activities would probably prevent the direct involvement of
UNOWA. Hence the need for UNOWA to establish alliances within the United
Nations system, possibly with the United Nations Office for Project Services
(UNOPS) or UNDP itself, so that agencies can help implement the externally funded
contributions to strengthening ECOWAS capacity and carrying out its programmes.
44. UNOWA relations with the Mano River Union and WAEMU were less visible
to the review team, although in November 2006 UNOWA helped to finance and
organize a major subregional meeting in Conakry on peace, security and confidencebuilding measures in the Mano River area, along with the Mano River Union, the
Department of Political Affairs and the UNDP/Bureau for Crisis Prevention and
Recovery. Overall, it is difficult at this stage to discern the impact on subregional
organizations other than ECOWAS. However, ECOWAS appears to be the key, and
UNOWA has been well advised to concentrate its attention there.
45. It is premature to say whether the existing structures and procedures are
optimally geared to meeting the needs of UNOWA partners, and to draw much in the
way of conclusions on lessons that can be learned from UNOWA support, in terms
of guidance, timely policy advice and other appropriate support relevant to this
practice area. One cannot say even tentatively whether the structure is optimal until
it has been properly staffed and the serious reflection called for in paragraph 22
above, on the minimal core competencies that such a facility needs, has been carried

12

07-34476

S/2007/294

out. The current staff of the Office is the group least ill-equipped to carry out that
task, notwithstanding their workload, which is already heavy.
46. As to UNOWA effectiveness in mainstreaming concerns of the United Nations,
the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
at the country and regional levels, it is difficult to say, beyond remarking that the
Office appears to have done a good job in advancing the goals of peace and security
in West Africa, what the principal relevant concerns of those two Departments are.
Any other major concerns should have been laid out in the overall Office workplan,
but since none exists beyond its mandate, which it is fulfilling, judgement on this
score has to be tentative.

Inter-agency coordination
47. Has UNOWA enhanced the harmonization of activities of various United
Nations missions and other regional entities, and has it favoured informationsharing? The simple answer to that complex question is yes. It organized regular
meetings for the special political and peacekeeping missions in the subregion to
discuss issues that go beyond borders and problems of common concern in the
management of such missions, including their military components. To date, there
have been eight such meetings.

Meetings
The work of the review was helped by the opportunity to attend two
significant meetings that UNOWA, along with other partners, organized
and conducted.
The first, on the theme “Consolidating peace in West Africa:
regional challenges, transborder threats and the evolving international
role”, was held in Senegal on 20 and 21 October 2006 at the Gorée
Institute. It addressed the topics “Responses to regional challenges and
transborder issues: governance and security”, “Sanctions and embargoes:
(un-) intended national and regional consequences”, “National processes
in peace consolidation and their regional implications: transitional
justice” and “Fine-tuning a regional approach or a new toolbox?”
The second, on the theme “Evolving security architecture of
ECOWAS: looking back to the future”, was held on 30 and 31 October
2006 in Accra, and included presentations and discussions on the topics
“West Africa’s evolving security architecture”, “Mediation: the Council
of Elders”, “United Nations/ECOWAS collaboration in peacekeeping/
peacebuilding”, “ECOWAS and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission”, “The ECOWAS early warning system”, “Elections and
democratic transitions”, “HIV/AIDS and Security” and the UNOWA
report Life after State House: Addressing Unconstitutional Changes in
West Africa.

07-34476

13

S/2007/294

The first was attended by ambassadors of major nations and
representatives of major international non-governmental organizations
dealing with conflict issues, regional organizations and international
financial institutions. Most of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and one United Nations Resident Coordinator from the
subregion also attended. Thus, there was a good mix of thoughtful
practitioners and practical thinkers. There were recurrent references to
various issues regarding which UNOWA has been an advocate, in
discussions on such diverse topics as differentiating between effective
and ineffective sanctions and the implications of the growing
involvement of emerging economies in the subregion.
The second was attended by staff of ECOWAS, a number of senior
thinkers from the subregion and representatives of the security and
private sectors. There were serious discussions of pressing security issues
facing the subregion and the practical aspects of democratic transfer of
power, into all of which UNOWA discreetly injected its thinking, as well
as presenting, at the end of the meeting, its paper Life after State House.
Both meetings lent plausibility to the view that UNOWA is affecting the
agenda and actions of key players both from within and from outside the
region.

48. Most United Nations participants interviewed indicated that they appreciated
the exchange of information in an informal setting and the chance to discuss
problems in an informal context and to seek and exchange advice. Most also
appreciated the extra reach that a geographically proximate but non-resident United
Nations good-offices facility could offer them. Such a facility should also, in theory,
be available to non-United Nations entities in the region, but it is not clear that they
would yet be willing to seek its help, however sensible and useful that might be for
the subregion.
49. Coordination, as a general rule, is difficult, if not impossible, for those who
have no hierarchical authority over, or benefits and resources to offer, those they are
asked to coordinate. Consequently, the practical operationalization of the concept of
coordination has in recent times morphed into harmonization, a much more subtle
and demanding task, the effects of which are harder to discern.
50. The UNOWA leadership appears to have exercised a harmonizing effect within
and beyond the United Nations system, working with a delicate touch to provide a
regular forum or meeting ground. In formal terms, this harmonization has not gone
beyond the United Nations system, but there is no indication that other external
partners of Governments in the region, such as the European Union, the
international financial institutions or the major international non-governmental
organizations interested in conflict issues are yet ready to be harmonized. However,
they do participate in various meetings or activities in which UNOWA has a role and
so appear to be open to being influenced by subtle advocacy.
51. The UNOWA tactic of organizing or co-financing regular meetings of concern
to such players is an effective way of putting issues on the agenda and thus inducing
and promoting harmonization. UNOWA has involved other influential groups, such

14

07-34476

S/2007/294

as the Development Assistance Committee/Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development-based Club du Sahel, to put youth unemployment in the region
and the problems of border areas, among other topics, onto many agendas. The
constraints to more effective inter-agency coordination and planning have been
addressed by the recent report of the High-level Panel on United Nations Systemwide Coherence. In its own domain, UNOWA appears to be doing quite a good job
on this score without fanfare.

Cross-cutting issues, including gender mainstreaming and
human rights
52. The terms of reference ask that the present review determine whether UNOWA
has been able to mainstream gender across its various service lines. But it is unclear
how much operational sense mainstreaming gender has in the areas in which it
operates, especially as its service lines have yet to be established. 22 It certainly does
have capacity in respect of gender, and it has worked actively with women’s groups
in the region in the pursuit of peace, not least with the Mano River Women’s Peace
Network. But the role and core competencies of the Office need to be firmly
established before one can sensibly assess performance in mainstreaming. The
gender-related recommendations of the High-level Panel on United Nations Systemwide Coherence are relevant here. 23
53. As for human rights work, the review team was advised that, as part of its
harmonization mandate, UNOWA has met regularly with the heads of the human
rights components of United Nations missions. The human rights staff also report
regularly to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and through him to
OHCHR on human rights developments in the region. The UNOWA issue papers,
such as those on youth unemployment and the problems of border areas, all make
reference to both gender and human rights. In the work on border areas, there has
been an interesting exploration from the perspective of human rights of the
difficulty those dwelling in such areas face in obtaining identity cards, which would
facilitate legal travel across frontiers. They have also actively drawn attention to
human trafficking issues, particularly in respect of children.
54. However, there may be more work to do to translate these concerns into
practical measures for a subregional conflict-prevention/peacebuilding facility, and
to show how the useful advocacy analysis for youth unemployment, security sector
reform and the problems of border areas can be expanded to include discussion and
consideration by the communities concerned of tangible measures to protect the
human rights of the communities involved and to advance the opportunities and
security of women therein. One or two pieces of advocacy analysis in this vein
analogous to that undertaken for youth employment might help translate these
overarching concerns into actionable components of Government and agency
programmes in the area.
55. Security concerns and military matters were not touched upon in the terms of
reference of the review, nor are they specifically mentioned in the mandate, but
appear to be a cross-cutting issue of consequence. The review team endeavoured to
__________________
22 See paras. 21 and 22 above.
23 See A/61/583, para. 49 and box 2.

07-34476

15

S/2007/294

elicit the views of the military staff of UNOWA, but specific suggestions were not
forthcoming, so the following observations are tentative and made without
professional backing. Military and security issues would appear to be cross-border
in nature and a common feature of many countries in the subregion, so a capacity to
understand and advise on both would appear to be a core competency required for
UNOWA going forward. How to link them with conflict-prevention agenda-setting,
including also political, human rights and humanitarian dimensions, and how to
associate them all productively with parallel activities of agencies such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, remains to be elaborated, but it is part
of the hard, searching look called for above.

Human and capital resource use and future financial sustainability
56. The most consistent features of staff and personnel trends in recent years have
been insufficiency and uncertainty. The review has already commented on the
desirability of having qualified personnel from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and OHCHR, and the importance of keeping them on the same
premises as UNOWA rather than setting up separate facilities, as has been the case
for the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
57. But the question should not be “What is the effectiveness of the arrangements
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and OHCHR for staff
to cover humanitarian and human rights functions, and with UNDP for the post of
Director of UNOWA?” but, rather, whether the skill profile and current mix of staff
meet present and projected needs. In the latter formulation, the evolving needs of
the subregion come first. Then the issue becomes that of how best to equip a
subregional conflict-prevention and peacebuilding facility, and how the various
parts of the United Nations system, in this instance the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, OHCHR, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and perhaps the UNDP Bureau for Crisis
Prevention and Recovery, can best supply the skills that such new initiative of this
kind requires.
58. It appears that donors are willing to provide extrabudgetary resources as trust
funds for conflict prevention and peacebuilding. A number of initiatives have been
made possible, including the November meeting in Conakry dealing with
peacekeeping in the Mano River area, funded by the Department of Political Affairs
Trust Fund for Preventive Action. However, implementing such trust funds is
difficult and labour-intensive because of the cumbersome financial and
administrative procedures of the United Nations. Managerial time and effort are
very scarce resources for UNOWA, so finding allies within the United Nations
system, such as UNOPS, that can handle the administration of such trust fund
activities that UNOWA is sponsoring and or co-financing may be an area to explore.

Other issues
59. Air transport has been posed as an issue. The review team understands that
provision for air transport was made in the last budget but that the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions was interested in the
comments of the present review. Transport links within the subregion are not

16

07-34476

S/2007/294

optimal, and safety standards are not always the highest. Modern communications
technology is increasingly reducing the need for staff to be physically present to
perform much of the day-to-day work of the United Nations. Some of its functions,
however, need the personal touch, notably diplomacy. The question would therefore
appear to be whether the good-offices role can be effectively carried out without
ready access to dedicated or partially dedicated transport facilities. Wars, mutinies
and rebellions are costly processes, and prospects for them to occur in West Africa
remain significant, so it may be prudent to lean towards generosity in considering
this aspect of the current operations and future needs of UNOWA.

Some lessons
60. UNOWA is an interesting and innovative experiment. As a new facility,
mandated by the Security Council to respond to subregional issues of peace and
security in West Africa, 24 it adds, potentially at least, to the tools the international
community can use to quell conflict and promote peace. It offers a new vantage
point for constructive intervention by the United Nations in West Africa. Located in
the subregion, it is physically near but less constrained in its actions than United
Nations country teams or the several special political and peacekeeping missions in
individual countries. Such an experiment should be properly resourced and managed
and intelligently monitored and tested to see how well it works over an extended
period. That has not been the case so far. 25 It should be in future.
61. When the United Nations develops an interesting idea for furthering its
effectiveness in promoting peace and curtailing conflict, it should support it
wholeheartedly and not permit administrative practices or debates over who has the
leadership role in reporting to the Secretary-General on political developments
within the subregion to get in the way of establishing and testing such an initiative.
62. Many of the skills of a successful manager in the United Nations can be
learned best (perhaps only) on the job. There is an apprenticeship, albeit a
sophisticated one, to be followed in learning how to build peace and prevent
conflict. Opportunities to learn conflict prevention and peacebuilding, as offered in
UNOWA, do not come easily to staff who serve only at United Nations
Headquarters. Those working in an innovative experiment such as UNOWA should
be aware of their special responsibility to record and report intelligently on what
they are doing. Equally importantly, their Department of Political Affairs colleagues
at Headquarters, who do not have the advantage of being on the front line of
multilateral efforts to build peace, should be aware of their special responsibility to
learn from and use the experience of facilities such as UNOWA.
63. Greater exchange and rotation of staff between Headquarters and the field
would offer considerable benefits both to the staff concerned and to the
Organization. Career mobility has been a sine qua non for advancement in the funds
and programmes and is a tried and cost-effective way of providing individuals with
the skills the United Nations Secretariat requires. It would strengthen the capacity of
Headquarters staff, particularly those within the Department of Political Affairs, to
__________________
24 See S/2005/16.
25 The initial midterm review, done internally in 2003, dealt mainly with issues of administrative

support (see S/2004/797).

07-34476

17

S/2007/294

serve in missions and facilities such as the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
and UNOWA, and vice versa.
64. The work of UNOWA appears to have been hampered by limitations on staff
mobility and the contractual choices available to its staff. If the Department of
Political Affairs and the United Nations Secretariat are to develop a more effective
conflict-prevention and peacebuilding capacity, those constraints should be
removed, and staff working for UNOWA should be given contracts permitting them
to serve anywhere United Nations staff can serve.
65. Part of the success of UNOWA may have come about through its integration
with the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, because of the association of the
immediate tasks of preventive diplomacy with the setting up in the same location of
a parallel capacity for reflection on and analysis of the conflict-prevention
experience. This lesson needs to be explored further to see if it is a guide for future
initiatives of this nature.

Some findings and recommendations

Suggested
actors

Results and progress made
1. UNOWA is an experiment that may represent a
significant addition to the United Nations toolkit for conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. To date there has been a gap
between the country-level capacity of the United Nations to
respond to threats to peace and its global capacity to do so.
A subregional facility such as UNOWA potentially contributes
to filling that gap.
2. Results have been more than satisfactory, given the
relatively short life of an Office that was given an innovative
role. Its impact, in terms of processes of conflict prevention
and peacebuilding set in motion by UNOWA, remains to be seen.

Office of Internal
Oversight Services

Strengths and constraints
3. According to all signals received, the good-offices role
appears to be successful and much appreciated by key
stakeholders, both in the subregion and outside it.
4. UNOWA lacks an overall workplan. One should be
formulated soon. The Office lacks a Deputy Director to
manage it. One should be fielded very soon. Its work appears
to have been hampered by limitations on the contractual
choices available to its staff.

18

UNOWA,
Department of
Political Affairs,
Personnel
Management and
Support Service of
the Department of
Peacekeeping
Operations, Office
of Human Resources
Management

07-34476

S/2007/294

Some findings and recommendations

Suggested
actors

Good practices and lessons learned
5. UNOWA studies are novel and appear to resonate within
the subregion as advocacy analysis; conscious experiments
using such analysis to try to harmonize the approaches of
different partners and to contribute to the subregional agenda
for conflict prevention.
Recommendations for future policy and practice

07-34476

6. As an experiment, UNOWA should be properly
resourced and staffed, managed and monitored intelligently
and tested to see if and how it works over an extended period.

UNOWA,
Department of
Political Affairs,
Personnel
Management and
Support Service of
the Department of
Peacekeeping
Operations, Office
of Internal
Oversight Services

7. The need for the good-offices role of UNOWA is clear.
What else is needed for it to function optimally is not yet
clear. Thus, the current UNOWA team should suggest a
minimum critical mass of the essential competencies with
which a subregional facility for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding should be endowed. The Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should also contribute to this process. The
Security Council may wish to seek clarity on this issue before
renewing the mandate.

UNOWA,
Department of
Political Affairs,
Personnel
Management and
Support Service of
the Department of
Peacekeeping
Operations

8. UNOWA may wish to build on its work with the
ECOWAS Council of Elders and develop the role of elder
statesmen in the subregion in conjunction with, in support of
and expanding the good-offices role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

Department of
Political Affairs,
UNOWA

9. The Department of Political Affairs and UNOWA each
need some feedback/lesson-learning mechanism. The form of
such a mechanism does not have to parallel that of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, but the purpose
should be served in some appropriate way. Allocating at least
1 per cent of Department of Political Affairs and of UNOWA
resources to evaluating their effectiveness and impact, and
using the lessons in a systematic fashion, would be a minimal
response to present needs.

Department of
Political Affairs,
UNOWA

19

S/2007/294

Some findings and recommendations
10. Rotation of staff between Headquarters and the field can
help build conflict-prevention and peacebuilding capacity and
is a tried, cost-effective way of providing individuals with
skills the United Nations requires. It would strengthen the
capacity of Headquarters staff, particularly within the
Department of Political Affairs, to serve in missions and
facilities such as the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
and UNOWA and vice versa. Thus, it would probably help the
Department of Political Affairs perform better if limitations
on contractual choices available to qualified UNOWA staff
were removed and they were given contracts permitting them
to serve anywhere such United Nations staff can serve.

20

Suggested
actors
Department of
Political Affairs,
Office of Human
Resources
Management,
Personnel
Management and
Support Service of
the Department of
Peacekeeping
Operations

07-34476
