Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Considering the practical advantages involved in the
proposal to request the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assume the above-mentioned
responsibilities,
1. Requests the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees provisionally to undertake
the func~ions foreseen under the Convention on the
Reduction of Statelessness in accordance with its article 11 after the Convention has come into force;
2. Decides .to review, not later than at its thirtyfirst session, the opinion of the High Commissioner
and the arrangements he shall have made in this regard,
with a view to taking a decision on the establishment
of the body envisaged under article 11 of the Convention.
231 Ith plenary meeting
I O December I 974
3275 (XXIX). International Women's Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, in which it proclaimed the year 197 5
International Women's Year and decided to devote this
year to intensified action:
(a) To promote equality between men and women,
(b) To ensure the full integration of women in the
total development effort, especially by emphasizing
women's responsibility and important role in economic,
social and cultural development at the national, regional and international levels, particularly during the
Second United Nations Development Decade,
(c) To recognize the importance of women's increasing contribution to the development of friendly
relations and co-operation among States and to the
stl'engthening of world peace,
Recognizing the importance of the implementation
at the national, regional and international levels of the
Programme for the International Women's Year approved by the Economic and Social Council and annexed to its resolution 1849 (LVI) of 16 May 1974,
Recognizing further that voluntary contributions
from Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, private foundations and interested individuals, as called for by the Economic and
Social Council in its resolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May
1974, would help significantly to promote the goals
and objectives of the International Women's Year,
1. Calls upon Governments, specialized agencies,'
regional commissions and non-governmental organizations to implement fully the Programme for the International Women's Year as approved by the Economic and Social Council;
2. Recommends that all Member States should include in their national development plans and country
programmes, if they have not already done so, goals
and projects designed to train and equip women to
make a greater contribution to, and to become more
fully integrated in, the economic and social life of the
nation;
3. Recommends further that Member States should
establish, if they have not yet done so, as a priority
measure for the International Women's Year, appropriate national machinery to accelerate the integration
of women in development and to eliminate discrimination on grounds of sex;

93

4. Appeals to Member States, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, private foundations and interested individuals to give voluntary contributions to the Secretary-General for the International Women's Year, as called for in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1850 (LVI).

2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974
3276 (XXIX). Conference of the International
Women's Year5 8

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975 International Women's Year,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council in
its resolution 1851 (LVI) of 16 May 1974 requested
the Secretary-General to convene in 1975, in consultation with Member States, specialized agencies and
interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Council, an international conference during the International Women's Year to examine
to what extent the organizations of the United Nations
system have implemented the recommendations for
the elimination of discrimination against women made
by the Commission on the Status of Wcmen since its
establishment, and to launch an international action
programme including short-term and long-term measures aimed at achieving the integration of women as
full and equal partners with men in the total development effort and eliminating discrimination on grounds
of sex, and at achieving the widest involvement of
women in strengthening international peace and eliminating racism and racial discrimination,
Noting further that in the same resolution the Economic and Social Council recommended that a separate
item entitled "International. Women's Year", including the proposals and recommendations of the Conference of the International Women's Year, should be
examined by the General A~embly at its thirtieth
session,
Noting further that the Economic and Social Council,
in resolution 1849 ( L VI) of I 6 May 197 4, approved
the Pro~ramme for the International Women's Year,
l. Decides to invite all States to participate in the
Conference of the International Women's Year;
2. Decides to invite also the national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity and/or by the League of Arab States in their
respective regions to participate in the Conference ac;
observers, in accordance with the practice of the United
Nations;
3. Requests the Conference to submit, if possible,
such proposals and recommendations as it deems appropriate to the General Assembly at its special session
to be held in September 1975;
4. Decides to consider at its thirtieth session an
item entitled "International Women's Year, including
the proposals and recommendations of the Conference
:.s At its 1938th plenary meetin.g, on 15 January 1975, the
Economic and Social Council decided that the Conference to
be held <luring the International Women·s Year should be entitled .. World Conference of the International Women's Year"
(Council decision 67 /ORG-75) ).

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

94

of the International Women's Year" and an item entitled "Status and role of women in society, with special
reference to the need for achieving equal rights for
women and to women's contribution to the attainment of the goals of the Second United Nations Development Decade, to the struggle against colonialism,
racism and racial discrimination and to the strengthening of international peace and of co-operation between
States".
2311 th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3277 (XXIX). Consuitative Committee for the
Conference of the International Women's
Year" 8

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1851
(LVI) of 16 May 1974, in which the Secretary-General was requested to convene, in consultation with
Member States, specialized agencies and interested
non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Council, an international conference during
the International Women's Year, in 1975,
Realizing the importance of consultations, at the
highest possible level, for the preparation of the Conference of the International Women's Year,
1. Expresses the hope that the preparation of the
Conference of the International Women's Year will be
given the full attention which it warrants, having regatd
to the importance of the question;
2. Decides to establish a Consultative Committee
for the Conference of the International Women's Year
composed of not more than twenty-three Member
States designated by the Chairman of the Third Committee after consultation with the different regional
groups, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution;~9
3. Expresses the hope that the Consultative Committee will be comprised of highly qualified individuals
designated by their respective Governments;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
Consultative Committee not later than March 1975
at United Nations Headquarters, for a period not
exceeding ten working days, to advise him on the preparation of an international plan of action to be finalized by the Conference;

5. Decides that all the costs of convening the Consultative Committee, including the travel expenses of
its members, will be met from the fund for voluntary
contributions for the International Women's Year established under Economic and Social Council resolution
1850 (LVl) of 16 May 1974;
6. Appeals to Member States to make, in so far
as it lies within their power, voluntary contributions
to the above-mentioned fund in order to meet the
necessary financial implications for the convening of
the Consultative Committee;
7. P :!quests the Secretary-General to prepare a
draft 111ternational plan of action in time to be considered by the Consultative Committee and to submit
a progress report on the preparation of the Conference
r.9 See also p. 95, item

12.

to the organizational session of the Economic and Social Council in January 1975.

2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974

•

•

•

At the 2311th plenary meeting, on JO December 1974, the
President of the General Assembly announced that the Chairman of the Third Committee, in pursuance of paragraph 2
of the above resolution, had designated the members of the
Consultative Committee for the Conference of the International
Women's Year.
As a result. tire Consultatfre Committee is composed of
the following Member States: AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL,
FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, INDIA, IRAN, JA.
MAICA, JAPAN, JORDAN, MEXICO, NIGER, PHILIPPINES, ROMANIA,
RWANDA, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE, SWEDEN, TUNISIA, UNION
OF SOVIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
and VENEZUELA.

3278 (XXIX). Contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3145 (XXVIII) and 3146
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
' Realizing that drug abuse control is a iong-term
problem the resolution of which requires sustained international action,
Recognizing. that the United Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control was established to provide the international community with a means to assist in undertaking the required action to eliminate illicit drug
supply, trafficking and demand,
Noting that the Fund, which has already undertaken
many useful programmes, requires larger resources in
order to respond affirmatively to requests from Governments for assistance,
Urgently appeals to Governments for generous and
sustained cont,ributions to the United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control.
2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3279 (XXIX). Abuse of and illicit traffic
in narcotic drugs

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern that the abuse of and illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs have transcended national
boundaries and affect the well-being and health of
mankind as a whole,
Mindful of the dangers of the increasing abuse of
psychotropic substances and the greater volume of the
illicit traffic in these substances, as well as of various
narcotic drugs,
Recalling with appreciation the activities of the International Narcotics Control Board and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in this matter,
Appealing for global participation in all efforts to
stop the abuse of and the illicit traffic in those drugs,
Reaffirming that the misuse of narcotic and psychotropic substances presents an actual as well as a potential danger to the health and future of mankind,
especially that of youth,
