A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/116
16 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 96 (e)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/618/Add.4)]
50/116.

Implementation of the outcome of the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/122 of 19 December 1994 on the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Recalling also its resolution 49/100 of 19 December 1994 on specific
measures in favour of island developing countries,
Reaffirming that, because the development options of small island
developing States are limited, there are special challenges to devising and
implementing sustainable development plans, and that small island developing
States will be constrained in meeting such challenges without the cooperation
of the international community,
1.
Takes notes with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral 1/ on action taken by the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to implement the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, 2/ and welcomes in particular
the action that has been taken by the Department for Policy Coordination and

1/

A/50/422 and Add.1.

2/
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994
(A/CONF.167/9 and Corr.1 and 2) (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18
and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
96-76663

/...

A/RES/50/116
Page 2

Sustainable Development of the United Nations Secretariat to support the
system-wide implementation of the Programme of Action;
2.
Notes the establishment of the Small Island Developing States Unit
within the above-mentioned Department, and requests the Secretary-General to
maintain the level of staffing and the structure and organization of the Unit
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/122;
3.
Welcomes the action that has been taken to enable the regional
commissions to support activities to coordinate the outcome of the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;
4.
Takes note of the interim measures that have been instituted to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to enable it to complement the functions of the above-mentioned
Department with respect to the implementation of the Programme of Action, and
requests the Secretary-General to implement fully the relevant provisions of
General Assembly resolution 49/122;
5.
Calls upon Governments, as well as the organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system, other intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations, to continue to implement fully all the
commitments and recommendations that were made at the Global Conference, and
to continue to take the action necessary for effective follow-up to the
Programme of Action, including action to ensure the provision of the means of
implementation under chapter XV thereof;
6.
Welcomes, in particular, the progress made by the United Nations
Development Programme in implementing General Assembly resolution 49/122, and
invites the Programme to continue to implement all the provisions of both the
technical assistance programme and the information network for small island
developing States, as appropriate;
7.
Takes note of the support that has been provided by the Commission
on Sustainable Development 3/ to following up the implementation of the
Programme of Action in accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/122 and
the Programme of Action itself, and invites the Commission at its fourth
session to consider giving due attention to small island developing States in
the national presentations on coastal zone management;
8.
Notes the initial action that has been taken by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and by the Department for Policy
Coordination and Sustainable Development in preparation for the high-level
panel that is being convened to discuss the challenges faced by island
developing countries, particularly in the area of external trade, and invites
the Conference and the Department to complete their arrangements in time for
the fourth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, and to make
the report of the panel available to the Conference at its ninth session;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Small Island
Developing States Unit of the above-mentioned Department include in its work
programme, along with an indication of the resources of its activities and

3/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
Supplement No. 12 (E/1995/32).
/...

A/RES/50/116
Page 3

programmes, provision for the development and compilation of a vulnerability
index for small island developing States, to be prepared in collaboration with
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other relevant
organizations;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-third session a report on the plans, programmes and projects for
the sustainable development of small island developing States that have been
implemented in response to the Programme of Action, as well as those that are
under implementation and those that are envisaged for implementation within
five years of the date of the report;
11.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session, under the item entitled "Environment and sustainable development",
the sub-item entitled "Implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference
on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States";
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session a report on action taken to implement the present
resolution.
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
