S/PV.8548*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8548th meeting

Thursday, 13 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sheikh Al Sabah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Shulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the Security Council and the League of Arab States
Letter dated 31 May 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/455)

*Reissued for technical reasons 26 January 2022.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-17360 (E)
*1917360*

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

why partnerships remain essential to maximizing our
impact on people’s lives and advancing a global order
based on international law.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the Security Council and
the League of Arab States
Letter dated 31 May 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/455)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/455, which contains a letter dated
31 May 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the f loor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Kuwait for convening this discussion on issues of
priority to the League of Arab States and outcomes of
the Arab Summit.
I want to express my warm welcome to Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States. We have been working together on many of
the most difficult issues that our two organizations
confront and it is for me an enormous pleasure to see
him sitting in the Security Council.
From day one, I have prioritized cooperation with
regional organizations to prevent conflict and sustain
peace. We know that no single organization or country
can address the complex challenges our world faces
today. Global problems require global solutions. That is
2/24

13/06/2019

Our cooperation with the League of Arab States
is pivotal. I was honoured to attend the Arab League
Summit in Tunis in March and appreciate the Tunis
Declaration’s reaffirmation of the “universal and
noble values and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations” (S/2019/306, appendix I, third preambular
paragraph). Our two organizations share a common
mission to prevent conflict, resolve disputes and act
in a spirit of solidarity and unity. We work together to
expand economic opportunity, advance respect for all
human rights and build political inclusion.
Today, we recognize an expectation from the
peoples of the region — indeed, from people around the
world — for a new social contract for education, jobs,
opportunities for young people, equality for women,
respect for human rights and a fair share in national
wealth. We understand the impulse for a more inclusive
vision rooted in cooperation, respect and dignity. We
appreciate all efforts to help break the vicious cycle of
conflict while establishing a new security architecture.
Within the challenges facing the region lies the
opportunity to build on the words and intentions of
the charters of our two organizations for action that
will bring real change to the peoples of the Arab world
and beyond.
In relation to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, for
example, we maintain our collective commitment to the
vision of two States, based on relevant United Nations
resolutions, long-held principles, previous agreements
and international law. As I have said before, there is
no alternative to the two-State solution. There is no
Plan B. Ending the occupation that began in 1967 and
achieving a negotiated two-State outcome is the only
way to lay the foundations for enduring peace.
In Syria, deadly escalation in the country’s
north-west has displaced hundreds of thousands, and
if continued could result in broader humanitarian
catastrophe for the 3 million people residing in greater
Idlib. After more than eight years of violence, Syria’s
conflict continues to take a devastating toll on the
country’s civilian population, impose burdens on
neighbouring States and threaten international peace
and security. I reiterate my appeal for full respect
for international humanitarian law, which must
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

prevail in all circumstances, including in the combat
against terrorism.
The alarming violence in Syria is a stark reminder of
the urgent need to forge a political path to a sustainable
peace for all Syrians. This will require an inclusive
and credible political solution, based on resolution
2254 (2015) in its entirety, including the convening of a
constitutional committee that is credible, inclusive and
balanced. The support and active engagement of the
international community, including the States members
of the Arab League, will be essential. And, of course,
any solution must respect the territorial integrity of
Syria, including the occupied Syrian Golan.
Regarding Libya, I would like to thank the League
of Arab States and its member States for its continued
support for the efforts of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and my Special Representative,
including through the Libya quartet. However, I remain
deeply concerned about the impact of the armed clashes
on the country and on the region. There is no military
solution. We need to work towards a ceasefire and a
return to the negotiating table.
I welcome Iraq’s sustained and active outreach to
strengthen its relations with neighbouring countries.
Conversely, Iraq needs the continued and sustained
support of the region and the international community
to help rebuild the country and overcome the trauma and
impact of Da’esh. Iraq’s Arab neighbours have a critical
role to play. The United Nations will continue to assist
the Government of Iraq, including through stabilization
and reconstruction support, as well as in facilitating
regional dialogue and cooperation on border security,
energy, environment, water and refugees.
The League of Arab States is vital in supporting
Lebanon’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. Let us do more to help Lebanon — a country
that has been significantly. affected by regional
developments and the generous hosting of large
numbers of refugees — in strengthening State
institutions, upholding its international commitments
and remaining stable and secure.
In Yemen, we continue to work towards a
resumption of negotiations leading to a sustainable
political solution. Every effort is being made to address
the extraordinary suffering on the ground in what
remains the world’s largest humanitarian crisis. The
implementation of the 2018 Stockholm Agreement will
not only significantly improve humanitarian access,

S/PV. 8548

but will also help the way towards a lasting political
settlement. All these efforts require patience, good
faith and the continued commitment of all of us to
preserving and building on gains.
I note with deep concern this morning’s security
incidents in the state of Hormuz. I strongly condemn
any attack on civilians vessels. The facts must be
established responsibilities clarified. If there is one
thing the world cannot afford, it is a major confrontation
in the Gulf region.
In Somalia, the international community must
remain united in supporting political progress and the
development of security institutions. The League of
Arab States is a key partner, both as an organization
and through its individual members, for political
support and economic development.
The Sudan is going through a delicate transition.
The United Nations is working with regional partners,
especially the African Union, in supporting this
process with the objective of enabling the Sudanese
parties to reach agreement on an inclusive, civilian-led
transitional authority.
On all these efforts and more, we continue to
invest in building our engagement with regional and
subregional organizations, including through regular
consultations and collaboration. Such activities
with the Arab League include our biennial general
cooperation meetings, sectoral meetings, capacitybuilding exercises and staff exchanges.
With this in mind, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the United Nations Liaison Office to
the League of Arab States in Cairo will become
operational this very month. I am very grateful to the
Government of Egypt for its support and hospitality.
I fully expect that the Liaison Office — the first
funded by the United Nations regular budget — will
improve the effectiveness of cooperation between our
two organizations. I intend to continue this fruitful
engagement and deepen our collaboration to advance
the vision set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
in the interest of the peoples we collectively serve. As
we look ahead together, the Council can continue to
count on my full and active support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit.

19-173603/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mr. Aboul Gheit (spoke in Arabic): It gives me
pleasure to extend my sincere congratulations to the
State of Kuwait on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June and to
express my deep appreciation for the its role as the
Arab member of the Council. I especially commend its
initiative to convene this meeting in order to elevate
the level of partnership between the League of Arab
States and the Security Council within the general
framework governed by Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, and for his firm commitment to
strengthening the cooperation and institutional
coordination between our two organizations in a manner
that enhances the complementarity of our activities in
maintaining international peace and security in the
Arab region. I also thank him for his commitment to
the two-State solution.
I speak today coming from a region rife with
conflicts and deep crises, some of which are excessively
difficult to resolve. Those conflicts and crises have
had a severely negative impact on generations of our
peoples, who have fallen victim to vicious cycles of
anger and frustration. As the Secretary-General noted,
most of these conflicts and crises are on the Security
Council’s agenda, yet regrettably and for a variety of
reasons, the Security Council has not been able, in
some cases, to adopt a clear position towards them or
act on those positions it had already reached.
The complex situation in Syria has entered its ninth
year without the emergence of a genuine horizon for the
political solution which the international community
has called for since the eruption of the crisis in 2011.
In Yemen, the Yemeni people remain the victims of
a humanitarian crisis that results primarily from the
insistence of an outlaw faction on seizing control of
the capital of the country and posing a clear threat to
Yemen’s neighbours and to maritime navigation in its
surrounding waters. Libya has fallen anew into military
hostilities that have come to threaten its societal fabric
and its chances of completing its political transition to
preserve its unity. As for Somalia, we continue to work
with other partners, as the Secretary-General noted,
in solidifying the pillars of security and stability and
consolidating peace there and in the entire Horn of
Africa, which is a region of direct geographic proximity
and importance to the Arab world.
4/24

13/06/2019

Having said all that and more, I cannot neglect
or ignore the centrality of the Palestinian question
in the minds and conscience of the Arab peoples and
leadership. The ongoing Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories is and will remain the main
source of destabilization and radicalization in the
Middle East region and beyond. That region will
never enjoy security or genuine stability without an
end to the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories
in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon, the establishment of
the independent Palestinian State and the attainment
of a just and comprehensive settlement to the ArabIsraeli conflict.
A host of additional factors have contributed to
exacerbating all these conflicts and instigating turmoil
elsewhere in the region, foremost among which are the
unprecedented regional and international interference
in the internal affairs of Arab countries; the spread
of militias and armed groups that are fighting against
national armies and challenging the authority of
States and threatening their sovereignty and territorial
integrity; and the growing threat posed by terrorist
groups that are afforded support, funding and media
platforms that allow them to commit their crimes and
disseminate their message based on murder and hatred.
In addition, I refer to the condemned and alarming
developments with regard to the targeting of oil
tankers in the Arabian Gulf yesterday and on 12 May,
as well as the ballistic missile attacks on the territory
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia two days ago. These
dangerous developments must, in our view, compel
the Security Council to act against those responsible
in order to maintain the security and stability of the
region. Some parties are trying to set the region aflame,
and we all must be aware of that.
While the League of Arab States looks forward
to enhancing the effectiveness of its partnership
mechanisms with the United Nations, and with the
Security Council in particular, to resolve these conflicts
and crises and address all these challenges, it has also
become determined to exercise a more effective role in
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security in our Arab region, defending the Arab
national security of its member States and deterring
the dangers that threaten them, all in accordance with
the Charter and international law. The emergency
Arab Summit that was held in Mecca on 31 May
was the most recent and perhaps best testimony to
this. The Arab leaders gathered in an extraordinary
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

session and condemned the terrorist acts that targeted
oil installations on Saudi territories and commercial
vessels in the territorial waters of the United Arab
Emirates. They further reiterated their full solidarity
with both countries in the face of Iranian interference
and practices, as well as the crimes perpetrated by the
Houthi militias, supported by the regime in Teheran.
I find it important in this regard to clarify that
the maintenance of the security of the Arab region
is a central condition for the preservation of the
international security system, and that threats and
acts which undermine Arab security will have serious
consequences that will not stop at the borders of our Arab
region. International solidarity is therefore essential in
order to send an unequivocal and unambiguous message
to all our neighbours that subversive activities are
no longer acceptable and that concealing themselves
behind regional proxies or through grey-zone operations
that are non-attributable to their original perpetrators is
a tactic that is rejected by all of us.
My principal message to the Security Council today,
as a representative of the oldest regional organization
to be granted observer status in the General Assembly,
in 1950, is based on our desire to establish a broad
and solid platform to elevate the level of consultations
between the League of Arab States and the Security
Council and to consider ways and means to translate
that coordination into further support that will advance
the joint and complementary activities between our two
organizations, similar to those arrangements in place
with other regional organizations and in a manner that
enhances efforts to maintain international peace and
security in the Arab region and their credibility, in
conformity with the provisions of international law, the
objectives of our two organizations, and the principles
and purposes of their charters. To that end, allow me to
present a number of observations and proposals.
First, any fruitful cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the Council should be
underpinned by the establishment of a permanent
and institutional arrangement for the exchange
of information — transparently as well as
frankly — between the two sides in order for the
Council to be apprised of the views and assessments
of the regional organization concerned and able to
articulate the appropriate position and adopt the proper
measures, in conformity with this vision and these
assessments, when addressing any matter related to
the region. This request is not in fact entirely new;

S/PV. 8548

it merely requires the commitment to putting it into
effect, as it already constitutes an established principle
in the relations between the Council and other regional
and subregional organizations.
Secondly, there is a parallel need to advance the
level of coordination and interaction with the Arab
League on the part of the United Nations special
representatives and envoys to Arab conflicts and areas
of crises in a manner that truly results in a unified and
common understanding of the causes of the eruption or
continuation of these conflicts, leading to coordinated
and complementary action by both organizations to
resolve them.
I commend in particular the commitment shown
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya, my dear friend Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and his
cooperation with the League of Arab States, especially
during the current critical stage in Libya following
the outbreak of hostilities around the capital Tripoli
and the reversals in the political process that he used
to oversee and which the Arab League fully supported
and continues to support. We also highly appreciate
the approach of the Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in regularly coordinating and
interacting with the League of Arab States, especially
to address the severe financial crisis that has afflicted
the Agency’s budget and endangered its operations
in the service of Palestinian refugees. This form of
cooperation provides a positive example that we hope
will be followed to maximize the coordination between
the Arab League, the envoys and senior officials of the
United Nations and others concerning issues related to
the Arab region.
Thirdly, there is a long-standing history of
institutional cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States in various areas of
common interest to both organizations. We established
an organizational framework for this relationship
almost 30 years ago when the two sides signed an
agreement on cooperation in 1989 and proceeded
afterwards to update the text of the agreement by
signing an additional protocol in 2016. The agreement
and the mechanisms emanating from it, along with the
preparations currently under way by the United Nations
to open a permanent liaison office to the Arab League in
Cairo — to which the Secretary-General has referred—
provide a comprehensive framework for advancing the

19-173605/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

cooperation between the United Nations system and the
Arab League.
We trust that this framework can be employed to
further develop the cooperation we aspire to with the
Security Council, not only in resolving armed conflicts
but also in addressing all threats to international
peace and security in the Arab region in its broader
perspective, be it with respect to disarmament and
the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East, combating terrorism, the protection
of civilians in armed conflict or humanitarian crises,
the flow of refugees and internally displaced persons
and irregular migration. I pledge to take care of and
cooperate with the liaison office, providing it with all
the support it needs to carry out its mandate in Cairo.
Fourthly, the cooperation that we aspire to achieve
with the Security Council and United Nations agencies
must expand to encompass all stages of early warning,
mediation, good offices, preventive diplomacy,
conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding
and peace sustainability. There are multiple examples
of joint action that we have undertaken together in
these fields, perhaps the most notable of which was the
appointment of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States to Syria in 2012
and the establishment of the Libya quartet, which is
comprised of representatives of the United Nations,
the League of Arab States, the European Union and the
African Union.
I believe that we must draw the lessons learned from
these and other experiences and strive to replicate their
positive results in other situations, whether existing
or emerging, that require joint action to prevent the
eruption or deterioration of conflicts, leading to their
resolution and ensuring them against the possibility
of reoccurrence. We also welcome, in this regard,
the institutional support provided to us by the United
Nations to strengthen the internal capabilities of the
Arab League in maintaining international peace and
security in the Arab region, which we hope to further
develop to the point of establishing and deploying peace
missions in the field to Arab crisis areas in the near
future. This practice is highly useful and we appreciate
the efforts of the Secretary-General and the important
resources he provides to us. Other practices are being
undertaken at the level of the Arab League thanks to
his support.
6/24

13/06/2019

Fifthly, despite the severity of the challenges facing
our region, the League of Arab States, as a regional
organization and collective of its Member States,
remains an active partner in the multilateral system and
a major contributor to efforts to maintain international
peace and security, not only in the Arab region but also
in areas in geographic proximity to the Arab world and
other crisis areas.
Certain Arab States — like Egypt, Jordan
and Morocco — are among the top troop- and
police-contributing countries in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Other Arab countries — such
as Kuwait, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and Qatar — are among the largest
donors of humanitarian assistance to address the
humanitarian crises in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Somalia,
as well as in supporting the budget and activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We all succeeded in bridging
the gap in the Agency’s budget last year, and we hope
that this year will be just as successful.
Arab countries have also exercised a significant
diplomatic role in sponsoring historic reconciliations
in the Horn of Africa and provided further financial
and logistical assistance to the countries of the Sahel
to enhance their capabilities to combat Boko Haram
and other terrorist groups active on their territories.
There are also distinguished Arab institutions, such as
Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, that are partnered with the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations and support dialogue
among religions and peoples in a way which promotes
the culture of peace, moderation and tolerance in our
Arab region and beyond.
I believe that these contributions, among many
others, all feed into the process of strengthening
cooperative relations between the United Nations and
the Arab League and demonstrate the benefits of the
cooperation and complementarity that can and must be
achieved between us.
Sixthly and finally, it is incumbent upon me to
once again warn against the dangers of maintaining the
status quo of the Palestinian situation to the security
and stability of the entire Middle East region. This is
especially pertinent given Israel’s continued oppressive
practices against the Palestinian people and its feverish
attempts to expand by annexing Arab lands, even to
the point of doubting the Palestinian right itself and the
just Palestinian question. Rather, it seeks to legitimize
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8548

the occupation of the territory and then proceed to
illegally annex it by recognizing occupied Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel, casting doubt over the just cause of
Palestinian refugees, which the Organization has been
sponsoring for 70 years.

letter and spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. It also affords the Council the added
legitimacy and credibility it often requires to elaborate
the most appropriate course of action and secure the
requisite support for its decisions vis-à-vis our region.

While I trust that the Council is fully aware of the
consistent positions espoused by the Arab League on
this issue over the decades, I also trust that it recognizes
the gravity of the issues I refer to. Attempts to resolve
the Palestinian question outside the framework of
international law, while ignoring the established
final-status issues based on the two-State solution, or
to create an alternative economic or development track
perpetuating the occupation constitute a devastating
blow to the international legal architecture, the
credibility of the Security Council and the basic
principles upon which the United Nations was founded.
In this regard, I call on the Council to fully assume its
responsibilities, without selectivity or double standards,
to provide international protection to the Palestinian
people, enforce all its previous resolutions and compel
Israel to fully comply with implementing them.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Aboul
Gheit for his briefing.

(spoke in English)
Allow me, in conclusion, to clearly state that we
are fully aware of the internal political dynamics
surrounding the Security Council’s approach — or lack
thereof — to many of the complex crises afflicting
the Arab region. I am confident that the Council
also appreciates the complications and tensions that
sometimes permeate our own Arab system and curtail
its ability to collectively respond to the security
challenges it faces.
Yet these considerations should not be an excuse
for inaction or lead to any abdication of the Council’s
commitment to upholding the foundational principles
of international law. I remain equally convinced that
advancing the cooperative partnership between the
United Nations and the Arab League is an indispensable
means of enabling both the Security Council and
our regional organization to assume their inherent
responsibilities and better discharge their duties in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security in our region.
This partnership alone is not sufficient to resolve
the multiple emergency situations that atrophy the Arab
region, yet it is an important prerequisite that embodies
our collective political will to address these crises and
act in a complementary manner that truly reflects the

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.
Allow me, first of all, to take this opportunity
to welcome His Excellency Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, and to thank them for
their participation in today’s meeting. We greatly
appreciate their important and valuable briefings and
their confirmation of the importance of strengthening
cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States.
As explained in the concept note we have distributed
(S/2019/455, annex), the State of Kuwait convened
today’s meeting in order to consolidate the important
principle established in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of United Nations Charter. This principle encourages
regional organizations to address regional issues and
crises in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter, while utilizing the Security Council to
identify solutions capable of resolving these conflicts
and maintaining international peace and security. As
stipulated in paragraph 3 of Article 52 of the Charter,
“The Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local disputes
through such regional arrangements or by such
regional agencies.”
Resolution 1631 (2005), which encourages the
Security Council and regional organizations to advance
cooperation, stresses also that the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations must cooperate
in the maintenance international peace and security.
Today’s meeting is the first of its kind under this agenda
item and can be considered the beginning of a new stage
in cooperation between these two organizations.
As the Council is well aware, the League of Arab
States, as a regional organization, was founded on
22 March 1945 — just before the United Nations was
founded on 25 October 1945. Relations between the

19-173607/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

two organizations date back to the 1950s and are based
on General Assembly resolutions and the cooperation
agreements of 1960 and 1989, as well as the protocol
of amendment of 2016. Those documents make up
the framework for the relationship between the two
organizations and call on them to further deepen and
expand that cooperation.
In that context, we welcome the upcoming opening
of the United Nations liaison office to the League of
Arab States, pursuant to the agreement reached in the
protocol of amendment that I have just mentioned and
General Assembly resolution 73/267, adopted at its
seventy-third session, which affirms that the opening
of the liaison office will improve the effectiveness
of cooperation between the Secretariats of the two
organizations. It also emphasizes the importance of and
need for further strengthening cooperation between the
two organizations in order to achieve their common
objectives and goals.
There is a genuine mutual desire of the SecretariesGeneral of the two organizations to advance the
cooperation and partnership between the organizations.
The participation of His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations in the work of the League
of Arab States at the summit level and the continued
participation of the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States in high-level meetings of the General
Assembly clearly demonstrate their commitment to
pursuing cooperation between the two organizations.
In its presidential statement S/PRST/2012/20, the
Security Council recognized efforts by the League
of Arab States to contribute to collective endeavours
to settle conflicts in the Middle East peacefully
as well as to promoting international responses to
the transformations experienced in the region. The
presidential statement also recognized the importance
of strengthening cooperation on capacity-building
with the League of Arab States in the maintenance
of international peace and security and expressed the
determination of the Security Council to take effective
steps to further enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
However, the level of cooperation continues to
be below expectations and aspirations even after the
signing of the 2016 protocol of amendment between
the two organizations. Given the challenges and
major threats facing our region and the complex
8/24

13/06/2019

political events, there have been nine Arab issues on
the Council’s agenda. The Council has been seized of
some of them for many years, foremost of which is the
Palestinian question that is central for Arab countries
and represents the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Without achieving a lasting, just and comprehensive
solution to that conflict, tensions and instability will
persist in the region.
I support what the Secretaries-General of the two
organizations have said this morning, namely, that
we condemn the attacks on the oil tankers in the Gulf
of Oman. That is the most recent event in a series of
acts of sabotage that are threatening the security of
maritime corridors as well as the energy security of
the world. That is a threat to international peace and
security. The international community has called for
taking all necessary actions and measures to prevent
more tensions in this sensitive region of the world.
In considering various aspects of cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, in line with the content of the presidential
statement, we would also like to highlight a number of
positive developments in those relations, namely, the
holding of the first consultative meeting at the level
of Security Council Permanent Representatives and
their counterparts of the League of Arab States on
21 May 2016. A number of issues of common interest
were discussed at that meeting, and we hope that such
consultative meetings will continue in the future given
their importance and role in terms of exchanging
views on addressing Arab issues. We hope to continue
the ongoing periodic consultations between the two
Secretariats at all levels to exchange information and
strengthen coordination and follow-up mechanisms,
particularly in political and security areas.
In that regard, we emphasize the crucial role of
coordination between the two organizations, especially
when it comes to Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General who deal with current issues in the
region, such as the crises in Syria, Libya, Yemen and
Somalia, in order to arrive at a more comprehensive
understanding of those crises and strengthen the
capacities of the two organizations to find effective
solutions to them through common action in many
areas such as conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, particularly in
post-conflict settings. We also need to focus on building
civilian capacities and humanitarian assistance as well
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

as ensuring human rights, addressing refugees and
migration issues and combating terrorism.
Strengthening cooperation between the two
organizations requires an institutional framework,
which would shape that relationship and provide it with
a legal basis. The State of Kuwait has made great efforts
in order to set up such a legal institutional framework,
which could lead to a new era of cooperation between
the two organizations. We hope to complete that task
before the end of our Security Council membership.
Developments in the region once again demonstrate
the importance of respecting the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, foremost of which
is respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, as well as non-interference in their domestic
affairs and not to use or threaten to use force against
them. That requires from us more cooperation and
work to bridge the gap between the resolutions adopted
by the Council and by regional organizations and the
implementation of those resolutions. We are convinced
that the League of Arab States can positively contribute
to the United Nations efforts to overcome the challenges
facing the States of our region.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the complete conviction
of the State of Kuwait that the most important
foundations for international peace and security are
respect for the principles of the Charter, the ability of
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities and
implementing the Council’s resolutions. We believe
that the non-implementation of such resolutions is one
of the key reasons behind tensions and destabilization
regionally and internationally. At the same time, we
reaffirm our absolute conviction in the principle of
the pacific settlement of disputes through dialogue,
negotiation and mediation in accordance with Chapter
VI of the Charter. It would be remiss of me not to
thank States members of the Council for their support
and endorsement of the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted at the end of this meeting in order
to advance and strengthen the relations between our
two organizations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): Poland welcomes
the opportunity to participate in today’s briefing and

S/PV. 8548

discussion on cooperation between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States. I would like to express
my gratitude to His Excellency Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al
Hamad Al Sabah, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Kuwait, for his valuable initiative. I would also
like to express my appreciation for today’s substantial
briefings by Secretary-General António Guterres and
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States Ahmed
Aboul Gheit.
Recently, I visited the secretariat of the League
of Arab States in Cairo. It gave me the opportunity to
have a more comprehensive understanding of regional
attitudes to developments in the region, including
the organization’s role and relevance in offering
constructive solutions. Poland sees added value in
closer and more operational cooperation between these
two important organizations. We are also active in
enhancing bilateral contacts with Arab countries and
contributing to the efforts aimed at addressing regional
challenges. That is why we find this debate timely and
attach great importance to its outcomes.
At the present time, the Arab world is facing
many challenges. The situation in the Middle East
and the North African region does not make us feel
optimistic. The protracted internal conflicts in Syria,
Yemen and Libya have negative consequences for those
countries’ neighbours. Terrorism, radicalization, illegal
mass migration and climate change exacerbate the
negative impacts of unresolved conflicts. The region
is experiencing multiple humanitarian challenges.
Millions of people in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Palestine
face deprivation and problems with access to food,
medical care and education, while many of them are
stranded in the middle of military conflicts.
It is our duty as the international community to do
our utmost to end these peoples’ suffering and bring
peace and stability back to the region. We cannot
overlook the tension in relations between Iran and Arab
countries or the need to de-escalate it in the wider region,
particularly in the Gulf. Further, the Middle East peace
process cannot effectively move forward as long as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains without a solution.
Indeed, the need to maximize the cooperation among
regional and subregional organizations is pressing if the
activities undertaken by the United Nations, the League
of Arab States, the African Union, the European Union
and other important contributors, in particular the
United States of America, are to achieve some degree
of synergy.

19-173609/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In recent years, we have witnessed an increase in
the use of mediation as a crisis management tool to work
towards the peaceful resolution of conflicts. However,
for it to be effective, a strong commitment by relevant
regional, subregional and universal organizations
is required. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations provides a solid basis for this kind of
cooperation, which was underscored by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on this very issue (S/2018/592).
Only by working together can we enhance our capacity
to prevent and resolve conflicts and other crises that
threaten humankind.
Obviously, success is never guaranteed, but we
are making progress in this area. Today’s meeting is
further evidence of that fact. We have to remember,
however, that in order to achieve milestones in working
together, we need to learn how to identify mutual
benefits and avoid destructive competition. There is
no other way to attain that objective than to regularly
assess the cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States. In my opinion, it would also
be useful to draw from experience and the examples
of best practices developed by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, particularly with
regard to confidence-building measures. I think that
this practice should be taken into serious consideration
by the League of Arab States.
Let me reiterate that it is not possible to resolve
political and strategic differences without coming to
a compromise between key actors at the regional and
global levels. Resolving peace and security challenges
in the Arab world requires external mediation and
support. Although national and international actors
are engaged on the ground, their policies are somewhat
uncoordinated, if not at times contradictory. Finding
viable solutions to existing challenges requires the
development of a broader front among those engaged. A
coherent vision rather than a zero-sum-game approach
is needed. That vision would require some level of
coherence among such major actors as the United
States, the European Union, China, Russia and others.
With that in mind, Poland, together with the United
States, hosted a conference in Warsaw in February
on security in the Middle East. The meeting was an
occasion to start a process that we hope will help to
tackle the concrete security problems of the Middle East
and bring greater stability and confidence to the region.
At the meeting, foreign missions, senior officials and
ministers from more than 60 countries, including Arab
10/24

13/06/2019

States, Israel and the countries of the Middle East, the
28 countries of the European Union and the United
States discussed how to solve the security problems
of the region. We agreed that we should continue the
process through engagement in working groups. We
hope for the widespread participation of representatives
of States in the search for concrete solutions for the
Middle East on such issues as the combat against
terrorism, the proliferation of weapons, cybersecurity,
maritime and aviation security, energy, human rights
and humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations and the League of Arab States
must join forces and develop closer cooperation so
as to find a way to strengthen peace and stability in
the Middle East. We would all benefit from bringing
cooperation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States to a new level. We welcome the opening
of the United Nations Liaison Office to the League of
Arab States in Cairo just announced by the SecretaryGeneral. This and other measures mentioned by the
briefers will help to enhance the cooperation between
the two organizations.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour to see you here in the
Chamber once again, Mr. President, and we welcome
you to New York. We commend the Security Council’s
substantive programme of work under the presidency of
the State of Kuwait, including this important briefing.
We express our immense gratitude to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States for their briefings, and
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland for his
statement.
Based on conviction and experience, we firmly
believe that, through cooperation and inclusive
dialogue, a better result can be achieved — and one
that contains a broader range of considerations and
recommendations that allow us to come closer to more
suitable and lasting solutions. Accordingly, we support
efforts and strategies that deepen cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations as fundamental building blocks for the
maintenance of peace and security, on the basis of the
Charter and relevant law.
The so-called multilateralism network or
multilateral collaboration, which was created to
address the excessively complex, multidimensional
and unpredictable challenges we face and to improve
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

collective security, is a major feature of the culture
of the United Nations, and it is extremely significant
in the Middle East, thanks to the contributions of
the League of Arab States. In keeping with that
indispensable model of collaboration that the United
Nations maintains with other regions of the world
through its representative bodies, and in the light of the
persistence and nature of the conf licts in the Middle
East and surrounding regions, including the question of
Palestine and the conf licts in Syria, Libya and Yemen,
which take up a large part of the Council’s agenda, we
agree with the assertion that we would benefit from
a comprehensive regional approach, which is why it
is important to strengthen our partnership with the
League of Arab States.
Experience throughout the conflict cycle, including
efforts aimed at prevention or to achieve the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, allows us to recognize the
contributions of regional and subregional organizations,
whose direct impact and relationship to the realities on
the ground are unique and non-replicable, particularly
in terms of cooperation on issues related to water,
human rights, sexual violence in conflict, migration,
refugees and counter-terrorism — central themes in the
collective effort for international stability.
We therefore agree on the importance of an effective
partnership between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States through regular consultations and
coordinated action at strategic and operational levels,
and welcome as positive developments the forthcoming
opening of a United Nations liaison office at the League
of Arab States headquarters in Cairo and the League’s
efforts to build capacity in prevention, management,
mediation, negotiation and peacekeeping.
We also welcome today’s meeting today’s meeting
and its effective follow-up, aware that the Council
can only benefit from a deepening of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States in areas related to security policy, thereby
contributing to the collective effort aimed at resolving
the conflicts that persist in the Middle East in fulfilment
of the legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region
to live in peace and security.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for presiding today over the
first-ever Security Council meeting on the cooperation
between the Security Council and the League of Arab
States. We also thank Secretary-General Guterres

S/PV. 8548

and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit of the League of
Arab States for their briefings. We would also like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland to
today’s meeting.
I want to join the Secretaries-General in
condemning today’s attack on the maritime vessels in
the Gulf of Oman. We must keep the sea lanes safe for
global commerce and travel.
The Charter of the United Nations gives the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Chapter VIII of
the Charter also recognizes the complementary roles
of the United Nations and regional organizations in
this regard. Political and strategic alignment between
the Security Council and regional organizations has
yielded effective results, as we have seen in the cases of
Somalia and the Sudan, among many other examples.
Such coordination should be enhanced and become
more formalized and structured, which is why South
Africa has consistently championed the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
As Council members are aware and recall, South
Africa played a pioneering role in the adoption of
resolutions 1809 (2008) and 2033 (2012) to further
strengthen the relationship between the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council. Through these resolutions, we, as a country
and as a representative of the African continent,
demonstrated our collective political will to strengthen
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.
We also believe that cooperation among regional
organizations is equally important, especially in
instances where there is overlapping membership,
which is the case with the League of Arab States
and the African Union. In these instances, regional
organizations should collaborate on developing
regional solutions to such common challenges as the
prevention and resolution of the conflicts, in particular
those ravaging Africa and the Arab world.
South Africa is of the view that cooperation among
global and regional bodies is critical to reaching a deeper
understanding of regional challenges, seeking solutions
for regional peace and security, and implementing
agreed solutions, agreements and frameworks. We
have found that since the start of cooperation between
the Council and the AU Peace and Security Council,

19-1736011/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the relationship between the two has been meaningful
and useful in finding common ground on peace and
security issues on the African continent. South Africa
wholly supports improved and increased cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States as this is pertinent to dealing with conflicts in
the Arab region.
South Africa appreciates the efforts of the League
aimed at promoting peace in the Middle East region,
especially those intended to further the Middle East
peace process, the oldest peace and security item on the
Council’s agenda. It is therefore vital that the United
Nations strengthen its engagement with the League
of Arab States. In this regard, South Africa welcomes
the appointment of Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari as
the Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific, which was created as part of the
Secretary-General’s proposed reforms of the United
Nations peace and security architecture.
We emphasize that in its cooperation with the
League of Arab States, the Council should be consistent
in addressing all of the conflicts in the Middle East,
rather than selectively choosing some to the detriment
of others. The underlying causes of uprisings and longstanding conflicts have to be addressed in a coordinated
manner. We have not seen such an approach applied to
the Middle East. There has been swift international
reaction to some conflicts, while in others such
cooperation is lacking. This is evident when it comes to
the Israeli-Palestinian question, and it is unacceptable.
As we continue to consolidate and strengthen
cooperation among the United Nations, the League
of Arab States and regional organizations, we call on
the members of the Council to value and support these
relationships and consistently make use of them in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We support the draft presidential statement that
will be adopted at the end of our deliberations.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I welcome
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland to the
Security Council today. I thank all speakers and briefers,
including Secretary-General António Guterres, for
their contributions to today’s debate.
The United States supports continued cooperation
between the League of Arab States and the United
Nations, including on key issues such as counter12/24

13/06/2019

terrorism,
conflict
prevention,
peacebuilding,
post-conflict reconstruction and natural-resource
management. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations to establish a liaison office in Cairo to enhance
coordination and look forward to it opening soon.
The United States also values its important
partnership with the League of Arab States, and we
thank the League for working with us on our vision of
a stable, prosperous and secure Middle East, including
the League’s ongoing support for President Hadi
Mansour and the legitimate Government of Yemen,
as the United Nations mediates between the parties to
reach a political settlement to end the conflict in that
country. We also value the League’s key support for the
Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS).
Today all of the territory that ISIS once held in
Iraq and north-east Syria has been liberated. The 75
nations and five international organizations of the
Global Coalition should be enormously proud of this
achievement. Working by, with and through our allies
and local partners, we have launched an unprecedented
military-stabilization, counter-messaging and lawenforcement effort to counter the evil ideology of
ISIS and prevent attacks against our homelands, our
personnel, our citizens, our citizens and our interests.
We also commend our friends and allies within
the League of Arab States for standing firm on not
readmitting Al-Assad’s Syria and not normalizing
relations with his regime until a political settlement
consistent with resolution 2254 (2015) has been
achieved. International solidarity against normalizing
relations is critical in helping bring the Al-Assad regime
to the realization that there is no military solution to
the conflict. Only a political solution as outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015) will achieve long-term peace
and stability for Syria and its neighbours.
Iran remains the most significant threat to regional
peace and security, engaged as it is in numerous malign
activities in the region. The United States welcomes the
31 May statement of the League of Arab States, issued
following its meeting in Mecca, in which it called out
Iran for its destabilizing behaviour. Iran has gone to
great lengths to prolong regional conflicts that radiate
instability across the region and exacerbate human
suffering. The United States is pressing the Iranian
regime to end its role in these conflicts and curtail its
support for proxy militias. Individually, the States of the
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

region are susceptible to Iran’s coercion, intimidation
and malign behaviour. Indeed, Iran has deployed
many of its resources to perpetuate its revolutionary
ideology and malign activities in the region. It should
be countered by a strong unified front.
It is unacceptable for any party to attack commercial
shipping, and today’s attacks on ships in the Gulf of
Oman raise very serious concerns. The United States
Government is providing assistance and will continue
to assess the situation.
Turning to Middle East peace, the White House is
working on a vision for peace that will offer a brighter
future for all and will release it when the time is right.
We hope all stakeholders will read the plan with an
open mind and be willing to engage constructively. We
look forward to discussing ideas and strategies on how
to achieve a more prosperous future for the Palestinian
people with international stakeholders at the upcoming
workshop in Bahrain later this month.
The United States supports continued cooperation
between the League of Arab states and the United
Nations and looks forward to seeing a strong relationship
advance progress toward a more stable, prosperous and
secure Middle East.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. António Guterres, and the SecretaryGeneral of the Arab League, Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
for their enlightening briefings, which made it possible
to draw up a precise overview of cooperation between
the Arab League and the United Nations, as well as for
the very promising approaches they proposed to deepen
this cooperation.
I would also like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency
for taking the initiative to organize today’s meeting and
to welcome the presence among us of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait and Poland.
Today’s meeting provides a new opportunity
for the Security Council to exchange views on the
common issues and challenges of the Arab world in a
cross-cutting manner, following on from the informal
interactive dialogue that France organized in March as
part of our presidency of the Council, in order to seek
points of agreement and convergence between us.
First of all, I would like to return to the scale of
the political and security challenges facing the Arab
world today, which more than ever justifies a sustained

S/PV. 8548

dialogue between the United Nations and the Arab
League. These issues concern us all because of their
impact on international peace and security.
On the security front, I am thinking in particular of
the terrorist threat, with the persistent menace of Da’esh
and the radicalization of minds. I am also thinking of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery to both State and non-State actors.
At the political level, it is essential to support
the United Nations efforts aimed at finding political
solutions to the conflicts in the region, particularly in
Syria, Yemen and Libya. These solutions must allow for
the strengthening of institutions and respect for the rule
of law, as well as inclusive and sustainable development
that benefits all, without discrimination. I am thinking
in particular of Syria, where military operations in the
Idlib region must be brought to a definitive end and
progress must be continued towards a political solution
under the aegis of the United Nations and on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015). I am also thinking of Yemen,
where we actively support United Nations mediation
and call on all parties to engage constructively with it
in the implementation of all the commitments made in
Stockholm in December 2018.
On method, it is essential that we reaffirm together
our commitment to dialogue and regional cooperation
in the very spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Yesterday, I had the opportunity to reaffirm our full
support for the role of the United Nations in conflict
prevention and mediation (see S/PV.8546). Today,
I would like to highlight the key role of regional
organizations, in particular the Arab League, whose
action is more essential than ever to build consensus
among Arab States and respond to global challenges
affecting the region and beyond.
In a context marked by the worrying rise in
tensions in the Gulf, as illustrated by the new incidents
against two tankers in the Arabian Sea today, which
are of deep concern to us, restraint and de-escalation
are more necessary than ever. As the Secretary-General
has just pointed out, the world simply cannot afford
a major confrontation in the Gulf region. It is all the
more essential to work together to gradually establish
a regional dialogue that could be the appropriate
framework for structured exchanges on all areas
of concern. In this regard, I would like to commend
Kuwait’s long-standing commitment to keeping the
channels of dialogue open and to building bridges

19-1736013/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

despite the differences we are experiencing. This is
also the meaning of France’s action.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
respect for the fundamental principles of international
law, which determine international peace and security.
Any unilateral decision that deviates from them would
be doomed to failure and would considerably weaken
the order based on international legality. In this regard,
I recall the first and foremost the political settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and our full commitment
to the two-State solution. In this context, too, the
Arab League and the United Nations have in common
that they have defined clear parameters within the
resolutions of the Security Council and the Arab Peace
Initiative. Any effort, particularly economic, must be
carried out within this framework.
In that context, close cooperation between the Arab
League and the United Nations is more necessary than
ever and must be further developed. In this regard, I
would like to welcome the forthcoming opening of
a United Nations liaison office at the Arab League
in Cairo, which has just been announced. This is an
important step towards further collaboration between
the United Nations and the Arab League.
The strengthening of exchanges between the
members of the Security Council and the Arab League
is also an important point. In this regard, we welcome
the Council’s commitment to invite the SecretaryGeneral of the Arab League to come and brief it on an
annual basis.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our desire to
promote a better understanding by the Security Council
and the United Nations of regional dynamics. This
involves, in particular, creating spaces for cross-cutting
discussions, as we are doing today and as we did in
March during our presidency. The Council could also
meet informally with the Special Envoys and Special
Representatives for the North Africa and Middle East
region once a year, in the presence of a representative
of the Arab League. The meaning of these efforts is to
move away from a logic of division or even confrontation
that is as futile as it is risky and to create a dynamic of
partnership. For this reason, there is no alternative to
dialogue. There are no shortcuts. That is why it is so
important to disconnect our automatic controls and to
constantly seek convergence between us.
It is in that spirit that France will continue to
support the strengthening of the partnership between
14/24

13/06/2019

the United Nations and the Arab League. It is in the
same spirit that France will continue to exchange with
the countries of the region as well as with the Arab
League both bilaterally and within the European Union
to provide a common response to its challenges. The
Summit of the Two Shores, which we will host in
Marseille on 23 and 24 June, will be another opportunity
to foster such dialogue.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank Secretary-General Guterres, as well as the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland to the Chamber.
Indonesia welcomes the convening of today’s
briefing, under Kuwait’s presidency, to further enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States in resolving conflicts. We would also
like to highlight Kuwait’s excellent role in the region
in that regard.
As we often state, Indonesia believes in the principle
that neighbours know best. Cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
peace and security is consistent with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and important to
achieving lasting solutions. Enhancing such cooperation
has been a recurring theme for Indonesia’s membership
of the Security Council, including through the adoption
of document S/PRST/2007/42, during our presidency
in 2007. We have always championed the need for the
greater involvement of regional organizations, as we
have done in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
region on peacebuilding and conflict resolution. In that
regard, permit me to share several points.
First, the League of Arab States, with its
22 members, remains of great importance and
relevance. In recent years, it has assumed a leading
role in maintaining peace and security in the region.
It has facilitated the pacific settlement of disputes
between its members, adopted clear stances on the
conflicts in the region and supported humanitarian
situations. Its member States have also been actively
participating in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
However, many countries of the Arab region remain
afflicted by conflicts. Therefore, we commend the
renewed determination of the League of Arab States
to strengthen its role in conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the region. The League of Arab States is best placed
to envision conflict-specific solutions, considering its
unique understanding of the dynamics of the situations
involving its members. It should continue to advance
a comprehensive regional approach, particularly in
resolving long-standing conflicts in the region.
I should like to concur with the statement made
by the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
earlier today on the issue of the continuation of Israel’s
illegal occupation of Palestinian territory. We condemn
any effort leading to the illegal annexation of Palestinian
territory, which would further destabilize the Middle
East. We will continue to work with our brothers and
sisters towards the aim of the Arab League to achieve
the vision of a two-State solution, based on relevant
Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed
parameters. We also concur with the statement made
by Secretary-General Guterres that there is no plan B.
Secondly, cooperation between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States should be enhanced,
building on respective comparative advantages, based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that such cooperation
should be more structured to ensure its effectiveness
and sustainability. We recognize the merit in having
regular briefings and annual informal meetings between
the Council and the League of Arab States. However,
interactions between the two should go beyond those
meetings and enable a more meaningful dialogue that
delivers concrete actions. In that regard, we welcome
the appointment of an Assistant Secretary-General for
the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, as well as the
opening of the United Nations Liaison Office in Cairo.
Thirdly, there should be a greater focus on
prevention and mediation. Indonesia believes that
tackling the root cause of conflicts is imperative to
preventing conflict or relapse into violence. There is
a nexus between peace and security and development.
In many instances, potential conflicts diminish when
there are economic and social developments that lead
to greater opportunities and well-being of the people.
Therefore, it is important to remain proactive in
identifying and addressing the social and economic root
causes of violence. In addition, the mediation efforts
of the League of Arab States should be promoted and
supported. Information-sharing, joint early warning and
empowerment to enhance the capacity of the League of
Arab States are areas that could be further explored.
On many occasions, we have underlined the importance

S/PV. 8548

of horizon-scanning so as to prevent conflict or ensure
that emerging conflicts will not escalate further.
In that vein, we are deeply concerned about the
most recent developments near the Strait of Hormuz,
including the attack on two oil tankers earlier today.
Such attacks should be condemned. We call on all
countries of the region and elsewhere to exercise
restraint and work together to help de-escalate tensions
in the region.
Indonesia views the League of Arab States as an
important partner, both historically and strategically.
We signed a memorandum of cooperation in 2016 to
promote cooperation on many issues. We will continue
to work together with the League of Arab States and
countries of the region in pursuit of global peace and
security, in promoting a culture of peace and tolerance,
in combating terrorism and in addressing development
challenges and the myriad issues facing the world today.
Lastly, we welcome the draft presidential statement
prepared by Kuwait regarding this very important issue.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit for their
briefings. We also thank Kuwait for its initiative in
convening important meeting.
China welcomes the draft presidential statement
to be adopted by the Security Council, concerning
cooperation between the United Nations, its Security
Council and the League of Arab States (LAS).
China supports the continued deepening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, as envisioned in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, and
efforts to consolidate and strengthen collective security
mechanisms to jointly maintain international peace and
security. The LAS has long worked to promote peace,
stability and development in the Middle East and
actively advocated political solutions to hotspot issues.
It has made unremitting efforts for a united and strong
Arab world. Recent years have seen close cooperation
between the United Nations and the LAS in easing
regional tensions and resolving hotspot issues. We
appreciate the efforts of Secretary-General Guterres
and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit in that regard.
Indeed, the LAS has become an important bridge for
cooperation and exchange between the United Nations
and the Arab world.

19-1736015/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

With regard to methods to promote cooperation
between the Council and the LAS, I would like to make
the following proposals.
First, we should pursue dialogue and consultation
and advocate inclusive reconciliation in improving
the regional security situation. As many problems in
the Middle East are intertwined, all parties need to
treat each other as equals, consult extensively, seek
common ground and build a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security architecture. They
should solve problems through dialogue, good offices,
mediation and other peaceful means and continuously
enhance mutual understanding and trust.
Secondly, we should strengthen coordination in
our joint efforts to resolve hotspot issues. With its
experience and geographic, historical, cultural and other
advantages, the LAS can play a greater role in solving
problems, such as the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and
those in Libya and the Sudan. The United Nations
should assist the LAS in enhancing its capability in
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and provide support to it in personnel
training, institution-building and logistical assistance
in order to forge synergies.
Thirdly, we must advance the fight against terrorism
and prevent violent extremism. The Middle East has
been plagued by terrorism and violent extremism. The
League of Arab States is an important partner in the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. The two bodies can cooperate in
countering terrorism through joint projects and by
strengthening information-sharing, capacity-building
and coordinated actions in our joint response to the
challenges we face in combating terrorism in the
Middle East.
The eighth Ministerial Conference of the ChinaArab States Cooperation Forum was held in Beijing
last June. At its opening ceremony, President Xi
Jinping announced the building of a future-oriented
strategic partnership of comprehensive collaboration
and common development between China and the Arab
States designed to usher in a new era of cooperation
between the two sides. China will firmly support
and help Arab countries in achieving stability and
development and in uniting and strengthening their
cooperation in order to jointly maintain peace and
stability in the Middle East. China is also ready to work
with others to promote greater cooperation between
16/24

13/06/2019

the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the League of Arab States,
support multilateralism and work together to build a
community of a shared future for humankind.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretaries-General for their briefings today. I want
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and Kuwait on
organizing this first meeting with the League of Arab
States under this agenda item. We agree with others
that sustainable long-term peace and prosperity is best
achieved through coordinated efforts. As the regional
situation continues to evolve, the League of Arab
States has shown resolve and perseverance in working
to strengthen regional security and stability. Stronger
cooperation will enable us all to confront the urgent
challenges that we share in the region and that demand
the international community’s immediate attention.
To begin with the Sudan, the international
community must support the demands of the Sudanese
people for a better future. We expect the Transitional
Military Council to act on their demands and engage
in dialogue to agree on a swift transition to civilian
Government. We utterly condemn the use of force
against peaceful protesters, and we encourage all
partners, including in the League of Arab States and
especially those with influence over the Transitional
Military Council, to support the African Union’s
mediation efforts and the calls for an end to violence
and a swift transfer to civilian rule. Stability will come
with an inclusive agreement, not with violence and
exclusion. We will continue to engage with all sides to
that end.
On Syria, the United Kingdom’s position remains
clear. Peace through a negotiated political settlement
is absolutely essential for the sake of the people of
Syria and the region. We have all recently seen again
horrifying scenes of civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals and schools, being bombed in Syria, this
time in Idlib. We cannot shirk our responsibilities as
members of the Council. Working with the United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria and with the League
of Arab States, we have to redouble our efforts to seek
a negotiated political settlement in line with resolution
2254 (2015), which remains the only sustainable solution
to the conflict. The United Kingdom will not resume
engagement with Syria or consider reconstruction until
a credible, substantive and genuine political process
is firmly under way. And I echo the comments of the
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

United States Ambassador on the importance of the
League of Arab States’ suspension of Syria.
With regards to the Middle East peace process, the
United Kingdom remains committed to a two-State
solution, leading to a safe and secure Israel living
alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State,
based on the 1967 borders and with Jerusalem as the
shared capital of both States. We have consistently
called and continue to call for an immediate end to
all actions that undermine the viability of a two-State
solution, including terrorism, anti-Semitic incitement,
settlement expansion and the demolition of Palestinian
property. We should all encourage all parties to abide
by international law and promote peace, stability
and security.
Turning to Libya, the United Kingdom remains
deeply concerned about the deteriorating security and
humanitarian situation. The protracted and worsening
violence benefits no one and serves only to demonstrate
that there is no military solution. We call on all involved
in the conflict to commit to an immediate ceasefire,
allow unfettered humanitarian access and resume
political talks. Achieving that will require compromise
on all sides. We remain fully supportive of the United
Nations-led political process and the efforts of Special
Representative Salamé as the only way to achieve
security and stability in Libya.
It has now been four years since the devastating
conflict in Yemen began. Without a political settlement,
the horrific suffering of millions will continue. The
United Kingdom fully supports the United Nations
and Special Envoy Martin Griffiths as he continues his
efforts to secure agreement by the parties to the conflict
to implement the Stockholm agreements. We encourage
both parties to continue to engage constructively with
the Special Envoy and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard.
We are deeply concerned about the reports of
explosions and fires on vessels in the Strait of Hormuz,
one of the world’s most important shipping lanes.
Freedom of navigation is vital to the global economy
and all of our interests.
The challenges facing the region are immense. All
of us sitting around this table today must show agility
and prioritize practical action in working together to
address them. We believe that the United Nations and
the League of Arab States can achieve more when they
work together in that spirit.

S/PV. 8548

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are very pleased to see you presiding
over the Council today, Sir. We are grateful to Kuwait
for convening today’s meeting and for initiating
presidential statement, on cooperation with the League
of Arab States, which we support. We consider it
essential to strengthen our cooperation with the League,
considering the continued potential for conflict in the
Middle East. We believe that just as there should be
African solutions to African problems, there must be
Arab solutions to Arab problems. We thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, the Secretary-General of the League, for their
detailed briefings. We share many of the views they
expressed. For our part, we would like to focus on the
following points.
Our colleagues around this table can affirm that the
Security Council attaches a high priority to the issues
of the Middle East and North Africa, almost as much
as to those of the African continent as a whole. That is
not accidental. The region is going through a difficult,
tense period that began with some ill-considered steps
aimed at interfering in the affairs of sovereign States of
the region.
There are ongoing active conflicts in Syria, Libya
and Yemen. We are seeing potential for an escalation
of the protests in the Sudan. There is still much to be
done to strengthen stability in Iraq. The problem of
Western Sahara is awaiting resolution. The IsraeliPalestinian settlement is at the epicentre of this
turbulence, and its international legal framework has
recently been eroded by the unilateral steps taken by
key players in the Middle East peace process. Terrorism
and extremism continue to escalate, and social and
economic problems are becoming more acute. All of
that undoubtedly increases the relevance of the League
of Arab States as a mechanism for multilateral dialogue
and the coordination of the collective efforts of regional
stakeholders, as well as for limiting destructive outside
interference in the region’s affairs.
We want to see a strong, united and effective
League of Arab States that can raise the profile of
the Arab world in preventing conflicts, overcoming
deadlocked situations and providing a collective rebuff
to the challenges facing the region that I have just
described. We must unite in order to achieve one of
the most important goals facing us right now, which
is launching a regional dialogue aimed at establishing
a security architecture in the Persian Gulf, where we

19-1736017/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

believe tensions are being artificially ratcheted up with
regard to Iran. There is a Russian concept for this issue
whose scope we believe could eventually be expanded
to cover the entire region of the Middle East and
North Africa and serve as a basis for this dialogue. We
know that Secretary-General Guterres has frequently
expressed similar ideas.
We support developing the cooperation between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations
to its full potential. We would therefore like to see a
regular synchronization of watches between our two
organizations on current regional issues that are on the
Security Council’s agenda, as well as the exchange of
experiences in resolving crises and other problems that
are obstacles to the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security. In our view, cooperation
between the Security Council and the League can
help to develop balanced international approaches to
addressing Arab problems, as well as new mechanisms
for cooperation in settling regional crises. Specific
areas for such cooperation could include anti-crisis
mediation efforts; aligning positions on serious
conflict situations, particularly in Syria, including
specific measures to assist post-conflict recovery in the
Syrian Arab Republic; working together to resolve the
Palestinian question on an internationally recognized
legal basis; humanitarian activity; tackling the problem
of sustainable development in the Arab world and
developing a strategy capable of countering new and
emerging challenges in the region, including the growth
of terrorism and illicit cross-border migration.
Russia will continue strengthening its partnership
with the League on a mutually beneficial basis. We
hold regular consultations on current international and
regional issues. The fifth ministerial session of the
Russian-Arab Cooperation Forum, held in Moscow on
16 April, and its outcomes — an action plan for the period
from 2019 to 2021 and a joint communiqué — reaffirmed
our converging positions on a broad spectrum of issues,
including the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, Syria, Iraq,
Libya, Yemen, the Sudan, Somalia, counter-terrorism,
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East and dialogue among civilizations.
Speaking of dialogue among civilizations, I should
not omit to mention the situation of the Christians and
other religious and ethnic minorities who have fallen
victim to destabilization and have become hostages
to extremist rhetoric throughout the Middle East and
North Africa. In our view the League could play a
18/24

13/06/2019

positive role in helping to spread a culture of interfaith
and inter-ethnic peace, and we are ready to share our
experience in that area.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
Russia will remain an honest and unbiased partner that
our Arab friends can depend on.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the initiative of the Kuwaiti presidency in
convening this meeting.
We appreciate the concept note (S/2019/455,
annex), which encourages us to reflect on the current
state of cooperation between the Security Council and
the League of Arab States. We warmly welcome your
presence, Mr. President, and that of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland. We thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, and his Arab League counterpart,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, for their briefings.
Through its Hispanic heritage, Peru shares
historical links with the countries of the Middle East.
We recognize the rich cultural, scientific, religious and
ethnic diversity of its peoples, as well as their continuing
desire for peace and prosperity. However, we deplore
the persistent regional challenges that have led to
serious threats to international security, as is evident in
the conflicts ravaging Libya, Yemen and Syria, as well
as in other scenarios that require the urgent support of
the international community and action on the part of
the Council. We are also concerned about the recent
attacks on oil tankers in the Gulf of Oman, which we
firmly condemn and which must be investigated.
In these sensitive situations, Peru considers it
particularly important to strengthen multilateralism
and relationships between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in line with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
emphasize the synergies that this kind of approach
fosters in an increasingly interdependent world, thanks
to the comparative and complementary advantages that
these bodies can offer. In that connection, we recognize
the effective leadership of the League of Arab States in
its efforts to promote peace and stability in the Middle
East, to which it contributes a profound understanding
of the dynamics and underlying causes of the conflicts
in that part of the world. That compels us to reaffirm the
crucial role played by cooperation between the Council
and the League of Arab States and to emphasize the
need to reinforce it. In that regard, we welcome recent
developments aimed at promoting this partnership,
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

such as the decision to establish a United Nations
liaison office in Cairo and a more fluid exchange of
information in areas such as the conservation and
management of water resources, the fight against
terrorism, sexual violence and migration.
However, we believe it is essential to ensure that
this relationship is a predictable one that enables issues
that are particularly critical for the region, such as those
relating to peace and security, to be more effectively
addressed. We therefore have a positive view of the
proposals to establish a consultative framework between
the United Nations and the League in addition to the
holding of an annual meeting between the members of
both organizations.
We encourage accelerated efforts to arrange greater
collaboration on conflict prevention through enhanced
mediation, the facilitation of dialogue, early-warning
and rapid-response systems and confidence-building.
We also believe that opportunities for improved
coordination should extend to the areas of the protection
of civilians and of humanitarian assistance, where
both organizations can and must work together to
ensure compliance with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. In that regard,
Peru stresses the benefits of this Council and the
League of Arab States joining forces to overcome the
current stalemate in the peace process between Israel
and Palestine, which means promoting a resumption of
direct negotiations leading to a two-State solution. The
validity and relevance of the Arab Peace Initiative is an
important example of the contributions that the League
of Arab States is in a position to make.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Peru’s
commitment to peace, stability and prosperity in
the Middle East, which guarantees the protection
of the civilian population, respect for international
humanitarian law and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and, of course, the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States for
their briefings. I would also like to extend a very warm
welcome to the Foreign Minister of Poland.
We very much welcome your initiative, Mr. President,
to discuss this issue here today at the Security Council.
During Germany’s presidency of the Council seven
years ago in 2012, we convened a discussion on the very
issue at hand today (see S/PV.6841), in an illustration

S/PV. 8548

of our long-term commitment to comprehensive
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in order to tackle
protracted conflicts. We believe firmly that stronger
ties between the United Nations and the League of
Arab States and greater exchange and collaboration
can make a significant contribution to preventing
crises and managing conflicts, improving human rights
situations, combating terrorism and mitigating the
plight of refugees and internally displaced persons in
the region. The list of conflicts and challenges in the
region is a long one, as we all know. Ongoing conflicts
such as those in Libya, Syria, Yemen and Sudan, as
well as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, present us with
complex conflict dynamics. I do not want to go into
all of these issues today in detail, but I would like to
highlight two issues.
The first concerns Syria. To echo several of my
colleagues, I would like to underscore Germany’s
strong commitment to a negotiated political settlement
on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). We are currently
following the deadly escalation in the north-west of the
country with great concern, and we reiterate our appeal
to all actors to fully respect international humanitarian
law, which must prevail in all circumstances.
Secondly, I would also like to comment very briefly
on last night’s security incident in the Gulf of Oman. We
strongly condemn the attack on two oil tankers in the
Gulf of Oman. Like every act of sabotage, it constitutes
another serious threat to the security and safety of
maritime traffic in the region, but such incidents could
also add to the tensions already present in the region.
That is particularly worrying and disturbing, and we
must closely follow the situation as a matter of great
concern.
The long list of challenges in the region highlights
the urgency of regional dialogue in order to address
the root causes of conflicts, such as underlying
grievances, and reconcile those conflicting interests.
Our organizations bear a particular responsibility
for constructively addressing and working towards
de-escalating such conflicts. The League of Arab
States can provide an important platform for promoting
enhanced regional dialogue. Such dialogue can facilitate
the identification of shared interests and opportunities
for political, economic and security cooperation within
the region, which ultimately helps to overcome existing
mistrust and tensions.

19-1736019/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

A particularly relevant area for cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States is
human rights. Presidential statement S/PRST/2012/20
notes the intention of the League of Arab Nations and
the United Nations to cooperate on the promotion of
human rights, freedom of expression and respect for
and promotion of the rule of law. Seven years later, we
note with some concern the trend in some countries
to restrict the space for civil society and human rights
defenders. It is a priority for Germany to defend human
rights worldwide. As we noted at yesterday’s briefing
(see S/PV. 8546), we do not view human rights as
they are too often seen in the United Nations context,
namely, in a negative context. It is not just about
naming and shaming. We see human rights as a positive
element that can contribute to resolving the root causes
of problems. I think that is how we should approach
human rights. Equally, the promotion of women’s rights,
women’s equal participation, the protection of religious
minorities and the promotion of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex rights are key to achieving fair
and prosperous societies.
In February, the European Union (EU) and the
League of Arab States held their first summit in Sharm
El-Sheikh. The key outcome was the joint commitment
to further develop a strategic partnership between the
EU and the League of Arab States through effective
multilateralism within the international rules-based
order, including increased cooperation with the United
Nations. In her statement at that meeting of Heads of
State and Government, Chancellor Merkel highlighted
the need for joint approaches to tackling shared
challenges, even where there might be disagreement on
particular issues.
In that spirit of strategic partnership between the
European Union and the League of Arab States, Germany
is also clearly supportive of stronger ties between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States. In that
regard, the Secretary-General mentioned the fact that
he was honoured to attend the Arab League summit
in Tunis in March. That is extremely positive, but we
would also like to emphasize that cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States is
most fruitful when it extends to all United Nations
bodies and forums. A comprehensive understanding of
processes, in particular on human rights issues in the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status
of Women, is key to strengthening the multilateral
system, to which our organizations are committed. The
20/24

13/06/2019

upcoming opening of the United Nations liaison office
to the League of Arab States in Cairo will play a key
role in deepening our institutional relations.
Before concluding, let me say that we greatly
welcome the draft presidential statement on this
important issue.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of this high-level
briefing. We are delighted to see you, Sir, once again
presiding over our discussion, which is part of the very
rich programme of work of the Kuwaiti presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June. Like those
who spoke before me, I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, for their
informative briefings on the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States in maintaining international peace and security
at both the regional and the international levels.
The regions of the Near and Middle East, North
Africa and the Horn of Africa are facing conflicts
whose intensification is a source of concern for the
international community. Despite the multifaceted
involvement of the United Nations in the pursuit of
lasting peace and stability in the region, these crises are
becoming further entrenched and increasingly complex,
to the great regret of the international community.
Political instability and changing security threats
in Syria, Yemen, Palestine, the Sudan and Somalia,
with their devastating humanitarian consequences,
have over the years considerably weakened the
legitimate aspiration for a lasting peace nurtured by the
populations concerned.
In that regional context, marked by a lack of space
for viable political compromises among the parties to
the conflicts, United Nations support for the mediation
efforts and good offices of regional organizations, in the
context of preventive diplomacy, is extremely relevant.
My delegation believes that the regional approach to
the settlement of ongoing disputes, based on Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is essential
to greater ownership of peace processes.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States therefore seems to be an approach
that should be fostered. It promotes joint analysis of the
root causes of conflicts and joint visits to crisis areas,
as well as the development of coordinated responses, in
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the context of a strategic partnership, which also helps
to strengthen regional capacities for conflict prevention
and management.
My delegation therefore shares the view that, in the
light of the complexity of the current political, security
and humanitarian challenges, cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States should
be further strengthened. That is the essence of the
draft presidential statement on cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States that
will be adopted at the end of the meeting and which we
clearly support.

S/PV. 8548

projects for the benefit of the people of the region. Côte
d’Ivoire has faith in the capacity of the Arab people,
who are rich in their cultural diversity and enormous
economic potential, to meet the current challenge and
achieve peace and stability. Very close cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States is therefore absolutely essential.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Secretaries-General of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States and encourages their
readiness to act in a concerted way to resolve the
current conflicts in the Arab world and internationally.

United Nations support is crucial. My country is
pleased that the presidential statement to be adopted
reaffirms the importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations and urges
the League of Arab States to contribute to conflict
resolution efforts in the region.

Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, our delegation
welcomes your presence here in New York this week
to moderate and enhance the work being done by the
Kuwaiti presidency. We congratulate you and the team
you represent for this excellent work.

Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the clearly expressed
resolve of the Security Council and the Council of the
League of Arab States to work together to establish
peace and stability in the region voiced at their
consultative meeting in Cairo in 2016.

We also extend our thanks to Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations; Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States; and Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Poland, for their valuable briefings,
which contribute to a better understanding of the topic
we are considering today.

In that context, we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/592) issued in August 2018,
which highlights the readiness of the United Nations
and other regional organizations to support the Arab
League in building its capacity for conflict prevention
and management. Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire believes the
announcement by the Secretary-General of the opening
of a United Nations liaison office to the League of
Arab States, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 73/267, adopted in December 2018, to be
entirely appropriate. As representatives know, that
announcement was made at the thirtieth ordinary
session of the Arab League summit, held in Tunis in
March.
United Nations support should also focus on the
economic and social development efforts of the States
of the region within the League of Arab States in order
to robustly address the underlying causes of the crises
in the region. That support will also ensure coordinated
responses to the humanitarian challenges.
In that regard, my country therefore encourages
United Nations bodies, programmes and specialized
agencies to provide assistance to the League of Arab
States in order to jointly implement development

Like other delegations before us, we condemn the
attack on ships in the Gulf of Oman and believe that
meetings of this nature present a unique opportunity
to reflect on possible ways to strengthen cooperation
in areas where the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations share a common interest as
it relates to the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Our delegation is from a country and a region that
greatly value the efforts and mechanisms of the United
Nations to respond to threats to international peace
and security. So far this year, this is the third time we
have had a meeting of this sort, which demonstrates
the willingness of the Council to make more effective
the implementation of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which establishes the fundamental
basis for the participation of regional and subregional
organizations in this arduous task, which is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. This dynamic
confirms the recognition of the United Nations of
the need to work with these international partners,
who benefit from their geographical proximity to the

19-1736021/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

places threatened by international peace and security
challenges.
Since the last decade, many parts of the world
have been especially affected by increasing political
turbulence, wars and terrorist attacks — a situation
that affects, in particular, various parts of the Arabian
peninsula, northern Africa and the Horn of Africa. We
believe that the League of Arab States, of which the
majority of States from those regions are members,
possesses special knowledge that enables it to deal
judiciously with the cultural issues that have often
been a factor in the conflicts of its member States. That
cultural and linguistic expertise is invaluable when it
comes to knowledge-based mediation, which gives the
League of Arab States an advantage with respect to
conflicts in its geographical region.
There have been important references confirming
the League of Arab States as a necessary partner of the
United Nations in addressing international conflicts. To
cite just one, I would point to the Arab Peace Initiative,
adopted for the first time at the Beirut Summit in 2002.
Although it has not resolved the dispute, it continues to
be cited to this day in most of the statements made and to
be made, making it one of the best-known contributions
to peace in relation to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Furthermore, bearing in mind the fact that most
of the States members of the League of Arab States
are also members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and that another significant proportion
belongs to the African Union, my delegation calls
on the League of Arab States to partner with other
regional organizations with a view to promoting joint
coordination and economizing effort.
Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea notes
the prevailing need for the Security Council, as the
highest guarantor of international peace and security,
to preserve the trend of integration of regional and
subregional organizations into the collective system of
global security as the best way to face the challenges
that threaten the peace and security of our planet.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, Mr. Aboul Gheit, for their informative
briefings. I also extend a warm welcome to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
22/24

13/06/2019

Regional cooperation is one of the pillars of
Belgium’s foreign policy. We therefore welcome
this opportunity to discuss within the Council the
cooperation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States. In the same spirit, the European Union
met with the League of Arab States in February.
The Arab world is currently facing many challenges,
ranging from conflicts in some of its countries to
thematic challenges, such as the preservation and
management of water resources. The conflicts in Syria,
Yemen and Libya, as well as the stalemate in the Middle
East peace process, have considerably destabilized
the region and strongly exacerbated tensions among
its States and putting its security at serious risk, as
evidenced today by the serious incidents in the Gulf of
Oman. The internationalization of these conflicts also
jeopardizes international peace and security, of which
the Council is the guarantor.
The region is stronger when it speaks with one
voice. The widespread support of the region for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East is a good example, as is the
support of the Arab world for maintaining the two-State
solution in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Given the
gravity and the complex and multidimensional nature
of the challenges faced, strengthened dialogue and
collaboration within the League of Arab States, as well
as between the League of Arab States and the Security
Council, are of critical importance. We therefore
support the request to convene the Security Council
and the League of Arab States at regular intervals, as is
the case with other regional organizations, such as the
European Union and the African Union.
Belgium has made conflict prevention one of its
priorities. As the Secretary-General points out in his
report on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations (S/2018/592), the latter
have a key role to play in conflict prevention, which is
also the case for the League of Arab States. Belgium
supports efforts to strengthen that dimension. A joint
analysis and common early warning mechanisms are
essential instruments in that regard. In that context, we
welcome the announcement of the opening of a United
Nations liaison office to the League of Arab States in
Cairo.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States must also be guided by the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The root
19-17360

13/06/2019

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

causes, as well as socioeconomic inequalities, must be
addressed without delay. In addition, respect for human
rights, inclusive governance and the rule of law must
be the thread of that cooperation. It is also essential
to ensure the meaningful participation of women and
young people.
Belgium will continue to give its full support to
strengthening and deepening the existing synergies
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, with the common objective of contributing
to stability and the search for peace, as well as the
promotion of multilateralism and a global order based
on the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Arabic): After consultations
among members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
“The Security Council recalls all its previous
resolutions and statements of its President which
underscore the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
statutes of regional and subregional organizations.
“The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the briefings of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, António Guterres,
and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, on 13 June 2019
and reiterates that cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to the
maintenance of peace and security, and consistent
with Chapter VIII of the Charter, can improve
collective security.
“The Security Council encourages the holding
of an annual briefing by the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, and expresses its
intention to consider further steps to promote
closer cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States in the fields of
conflict early warning, prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
and to promote the coherence and effectiveness of
their efforts. In this regard, it welcomes the already

S/PV. 8548

existing strong cooperation initiatives between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States.
“The Security Council takes note of the
outcome of general meetings on the cooperation
between the Secretariats of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States and their specialized
agencies, the last of which was held in Geneva in
July 2018.
“The Security Council encourages the holding
of an annual informal meeting between its members
and the members of the Council of the League of
Arab States, as well as the consideration of the
proposal by the Council of Ministers of the League
of Arab States to establish a consultative framework
between the Arab League and the United Nations
to enhance collaboration in maintaining peace and
security in the Arab region.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of intensifying coordination between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations
special envoys, as appropriate, in addressing the
current crises in the Arab region with a view to
reaching a more comprehensive understanding
of the crisis in the region, strengthening the
capacity of the two organizations and developing
effective solutions through joint action where
appropriate. The Security Council also emphasizes
the importance of trilateral cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States on
cross-regional peace and security issues, as well as
with other regional organizations on situations of
common interest.
“The Security Council recognizes and further
encourages efforts by the League of Arab States
to contribute to collective endeavours to settle
conflicts in the region peacefully, while reaffirming
its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
countries and to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council commends members
of the League of Arab States on their ongoing
commitment to international peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, including through the
contribution of troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

19-1736023/24

S/PV.8548

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

“The Security Council welcomes the upcoming
opening of the United Nations liaison office in the
headquarters of the League of Arab States in Cairo
in June 2019, and encourages the United Nations
Secretariat and the Secretariat General of the
League of Arab States to maximize the utilization
of this office towards strengthening cooperation
between the two organizations.

24/24

13/06/2019

“The Security Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to report, as appropriate, on further
ways of strengthening institutional relations and
cooperation between the two organizations.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2019/5.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

19-17360
