S/2022/689

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 September 2022
Original: English

Situation in South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2625
(2022), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to 15 March 2023 and requested the Secretary-General to
report on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 90 days. The report
covers political and security developments, the humanitarian and human rights
situation and progress towards the implementation of the Mission’s mandate between
1 June and 31 August 2022.

II. Major political developments
2.
During the reporting period, the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan saw limited progress.
On 30 August, the graduation ceremony of the necessary unified forces finally took
place. The event was attended by the signatories of the peace agreement, guarantors,
members of civil society, representatives from the region, the international
community and the public.
3.
On 30 May, the reconstituted Transitional National Legislative Assembly passed
the Political Party Act, 2012 (amendment) bill. On 1 June, the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition (SPLM-IO) and the Other Political Parties
issued a joint statement in which they claimed that the Assembly had overstepped its
mandate by amending the bill forwarded by the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee. On 14 June, SPLM-IO released a press statement in which it condemned
the alteration of the key provisions of the Political Party Act, 2012, while continuing
its boycott that started on 9 June. Following a meeting between the President, Salva
Kiir Mayardit, and the First Vice-President, Riek Machar, on 11 August, the SPLM-IO
parliamentary caucus agreed to end the boycott as from 14 August.
4.
On 13 August, the Ministry of Presidential Affairs issued a letter in which it
announced that the bills that were discussed during the SPLM-IO boycott period
should be submitted again to obtain consensus. The affected bills include the
constitution-making process bill (2022) and the national wildlife service
(amendment) bill (2022). It was also noted in the same letter that the Political Parties
Act, 2012 (amendment) bill had been assented to by the President.

22-21519 (E)

140922

*2221519*

S/2022/689

5.
On 2 July, SPLM-IO launched the party’s membership registration in Juba under
the theme “Towards Democratic, United and Prosperous South Sudan”.
6.
On 9 July, the President addressed the nation on the eleventh anniversary of the
independence of South Sudan. He declared that critical bills related to security and
constitution-making were in the final stages of consideration by the legislature and
stated that those bills were critical to holding fair, transparent and credible election s
at the end of the transitional period. The President expressed his concern over the
decision made by the United States of America to withdraw support for the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and
the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission as at 3 and 15 July,
respectively, owing to the failure of the parties to implement the Revitalized
Agreement.
7.
On 21 July, the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission held
its twenty-third plenary meeting. The interim Chair of the Commission, Major
General Charles Tai Gituai, welcomed updates from the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity that a proposed road map to implement outstanding
tasks in the Revitalized Agreement had been submitted to the President. He also
registered his concern about the serious violations to the transitional security
arrangements in Unity and Upper Nile, as reported by the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism.
8.
On 4 August, the parties to the Revitalized Agreement signed an agreement on
the road map to a peaceful and democratic end to the transitional period of the
Revitalized Agreement, in line with the provisions to amend the Agreement. The road
map extends the transitional period by 24 months, until 22 February 2025. In his
remarks, the President appealed to hold-out groups led by Pagan Amum and General
Thomas Cirillo to join the peace process. Speakers from across the political divide
and a civil society representative called for more political space, efforts to address
intra-alliance conflict and engagement with civil society organizations.
9.
UNMISS and the African Union welcomed the agreement and called upon the
Government to implement the remaining benchmarks in full to ensure that a
conducive atmosphere was created for the conduct of free, fair and credible elections
at the end of the extended period. In a statement, the troika of Norway, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States and the
European Union called upon the Government to undertake sustained action to
implement the road map in order to receive the donor support requested by the
Government.
10. The National Democratic Movement, the People’s Coalition for Civil Action,
the South Sudan United Front/Army (SSUF/A) and the National Salvation Front
(NAS) criticized the road map, citing that the extension was a result of deliberate
obstruction and lack of political will among the parties of the Government to
implement the Revitalized Agreement.
Hold-out groups
11. From 20 to 30 June, two South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance
(SSOMA) factions, namely, the Real SPLM and SSUF/A, participated in an induction
workshop to be integrated into the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism structure, which was held under the auspices
of the Community of Sant’Egidio in Rome. The 15 August deadline for the two
factions to join the Mechanism as national monitors was not met.
12. On 13 July, the Non-Signatory South Sudan Opposition Group (NSSSOG), a
group of six political organizations (United Democratic Revolutionary Movement/
2/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

Army, National Democratic Movement Patriotic Front, NAS, SSUF/A, South Sudan
National Movement for Change and Real SPLM), announced its rejection of any
extension of the transitional period. NSSSOG clarified that, while it was neither a
political or military alliance nor a replacement of SSOMA, the group had the common
objective of advocating a technocratic Government following the end of the
transitional period in February 2023.
Regional developments
13. On 17 June, South Sudan signed two Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) protocols on transhumance and movement of people to regulate
the movement of cattle and people in the Horn of Africa region. However, on 22 June,
the Eastern Equatoria State caucus in the Transitional National Legislative Assembly
rejected the IGAD protocol on transhumance, describing it as an avenue for invasion
and occupation of land.
14. On 5 July, the Vice-President, James Wani Igga, participated in the thirty-ninth
Extraordinary Assembly of IGAD Heads of State and Government, held in Nairobi.
The subsequent communiqué contained a call for the Government to draw up a road
map with clear benchmarks and realistic timelines. It also contained appeals to the
United States to reconsider its decision to scale down its support for the peace process
in South Sudan, given that doing so would cripple the work of the Reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism.
15. From 1 to 4 June, a delegation from the African Union High -level Ad Hoc
Committee for South Sudan (Algeria, Chad, Nigeria, Rwanda and South Africa)
visited South Sudan and met UNMISS, the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission and parties to the Revitalized Agreement. The visit was in
solidarity with the people and Government of South Sudan and was intended to
understand the challenges in achieving the benchmarks set out in the Agreement. This
visit was undertaken in anticipation of the visit of the foreign ministers of the five
countries in the third quarter of 2022.
16. On 11 August, in a meeting with the President in Juba, the Deputy Chair of the
Sudan Sovereignty Council, General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, stated that the
Sudan, as a peace guarantor of the Revitalized Agreement and Chair of IGAD,
welcomed the agreement by the South Sudanese peace partners on the road map and
extension of the transitional period.
Economic situation
17. The macroeconomic situation remains challenging, although the World Bank
projected gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 1.2 per cent in 2022. Further GDP
growth is contingent on the implementation of the peace process and ongoing macro fiscal and public financial management reforms, as well as the recovery of oil prices
in the medium term. The South Sudanese pound remained unstable and continued to
depreciate against the dollar (1 dollar/651 South Sudanese pounds as at 31 August).
18. The revised national development strategy for 2021–2024 was launched on
21 June. The new fiscal year (2022/23) budgeting process was in progress, and on
3 June the Cabinet approved a $2.71 billion budget for the fiscal year, equivalent to
1.3 trillion South Sudanese pounds. A budget deficit of approximately 558 billion South
Sudanese pounds ($981 million) is projected, with no clarity on how the deficit will
be financed.
19. On 20 July, the National Revenue Authority issued a circular to operationalize
the Financial Act 2021/2022, repealing the 2019/2020 Act, stating that the new Act
22-21519

3/18

S/2022/689

had been passed by the Transitional National Legislative Assembly and signed by the
President on 9 June. The Authority, in the circular, revised the exchange rate used for
customs valuations from 45 South Sudanese pounds to the dollar to 90 South
Sudanese pounds to the dollar. This adjustment implied a 100 per cent increase in
taxes and levies imposed on imports and exports, effective 22 August. This tax hike
will potentially encourage smuggling and reduce customs revenue.

III. Security situation
20. The security dynamics in South Sudan were affected by continued cattle raids
in greater Bahr el-Ghazal, resulting in large numbers of casualties and the
displacement of civilians. Similarly, reprisal attacks across the country, in particular
in Magwi and Kapoeta, in Eastern Equatoria State, have accentuated intercommunal
dynamics, while fragmentation within the Kitgwang faction that split from SPLM -IO
further complicates the security dynamics in the Upper Nile region.
Greater Upper Nile region
21. On 20 July 2022, in Unity State, clashes between the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces and forces reportedly loyal to General Stephen Buay’s South Sudan
Patriotic Movement/Army (SSPM/A) around Mayom County reignited. UNMISS
condemned an attack on 22 July in which 12 security personnel and the county
commissioner were killed and 14 others injured (including 2 female civilians).
Subsequent skirmishes took place, including an attack on 26 July on a government
convoy and fighting in the border region between Mayom County and Twic County
in Warrap. On 8 August, four SSPM/A senior officers were reported to have been
executed by the local government and military officials. UNMISS expressed grave
concern at the incident and called for a fair judicial process.
22. Upper Nile and Jonglei States witnessed heavy fighting between the Kitgwang
factions (Agwelek and pro-Gatwech forces), eventually also involving the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA–IO) in Tonga, New Fangak, Diel and
Atar areas from 18 to 25 August. The fighting displaced more than 15,000 persons
from Tonga, Panyikang County, and approximately 3,500 from Fangak County, with
internally displaced persons spilling over into northern Jonglei, Unity State, and the
Sudan. As at 30 August, the designated internally displaced persons site in Adidyang,
Panyikang County, has received more than 3,000 internally displaced persons, while
2,246 persons (including 1,133 women) arrived at the UNMISS protection of civilians
site. In addition, the fighting reportedly resulted in 11 killed and 58 wounded on all
sides and more than 270 Shilluk civilians taken hostage by the pro-Gatwech forces.
23. On 9 and 10 June, heavy clashes ensued between Gawaar Nuer and Lou Nuer
young people in Nyerol County. This resulted in the displacement of 4,000 individuals
from Pulutruk to Bulbei and Dengdor villages and the reported death of four Lou
Nuer, nine Gawaar Nuer and many raided cattle. UNMISS supported the local
authorities in northern Jonglei in facilitating the return of the displaced persons.
Greater Equatoria region
24. Cattle rustling and related retaliatory attacks triggered deadly violence in the
region. In Mangala payam, Central Equatoria, Dinka Bor cattle herders reportedly
established camps in the area and harassed the local population and civilians along
the Juba-Mangala road. On 24 and 26 June, Dinka Bor cattle keepers clashed with
local young people in Nangala, resulting in several casualties, followed by the alleged
abduction of Dinka Bor cattle keepers by local young people, in retaliation for several
deadly attacks carried out between 24 and 26 June.
4/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

25. Further incidents of intercommunal violence were reported in Eastern
Equatoria, including between young people from various communities in Lafon
County. On 6 July, the Murle from the Greater Pibor Administrative Area, the Tenet
from Lafon County, and the Buya from Budi County jointly attacked the Toposa in
Riwoto, Kapoeta North County. The attack resulted in the killing of 271 fighters, the
injuring of 86 and the raiding of some 15,000 cattle.
26. Meanwhile, clashes between NAS elements and the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces, especially in Maridi County, continued to destabilize the security
situation in the area. On 8 June, NAS reportedly attacked South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces barracks in Embe along the Maridi-Rasolo road. On 13 June, clashes
took place between Ngulu-Sai and Meke in Maridi County. There were other reports
of abductions and arbitrary arrests of civilians, often attributed to NAS and the South
Sudan People’s Defence Forces.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
27. Deadly clashes over cattle rustling erupted between local young people and
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces in Rualbet, Tonj County. The security situation
in Twic County on the border with Abyei showed relative improvement. Following a
series of clashes between Rualbet young people (Dinka Awan) and residents of Awul
payam (Dinka Atok) in Tonj North from 11 to 13 June, 13 civilians (including
3 women) were reportedly killed, 3 were injured and many others were displaced. The
local authorities redeployed security forces from Tonj South and Tonj East Counties
to prevent further clashes between the two communities. On 16 June, the Warrap State
Governor dismissed the Tonj North County Commissioner, citing mismanagement on
security and disarmament issues.
28. The area witnessed a deadly cattle raid on 21 June in Warrap town, where Dinka
Awan reportedly raided some 130 cattle from an influential local businessman.
Consequently, on 25 June, deadly violence erupted between Rualbet young people
and the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces, when the latter reportedly attempted
to recover the raided cattle. Approximately 7,000 people were displaced. The attack
reportedly resulted in 115 people killed, of whom 75 were from the Defence Forces
(men) and 40 civilians (including 7 women caught in the crossfire), and 32 injured
(15 from the Defence Forces and 17 civilians). On 27 June, the President issued a
directive to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces to conduct a 21-day operation
in Tonj North and restore order. The violence also displaced more than 11,000
residents.
29. Between 1 and 19 July, insecurity in Rualbet continued, with the South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces reportedly shooting and killing 36 individuals, including
children, raping women and burning down 34 homes in retaliatory attacks against the
community, following the violent clashes on 25 June. The Chief of the Defence Forces
and a high-level security committee tasked by the President with investigating the
incident and disarming civilians in greater Tonj arrived in Rualbet on 4 July. On
15 July, a joint United Nations and government delegation visited Rualbet to engage
with the high-level security committee, which claimed that no incident had occurred
since their deployment. The committee called upon humanitarian actors to provide
assistance.
30. The security situation in the Twic-Abyei border areas continued to be marked
by low-level criminal activities and clashes between Dinka Twic and Dinka Ngok
from the Abyei Administrative Area. The main supply route linking Twic to Abyei
saw criminal attacks on commercial trucks, and the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces were reportedly providing escorts. In efforts to improve the security situation,

22-21519

5/18

S/2022/689

state officials engaged local chiefs to prevent the local young people from looting and
allow freedom of movement, in particular for humanitarian actors.
31. Further intercommunal incidents were reported in Akop, Tonj North County. On
22 June, clashes between local young people and the Luanyjang and Lou Paher
communities resulted in the arrest of 19 persons by the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces disarmament unit. Meanwhile, on 30 June, armed Nuer young people from
Mayendit County in Unity reportedly killed 18 Dinka Apuk from Warrap (16 men and
2 boys) and injured 4 men in the border area between the two states.

IV. Humanitarian situation
32. On 9 June, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Food Programme, in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and Fo od
Security, released a crop and food security assessment mission report for 2021. The
report projects a country-wide population of approximately 12.5 million people by
mid-2022 and, accordingly, an overall cereal production deficit of approximately
541,000 tons for the 2022 marketing year (January to December), 16 per cent above
the deficit that had been estimated for 2021. As at 31 August, only 34 per cent of the
2022 Humanitarian Response Plan launched on 31 March had been funded.
33. Excessive rains and river overflows, in particular in the areas along the Nile and
its tributaries, triggered floods in Warrap, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, Jonglei, Upper
Nile, Lakes, Unity and Central Equatoria States, affecting some 835,000 people and
resulting in significant crop losses and livestock mortality. On 14 June, the World
Food Programme announced that almost one third of the acutely food insecure South
Sudanese that it planned to support in 2022 would be left without humanitarian food
assistance owing to critical funding shortages.
34. Rampant intercommunal violence and attacks by armed cattle raiders in Nangala
village displaced 5,600 people in Lirya and Lokiliri payams, Juba County, Central
Equatoria. An unconfirmed number of civilians were reportedly killed or injured and
an unspecified number of children and women were abducted. Homes and properties
were looted and destroyed. Attacks by armed young people, suspected to be from the
Greater Pibor Administrative Area, on a cattle camp at Lokitela in Wokobu payam,
Kapoeta North County, Eastern Equatoria, on 20 June, reportedly resulted in the
displacement of 5,000 people and the killing of several others.
35. On 7 July, intercommunal violence between conflicting communities in Riwoto
payam, Kapoeta North, in Eastern Equatoria, resulted in an unverified number of
combatants killed or injured. Local authorities reported that the local population had
been moved out of the area ahead of the fighting, and the humanitarian impact was
yet to be assessed.
36. With continued intercommunal tensions in the Abyei Administrative Area, an
estimated 41,200 people were displaced to Twic and Gogrial West Counties in Warrap
and Aweil East in Northern Bahr el-Ghazal. Renewed fighting on 26 June displaced
another estimated 2,000 people.
37. The rains intensified in July, resulting in flooding in some areas of Unity and
Warrap. Dyke and berm improvement and construction helped to prevent the impact
of floods. Torrential rain and floods affected an estimated 2,384 people in the
Abeidaw internally displaced persons site in Wunrok, Twic County. The flood
response task team, set up by the Humanitarian Coordinator, continues to implement
and monitor preparedness and response activities.

6/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

38. Between 1 June and 31 August, 104 incidents related to humanitarian access
constraints were reported, of which 56 involved violence against humanitarian
personnel and assets. A total of 105 incidents were reported in nine states. One
humanitarian staff member was killed while on duty in Eastern Equat oria. Twentyeight humanitarian workers were relocated in Jonglei and Eastern Equatoria.
Incidents of looting and theft of humanitarian assets were reported. Two attacks on
convoys and commercially contracted vehicles took place in Eastern Equatoria. The
continued violence targeting humanitarians and their assets had a significant impact
on vital life-saving humanitarian support.
39. On 18 July, the Minister of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management
unilaterally signed the South Sudan country agreement between the Government and
international non-governmental organizations, without prior consultations with those
organization on the contents of the Agreement.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Supporting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and
the peace process
40. UNMISS continued its good offices with the parties and stakeholders in South
Sudan and in the region. Those engagements included several separate interactions
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and
Head of UNMISS with the President and the Vice-President, in which both expressed
their commitment to the Revitalized Agreement. The Special Representative also held
extensive engagements with the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism, IGAD, the African Union and the troika of Norway, the
United Kingdom and the United States. The engagements focused on preserving the
peace framework by calling for a road map to implement the outstanding benchmarks
regarding the Agreement, encouraging the key parties to resolve the impasse in
parliament as a result of the boycott of SPLM-IO and providing substantive support
to peace implementation.
41. On 11 July, the Special Representative addressed the African Union Peace and
Security Council session on the situation in South Sudan and stressed the need to see
progress in peace implementation, in particular the development of an agreed road
map. The Council welcomed the outcome of the thirty-ninth Extraordinary Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of IGAD, held in Nairobi on 5 July. It also requested
the United Nations, the African Union Commission and IGAD to commence plans by
the end of August 2022 on a joint task force to formulate a strategy to mobilize support
for constitution-making and electoral processes in South Sudan.
42. On 15 July, UNMISS, together with the South Sudan Council of Churches, met
the Western Equatoria State authorities to discuss proposed plans to advance
reconciliation among the communities in conflict in Tambura. Relatedly, the Mission,
in partnership with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
commenced a community violence reduction programme in Tambura on 18 July to
train more than 300 young people on livelihood skills.
43. UNMISS continued to support key reforms under chapter IV of the Revitalized
Agreement on resource, economic and financial management. From 13 to 17 June,
UNMISS supported the South Sudan Anti-Corruption Commission during technical
consultations on the United Nations Convention against Corruption. The Mission also
provided technical assistance to the Financial Intelligence Unit in addressing legal
gaps in the national anti-corruption framework. On 23 and 24 June, UNMISS

22-21519

7/18

S/2022/689

provided technical legal comments to the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee consultations on the reform of the petroleum laws.
44. The Mission also supported the Strategic Defence and Security Revie w Board
in its activities to advance key deliverables required under chapter II (security issues)
of the Revitalized Agreement. The Board concluded its review of the revised defence
policy on 9 and 10 August. The development of the security sector transfor mation
road map was initiated from 22 to 25 August. Completion of the strategic defence and
security review process is critical to laying out a national vision for security sector
transformation.
45. To support increased civilian oversight of the security sector, UNMISS
supported the parliamentary standing specialized committee on defence and veterans
affairs with the holding of a workshop, on 11 and 12 August, to finalize its 2022 –
2023 action plan. The workshop was designed to strengthen the ability of the
committee to exercise its constitutional role and responsibility to oversee the
performance of security sector institutions and to approve relevant plans,
programmes, policies and budgets.
46. UNMISS continued initiatives to promote the expansion of civic and political
spaces. The Mission hosted 14 political round-table discussions on Radio Miraya,
facilitating dialogue and bridging the gap between the public and political leaders on
key issues concerning the constitution-making process, the forum of political parties
and progress on peace implementation.

B.

Protection of civilians and mitigating intercommunal conflict
47. UNMISS continued to provide physical protection to the 34,529 persons,
including 17,740 women, in the Malakal protection of civilians site, in addition to
engaging stakeholders on enhancing safety and protection to site residents.
48. UNMISS conducted 19 community consultations and workshops to strengthen
protection networks in Central, Eastern and Western Equatoria, Jonglei, Lake,
Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, Unity and Warrap States, with attendance from 507 state
and county officials (including 160 women). UNMISS conducted five women
leadership consultations and dialogues on protection of civilians and community
violence reduction for 1,250 internally displaced persons (including 1,000 women) in
the Bentiu internally displaced persons site. UNMISS also conducted seven events
for 573 persons (including 156 women) to build the capacity of national stakeholders
in conflict management and mitigation.
49. UNMISS facilitated a two-day workshop, on 7 and 8 June, for state government
representatives in Yambio, Western Equatoria, bringing together 100 participants
(including 30 women). From 14 to 16 June, UNMISS facilitated the engagement o f
religious leaders under the South Sudan Council of Churches who are leading the
Tambura peace process. From 23 to 25 August, UNMISS and partners assisted the
South Sudan Council of Churches in bringing together key Azande and Balanda
politicians based in Juba and Yambio in a dialogue. The initiatives promoted political
cohesion and trust as part of broader efforts to address continuing political and ethnic
tensions in Tambura.
50. On 7 and 8 June, UNMISS facilitated Kidepo Valley inter-county dialogue for
cattle camp young people comprising 48 participants (including 6 women) from five
counties in Eastern Equatoria. As a result, a mechanism for monitoring violations of
established regulations was developed, and the young people committed themselves
to maintaining peace along the Kidepo Valley corridor.

8/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

51. Similarly, to encourage local efforts in early warning and mediation, UNMISS
conducted a capacity-building workshop for rural youth peace and security
committees of Yirol West, Lakes, on 15 and16 June. Forty-eight people (including
five women) from the payam and boma levels participated.
52. In facilitating the work of the joint border peace committees in Aweil, UNMISS,
in collaboration with the state government, organized conflict management training,
involving 55 participants (including 9 women), on 22 and 23 June and on 30 and
31 August. It fostered community ownership of the joint border committees (formed
in 2018), which remains instrumental in promoting peace and harmonious
relationships among host communities and cattle herders in Northern Bahr el-Ghazal.
53. UNMISS continued its support for national and local efforts to mitigate tensions
between Dinka Twic and Dinka Ngok along the Abyei Administrative Area and Twic
County borders. The Mission engaged with government officials, key personalities
and community leaders. Six preparatory meetings were conducted between UNMISS,
the office of the Vice President for the Services Delivery Cluster, the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei, UNDP and the International Organization for
Migration to organize a follow-up peace conference in Aweil in October.
54. From 16 to 21 August, UNMISS assisted the Fashoda ecumenical conference
for peace and development in organizing a peace dialogue conference in Kod ok,
Upper Nile. The conference drew 400 participants from civil society, military and
political actors, faith-based leaders and community representatives, and was aimed at
encouraging peace and reconciliation in the region.
55. Owing to flooding, a lack of dissipation in the interim dry season and restrictions
imposed by military forces, access to large areas of the country remained restricted.
This caused significant challenges when planning and conducting patrols across
sectors and reduced engagement opportunities at the local level.
56. As at 31 August, the UNMISS force had conducted 1,799 patrols, including
1,472 short-duration patrols, 68 long-duration patrols, 106 dynamic air patrols and
153 riverine patrols. The active participation of women peacekeepers in the patrols
are being ensured in furtherance of the Mission’s mandate. A total of 1,948 patrols
were conducted in and around protection of civilians sites. Eight per cent of patrols
included women uniformed peacekeepers on routine liaison patrolling. UNMISS
completed six requests for force protection from humanitarian partners. Of eight
temporary operating bases, five (Duk Padiet, Kajo Kaji, Aduel, Rokon and Ueli -Roja)
had been completed and three (Koch, Tonj and Tambura) were ongoing.
57. As at 31 August, United Nations police had completed 6,215 patrols, including
2,661 confidence- and trust-building patrols, 183 short-duration patrols, 38 longduration patrols, 83 dynamic air patrols, 637 coordinated security patrols and 2,613
high-visibility patrols. Of those patrols, 2,789 included women. The patrols increased
protection for internally displaced persons, enhanced a secure environment, prevented
crime, deterred violence and restored confidence. The United Nations police has
expanded its operational footprints to daily co-location at several police stations and
posts, which includes mentoring, advising and monitoring the South Sudan National
Police Service.
58. United Nations police collaborated and coordinated with the National Police to
respond and manage crimes and sexual assaults inside protection of civilians sites and
internally displaced persons camps, leading to the apprehension and detention of
suspects. Nine residential blocks were identified as hotspot locations and are under a
proactive patrolling and policing posture. United Nations police conducted 8 search
operations and 636 access control operations in Malakal to reduce the fear of physical
harm and enhance the safety and security of internally displaced people. A total of
22-21519

9/18

S/2022/689

737 quick-response teams were in place on active standby to respond to security
incidents in support of the National Police in Juba, Malakal and Bentiu, to enhance
operational response capability and maximize the protection of civilians mandate
delivery.
59. The Mine Action Service responded to 33 requests for the identification,
removal, disposal and clearance of suspected landmines and explosive ordnance. That
response prevented injury and loss of life by landmines and explosive ordnance and
enabled the communities to gain access to 44 agricultural areas, 1 hospital and
8 natural water sources. A total of 7,840 items of explosive ordnance were disposed
of and 2,695,962 m 2 of land was released during the period. The Mine Action Service
provided awareness-raising training on landmines and explosive remnants of war to
834 UNMISS personnel (246 of whom were women). To support safe and voluntary
return and resettlement, 55,502 civilians (9,414 men, 10,613 women, 18,905 boys and
16,570 girls), as well as 850 refugees and 1,000 internally displaced persons residing
in the Doro refugee camp and protection of civilians site in Malakal, were provided
with explosive ordnance risk education.

C.

Rule of law and accountability
60. UNMISS continued to facilitate the creation of a protective environment for
civilians by providing technical assistance and capacity-building support to rule of
law actors at the national and subnational levels.
61. In June, the Mission provided technical legal assistance and logistical support
to the Military Justice Directorate of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces to
deploy General Courts Martial to Bentiu, Unity, and Yei, Central Equatoria. In total,
the Bentiu and Yei General Courts Martial concluded 22 cases involving 34 accused,
including 6 convictions in 5 sexual and gender-based violence cases. UNMISS also
supported civil society organizations in providing victims and witnesses with
counselling and other services.
62. On 29 June, UNMISS supported the induction of six judge advocates (includi ng
three women) into a specialized conflict-related sexual violence team responsible for
investigating allegations of conflict-related sexual violence across South Sudan and
for conducting targeted training for personnel of the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces.
63. Between 6 and 24 June, UNMISS supported the third deployment of the joint
special mobile court to Gette, Western Bahr el-Ghazal, to address cases of
intercommunal violence. For the first time, the joint special mobile court convicted
two accused for three separate sexual and gender-based violence incidents.
Communities where the joint special mobile court has deployed continue to advocate
its return, given that it is perceived as breaking cycles of violence.
64. UNMISS supported the deployment of justice actors to Raja, Western Bahr
el-Ghazal, from 27 June to 1 July to increase presence in areas of return and to address
criminal cases for the first time in six years. Seven sexual and gender-based violence
cases were adjudicated, resulting in six convictions. To build capacity across the
criminal justice chain, UNMISS also provided technical assistance to the police and
conducted training for 44 prison officers (including 19 women), and 23 customary
chiefs (including 2 women).
65. The Mission provided technical and coordination support to launch prison
development committees in Aweil, Rumbek and Bentiu. UNMISS also provided
technical advice to the National Prisons Service of South Sudan induction committee
in anticipation of the absorption of personnel into the prison service in relation to the

10/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

integration process of the necessary unified forces. UNMISS also supported
integrated training of police and prosecutors in Aweil, Wau and Kuajok in June and
July to effectively investigate and prosecute serious crimes, including sexual and
gender-based violence. UNMISS continued to support the reform of the national
criminal laws, including through support for the South Sudan Law Review
Commission in holding public consultations on the review of the Criminal Procedure
Code on 27 and 30 June.
66. On 9 June, UNMISS, in coordination with the United Nations Population Fund
and UNDP, supported the Ministry of Youth and Sports and the parliamentary
specialized committee on youth, sports and culture in holding public consultations on
pending youth-related legislation and policies, including the draft national youth
development policy and the ratification of the African Youth Charter, both of which
are now before parliament for consideration.

D.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
67. In close coordination with the humanitarian actors, UNMISS supported delivery
of humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons and refugees in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal and Eastern Equatoria; assessed humanitarian conditions of displaced
populations and returnees in Tambura and Mundri Counties of Western Equatoria; and
used its good offices, air assets and force protection to facilitate humanitarian delivery
of assorted seeds and fishing kits to 859 flood-affected households in Cueibet County,
Lakes. The Mission conducted joint patrols in Malek in Lake State, and Panyijiar and
Koch Counties, Unity, to create conditions conducive to delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The Mission facilitated joint humanitarian-mission assessments to gather
information on humanitarian needs and return conditions in Pochala, Jebel boma,
Akobo, Lankien, Ayod, Duk Padiet and Baidit in Jonglei State.
68. As at 31 August, UNMISS had conducted 68 long-duration patrols and 812
short-duration patrols to support delivery of assistance and ensure the protection of
humanitarian workers. The UNMISS force provided protection to 253 integrated
missions and 31 force protection patrols supporting convoys and humanitarian
partners, including non-governmental organizations. UNMISS completed six requests
for force protection from humanitarian partners.

E.

Monitoring and investigating human rights violations
69. The Mission documented at least 160 incidents that negatively affected the
human rights and protection situation, including 84 arbitrary killings, 22 injuries,
8 abductions, 24 incidents of sexual violence, 16 incidents of arbitrary arrest and
detention, 5 incidents of ill-treatment, 1 attack against humanitarian workers, and the
looting and destruction of civilian property. Those incidents involved 627 civilians
(including 71 women and 38 children) subjected to violence, of whom 265 were killed
and 128 injured. Of these, 274 cases were attributed to community-based militias and
armed elements; 241 to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and other
government security sector elements; 41 to SPLA-IO; 37 to NAS; and 34 to other
armed groups. Attribution remained under verification for 24 incidents invol ving
97 victims.
70. On 3 August, UNMISS published its 2022 second quarter brief on the human
rights situation in South Sudan. At least 188 incidents were documented, reported and
verified (compared with 173 in the previous quarter), involving at least 922 civilians
(754 in the previous quarter) subjected to one of the four major forms of individual

22-21519

11/18

S/2022/689

harm (killing, injury, abduction and sexual violence). The 9 per cent increase in
violent incidents (from 173 to 188) and a 22 per cent increase in the number of victims
(from 754 to 922) can be attributed in large part to violence in southern Unity State,
specifically the attacks between the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and
SPLM/A-IO, which resulted in approximately one third of the civilian casualties in
the second quarter.
71. On 17 August, the joint UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights report on human rights violations and abuses in
southern Unity, covering the period from 12 February and 31 May 2022, during fighting
between the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and affiliated armed militia and
groups, and SPLM/A-IO, was submitted to the Government of South Sudan for its
comments and clearance. The report established that at least 173 civilians had been
killed (100 men, 24 women and 49 children) and 12 others injured (8 men, 2 women
and 2 children). In addition, 131 cases of rape or gang rape (of 113 women and 18 girls)
were documented, and 26 women and 11 children were abducted during the attacks.
72. Extrajudicial executions remained a concern. UNMISS documented the
execution of 17 individuals (10 in Warrap, 4 in Unity, 2 in Lakes and 1 in Western
Equatoria). UNMISS continued to engage authorities at the national and state levels
to urge due process of the law.
73. UNMISS continued to monitor the shrinking civic space, in addition to
providing technical support to the Union of Journalists of South Sudan in conducting
awareness-raising workshops on human rights standards and principles.
74. The Mission also conducted 123 capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities for 4,423 persons, including 1,622 women, focusing on basic human rights
principles, international humanitarian law, transitional justice mechanisms, and
sexual and gender-based violence. Those activities strengthened national and state
capacity to contribute to a protective environment.
Children and armed conflict
75. The United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting verified
40 grave violations affecting 37 children (31 boys and 6 girls). A total of 18 boys were
verified as victims of recruitment and use and 11 were abducted, 3 children (including
1 girl) were injured, and 5 girls were survivors of rape and other forms of sexual
violence. Three incidents of attacks on schools were verified. Children were most
affected in Unity (30), Lakes (3), Western Equatoria (2), Western Bahr el-Ghazal (1)
and Central Equatoria (1).
76. Twenty-nine violations, against 24 boys and 4 girls, as well as the attack on a
school, were attributed to the South Sudan People’s Defence Force, 5 to SPLM/A-IO
forces, 2 to SSPM/A and 1 to SPLA-IO Kitgwang, and there was 1 case of maiming,
which was a result of unexploded ordnance.
77. On 11 June, the President issued a decree on the formation of the National
Human Rights Council, which is tasked with advocacy and human rights promotion.
It will provide a direct link between the Office of the President and the two high-level
committees that spearhead the implementation of the action plan to preve nt and halt
grave violations against children.
78. UNMISS delivered nine child protection training sessions to 390 participants
(332 men and 58 women), including 257 government security forces (including
35 women), 70 SPLA-IO members (including 6 women), 58 community members
(including 17 women) and 5 South Sudan Opposition Alliance members (all men).
UNMISS delivered 76 child protection awareness-raising sessions to 3,407 participants
(including 1,239 women).
12/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

79. Furthermore, UNMISS conducted 43 induction and child protection
mainstreaming sessions that benefited 650 United Nations staff (including 152
women) including 293 military officers (including 33 women), 266 police officers
(including 89 women), 86 civilian personnel (including 26 women) and 5 corre ctions
officers (including 4 women).
Conflict-related sexual violence
80. During the reporting period, UNMISS documented and verified 22 incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence affecting 51 survivors, including 19 girls. Survivors
whose ages ranged from 12 to 43 were subjected to rape (38), gang rape (9), attempted
rape (2) and forced marriage (2). Eighteen survivors were able to receive medical aid,
among whom six sought legal action. The incidents occurred in Central Equatoria (5),
Warrap (7), Western Equatoria (3), Western Bahr el-Ghazal (3), Jonglei (2) and Unity
(2) and were attributed to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (10), SPLM/A-IO
(5), SSNPS (2) and community-based militias/civil defence groups (2), while 3
incidents were unattributed.
81. The Mission conducted 12 awareness-raising sessions and capacity-building
activities in Juba targeting various stakeholders, including civil society organizations,
lawyers, the National Police and Juba University students to commemorate the
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, celebrated
globally on 19 June. Several other activities were carried out by the field offices on
the prevention of and response to sexual violence. UNMISS provided technical
support to the South Sudan Council of Churches and the Islamic Council of South
Sudan on messages related to sexual violence to mark the occasion. A workshop on
survivor-centred monitoring, investigation and reporting skills for members of the
joint consultation forum and two-day consultation to discuss the domestication and
operationalization of the model legislative provisions and guidance on investigation
and prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence were also organized.

F.

Women and peace and security
82. UNMISS partnered with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) in launching three women’s networks in the
police (4 July), the military (6 July) and the prison services (12 July) as part of a
Peacebuilding Fund project on gender mainstreaming in security sector reform. The
Mission assisted in drafting and finalizing relevant terms of reference and gave
presentations on human rights. The networks are intended to mainstream gender and
advocate women’s appointments in the security sector.
83. The Mission also provided technical support for the validation workshop of the
Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare’s five-year strategic plan (2022–2027)
to assist in its mandate delivery on gender equality and women pea ce and security.
UNMISS also delivered technical support through a two -day workshop, held in Torit
on 28 and 29 June on the roles and responsibilities of political and influential women
leaders in good governance and gender-sensitive leadership to discuss measures
through which women leaders in the states could influence and advocate gendersensitive policy making, including the development of a road map to respond to
sexual and gender-based violence in Eastern Equatoria.

22-21519

13/18

S/2022/689

VI. Mission staffing, status of deployments, and conduct
and discipline
84. As at 31 August, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,662,
comprising 864 international staff members, including 252 women (29.2 per cent),
1,420 national staff members, of whom 227 were women (16.0 per cent), and
378 United Nations Volunteers, of whom 165 were women (43.7 per cent).
85. UNMISS police strength stood at 1,493 (of an authorized 2,101 personnel),
comprising 616 individual police officers, including 242 women (39.3 per cent),
846 personnel in formed police units, of whom 212 were women (25.1 per cent), and
31 corrections officers, 16 of whom were women (51.6 per cent).
86. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, UNMISS troop strength stood at 13,833
military personnel: 201 military liaison officers, including 59 women (29.4 per cent);
400 military staff officers, including 81 women (20.3 per cent); and 13,233 military
contingent personnel, including 770 women (5.8 per cent).
87. During the reporting period, UNMISS conducted visits to field locations in Juba,
Bentiu, Aweil, Yambio, Pibor and Kodok to conduct internal training with all
categories of UNMISS personnel with respect to United Nations standards of conduct,
especially in relation to the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, and external
training and capacity-building, with members of community-based complaints
mechanisms to further enhance their capacity to report any information on possible
incidents of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. UNMISS als o continued to be
actively engaged in the prevention of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse task force
to ensure implementation of the system-wide strategy to prevent sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse in South Sudan.
88. In accordance with the applicable policy, information on possible unsatisfactory
conduct and/or misconduct was processed in a timely fashion. Between 1 June and
31 August, 38 allegations of misconduct were recorded in the case management
tracking system, including zero allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. All
identified victims of the previously reported allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse continued to receive support from the Senior Victims’ Rights Officer in South
Sudan.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
89. UNMISS and the Government continued to make efforts to improve overall
communication and coordination of the Mission’s freedom of movement for patrols.
90. As at 31 August, UNMISS recorded 38 violations of the status-of-forces
agreement, compared with 26 violations during the previous reporting period.
Twenty-nine of the violations involved movement restrictions imposed by
government authorities, affecting UNMISS patrols in Central Equatoria, Upper Nile,
Warrap, Eastern Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal. UNMISS also recorded four
movement restrictions by non-government forces: SPLA-IO (two), the SPLA-IO
Kitgwang faction (one) and Agwelek forces (one), affecting UNMISS pat rols in
Central Equatoria and Upper Nile.
91. The status-of-forces agreement violations also included the imposition of undue
taxes, fees and restrictions on UNMISS and its contractors for importing
consignments for the Mission’s exclusive use. As from 1 June, the South Sudan
customs services division introduced an “accreditation permit” for all consignments
14/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

imported into South Sudan, requiring all cargo importers, including UNMISS and its
contractors, to pay a standard fee of $250 per cargo for the issuanc e of the permit.
UNMISS transmitted a démarche to the Government to protest the imposition of the
undue taxes and fees and continues to engage with the Government for exemption of
any payment of the imposed fees by UNMISS and its contractors for the issuance of
the “accreditation permit”.
92. The two national staff members arrested in 2014, whose whereabouts remained
unknown, were both declared dead by national courts on 4 February and 20 July 2022.
In Juba, the National Police arrested and detained one UNMISS national staff member
over a private matter without following the procedures set out in the status-of-forces
agreement. The staff member was released after two days in detention.

VIII. Performance of uniformed components
93. The UNMISS force evaluated 13 units, which included 7 infantry battalions, in
Yei, Bor, Juba, Tomping, Bentiu, Wau and Malakal, and 6 enabling units in Wau,
Tomping, Bor and Malakal. The units were found to be well trained, and seven
exceeded the established standards. In line with the recommendations of the
evaluation team, the units have put more emphasis on military peacekeeping
intelligence, the increased frequency of casualty evacuation, medical evacuation and
emergency response exercises and addressed some administrative difficulties.
94. As at 31 August, performance evaluations and assessments were conducted for
four formed police units in Bentiu, Juba and Malakal. While the assessment results
were satisfactory, the units had shortfalls in contingent-owned equipment, training
and administration (documentation) and were put on a performance improvement
plan.
95. The evaluation of both components covered operations, mandate comprehension
and support, command and control, protection of civilians, training, discipline,
sustainment and health, among others.

IX. Observations and recommendations
96. I join the African Union and the international community in commending the
signatory parties for agreeing to a road map that extends the transitional period for an
additional 24 months to enable the implementation of critical outstanding tasks. I take
note of the calls by other stakeholders to conduct extensive consultations and call
upon the parties to engage, as necessary, as they move forward on the road map.
97. I also encourage the parties to view the road map as a recommitment to the
Revitalized Agreement and its implementation benchmarks, and I call upon the
international community to provide support to this end. While the extension of the
transitional period provides the parties with additional time towards meeting the road
map benchmarks, progress continues to be of the essence, and concrete, tangible
results are now imperative.
98. I am encouraged by the graduation of the necessary unified forces as part of the
first phase of the reunification process. I urge the parties to sustain momentum by
making consistent progress on the requisite benchmarks. This includes the
reunification of forces, the constitution-making process and ensuring civic space in a
manner that brings confidence to South Sudanese that the transitional period will end
with peaceful, free and fair elections. The extension of the transitional period must
not detract the parties from the urgency of fulfilling these obligations, which remain
critical.
22-21519

15/18

S/2022/689

99. I am pleased that the SPLM-IO caucus has suspended its parliamentary boycott.
The agreement will help to build consensus, and it is important that legislation be
discussed in the presence of the opposition.
100. It remains critical that the way forward on the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement be an inclusive process with broad-based discussions and the full
participation of all parties, civil society and other key stakeholders. In this spirit, I
urge the Government to create the political environment necessary to foster dialogue,
confidence and political participation and address the shrinking civic space.
101. I am encouraged that the SSOMA faction will deploy national monitors into the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism structure. I commend the Community of Sant’Egidio’s efforts for this
accomplishment. While remaining cognizant of the challenges ahead, I urge other
non-signatory groups to join the dialogue through the Sant’Egidio peace process.
102. I am, however, concerned about the implications of the withdrawal of funding
from the Revitalized Agreement’s mechanisms. The curtailment of funds has had an
immediate impact on the monitoring and reporting of ceasefire violations and parties’
adherence to the obligations of the cessation of hostilities agreement. UNMISS
support for the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism is a stop-gap measure, and I appeal to all partners and stakeholders to
explore mitigation arrangements and sustained support.
103. The United Nations will continue to work in coordination with the African
Union, IGAD and members of the international community to support t he timely
implementation of the recently agreed road map.
104. I am gravely concerned about reports of violence in parts of South Sudan.
Subnational violence, cattle rustling, abductions, revenge killings and the alarming
spike in conflict-related sexual violence incidents continue to take a toll on civilians.
This year, more than 80 per cent of civilian casualties have been attributed to
intercommunal violence committed by community-based militias. UNMISS
continues to proactively deploy and maintain a visible presence in violent hotspots.
This strategic pivot to engagement in situations of peace and security across the
country, including through the establishment of temporary operating bases, and
hub-and-spoke deployments, is part of a broader mission strategy to make the
transition from static duties and limited patrolling functions to a nimbler posture
prioritizing geographical mobility. This transition has had a possible positive
correlation with the consistent reduction in civilian casualties over the pa st year.
105. I am appalled by the attack and killing of the county commissioner of Mayom
County. I am also disturbed by the extrajudicial killing by alleged South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces elements of those accused of attacking the county
commissioner. Such acts have the potential to delegitimize local, state and national
authorities, undermine peace gains and fuel further violence. I welcome the
assurances from the Government to bring criminals and perpetrators of extrajudicial
killings to justice. The justice system in South Sudan must be strengthened, with
criminal cases tried in a fair and timely manner with appropriate due diligence
resulting in accountability. UNMISS will continue to provide capacity-building
support to the Government to enhance the rule of law and facilitate access to justice
for the South Sudanese.
106. The humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains dire, amid a challenging
operational environment comprising diminished funding, bureaucratic disruptions
and rising insecurity. Pervasive insecurity, unresolved housing, land and property
issues, and a lack of basic services compound people’s vulnerability, and needs are
16/18

22-21519

S/2022/689

increasing against a backdrop of limited resources. In this regard, I encourage the
international community and donors to facilitate the provision of contributions to
ensure that the humanitarian response is commensurate with the needs.
107. This year alone, five humanitarians have lost their lives while delivering life saving assistance. This is unacceptable. I appeal to the Government to take immediate
action to address impediments and violence against humanitarian workers and assets
and to bring perpetrators to justice. I applaud the humanitarian community, which
continues to prioritize activities, notwithstanding limited resources, and build critical
cross-pillar partnerships on protection, durable solutions and the triple nexus
approach to programming to support the most vulnerable populations. Ensuring
coherence, complementarity and coordination across development and humanitarian
and peace actions is essential.
108. I note with concern the deteriorating economic conditions, which have the
potential to negatively affect the implementation of the peace agreement and erode
the peace gains achieved to date. I call upon the international community to support
the Government in undertaking appropriate mitigation measures, including through
further strengthening public financial management initiatives, to ensure that the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement continues to progress.
109. Lastly, I remain grateful to the troop- and police-contributing countries. I am
thankful to my Special Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for his leadership and for
fostering an emboldened political posture though sustained engagement with the
parties and greater involvement in the peace processes. I also thank the uniformed
and civilian personnel of UNMISS and the United Nations country team, who have
continued to work tirelessly towards peace in South Sudan under challenging
conditions.

22-21519

17/18

S/2022/689

18/18

Map

22-21519
