VI,

Reaolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and
foreign domination to self-determination;17
and expresses its thanks to their authors;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
to give the widest possible publicity to the struggle
being waged by oppressed peoples for the realization
of their self-determination and national independence;
17. Decides to consider this ítem again at its thirtyfourth session on the basis of the reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-govemmental organizations have been requested to submit concerning the strengthening of
assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under
foreign domination and control.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978

33/25.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957, in which it provided for the establishment
of an Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
well as its resolutions 1958 (XVIII) of 12 December
1963 and 2294 (XXII) of 11 December 1967, in
which it provided for subsequent increases in the
membership of the Executive Committee,
Bearing in mind the interest in the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the range of refugee problems confronting the Office,
Noting that the Executive Committee has at present
a membership of thirty-one States Members of the
United Nations or members of any of the specialized
agencies,
l. Decides to increase the membership of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme by up to nine additional members;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its first regular session of 1979, to elect, in consultation
with the regional groups, up to nine additional members of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme from those States with a demonstrated interest in and devotion to the solution of
the refugee problem.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978
33/26.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of
his Office 18 and having heard bis statement,19
11 E/CN.4/Sub.2/405 (vols. I and II).
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/33/12) and Supplement No.
12A (A/33/12/Add.1).

139

Recalling its resolutions 32/67 and 32/70 of 8 December 1977 and noting the gravity of the problems
continuing to face the High Commissioner in his efforts
to assist refugees and displaced persons in many parts
of the world,
Reaffirming that the activities of the High Commissioner are eminently humanitarian in character and
that there is need to assist, on as wide a basis as
possible, his efforts to promote permanent solutions
through voluntary repatriation, local integration or
resettlement in other countries,
Commending Governments for the humanitarian
spirit in which they have received refugees and for
the generous manner in which they have contributed
to alleviating suffering,
Deploring the fact that refugees often face the threat
of refoulement, arbitrary detention and the denial of
asylum and noting that it is necessary to ensure their
basic human rights, protection and safety, ínter alia,
through further accessions to and more effective implementation of international instruments, notably the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees20
and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees, 21
Noting that the increased needs of the refugees and
displaced persons of concem to the Office require the
widening of financia! and other support from Govemments and the closest co-operation of United Nations
bodies and non-govemmental organizations,
l. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the efficient
manner in which they continue to discharge their many
responsibilities in assisting refugees and displaced persons and takes note with appreciation of the report
of the High Commissioner, including the report of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme on its twenty-ninth session; 18
2. Requests the High Commissioner to intensify his
efforts to assist refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office, especially with a view to providing
urgent humanitarian assistance to the large and increasing numbers in need in Africa, Asia and Latin
America;
3. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue to promote permanent and speedy solutions, in
clase co-operation with Governments, United Nations
bodies and non-governmental organizations;
4. Commends Governments that are actively encouraging voluntary repatriation or return as a solution
to the problems in their area and requests the High
Commissioner to render all possible assistance in such
situations in lending help in the rehabilitation of the
returnees;
5. Urges Governments to continue to co-operate
closely with the High Commissioner in efforts to
achieve the self-sufficiency and, where possible, the
integration of refugees in countries of asylum, and to
accept for resettlement, on the widest possible basis,
refugees from countries of first asylum;
6. Further urges Governments to continue to facilitate the work of the High Commissioner in the field
19 !bid., Thirty-t~i~d Sessi?n, Third Committee, 43rd meeting,
paras. 1-13; and 1b1d., Th1rd Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendurn.
2 º United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545 p. 150.
21 Jbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
'

140

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

of international protection by considering accessions
to relevant instruments for the benefit of refugees, the
effective implementation of these instruments and the
scrupulous observance of humanitarian principies with
respect to the granting of asylum and the non-refoulement of refugees;
7. Commends the increasing number of contributors to the High Commissioner's programmes and, emphasizing the need for a wider sharing of the financia!
burden, calls upon Governments to provide him with
necessary funds to attain the objectives of his humanitarian programme.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978

33/47.

National experience in promoting the eooperative movement

The General Assembly,
Recallíng its resolutions 2459 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 and
31/37 of 30 November 1976, and Economic and
Social Council resolution 1668 (LII) of 1 June 1972,
Bearing in mind that the establishment and growth
of co-operatives is one of the important instruments
for the full economic, social and cultural development
of ali members of society,
Recagnizing the necessity of training and educational
programmes at various levels for the growth, diversification and professionalization of the management of
co-operatives,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on national experience in promoting the co-operative movement; 22
2. Reiterates the necessity of an international exchange of experience as a contribution to the growth
and diversification of the co-operative movement;
3. Stresses the role of co-operatives in the development of weaker sections of the community and in
over-all social and economic advancement, particularly
in developing countries;
4. Recognizes that co-operatives are an important
means of increasing employment opportunities for
women and integrating them, as active members of
society, into the development process;
5. Stresses also the important social role of cooperatives in involving people at the grass-roots level
in the planning and decision-making which affect their
daily lives;
6. l nvites Member Sta tes, relevant specialized
agencies and other United Nations organs to pay special attention to the training and education aspects of
the co-operative movement at the local, national and
international levels;
7. A/so invites Member States, relevant specialized
agencies and other United Nations organs to submit
follow-up reports on their experience in promoting
the co-operative movement, referring especially to
the participation of women in the co-operative movement and to the role of co-operatives in achieving
over-all social and economic development;
22 E/1978/15

and Corr.2.

8. Invites those Member States which have not
already done so to submit reports on national experience in promoting the co-operative movement;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a follow-up report
on national experience in promoting the co-operative
movement, referring especially to the participation of
women in the co-operative movement and to the
role of co-operatives in achieving over-all social and
economic development, based on data already available
and on additional contributions from Member States
and relevant specialized agencies;
1O. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-sixth session the ítem entitled "National
experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress"
and to consider under this item the follow-up report
of the Secretary-General on national experience in
promoting the co-operative movement.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/48.

World social development

The General Assembly,

I
Recalling its resolutions 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 containing the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development and 2771 (XXVI) of
22 November 1971 and 31/84 of 13 December 1976
on the world social situation,
Recalling also its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the Intemational Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Convinced that the improvement of the living conditions of peoples, particularly in the developing countries, depends on their rapid economic and social
progress,
Considering, however, that the desired pace of socioeconomic progress in the developing countries is
hindered because of thc magnitude of their economic
difficulties arising from the unjust international economic order which has existed hitherto,
Considering also that the world socio-economic
situation is characterized by the deterioration of the
economic situation in the developing countries and
the continually widening gap between the developing
countries and the developed countries,
Considering further that the objective of increasing
the real national income of the developing countries
and their social progress necessitates far-reaching
changes in the structure of the existing world economic system as provided in the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
