S/PV.9295

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9295th meeting

Monday, 27 March 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernandes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Chanda
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08684 (E)
*2308684*

S/PV.9295

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belarus, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Nicaragua, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/212, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Belarus, China, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Nicaragua, the Russian
Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today we are to vote on a draft resolution
(S/2023/212) to establish, under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, an international investigation
into the act of sabotage against the Nord Stream gas
pipeline in the Baltic Sea in September 2022. The draft
resolution is proposed by the Russian Federation and
is co-sponsored by the People’s Republic of China,
along with Belarus, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Eritrea, Nicaragua, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
As we said during the Council’s meeting on this
issue in February (see S/PV.9266), we put forward
this initiative because we have serious — and very
justified — doubts about the objectivity and transparency
of the national investigations being carried out by some
European countries. Unfortunately, those investigations
demonstrate, in every way possible, a lack of intention
to cooperate with the stakeholders — in particular
our country, as one of the most affected — in order
to comprehensively clarify the circumstances of this
crime, which threatens various aspects of international
peace and security.
2/9

27/03/2023

Moreover, those countries are deliberately and
consistently trying to mislead the Council by saying
that Russia was informed of their efforts. I would like
again to draw attention to the letters we circulated
dated 13 March 2023 (S/2023/193) and 24 March
2023 (S/2023/223), which include annexed copies
of the correspondence from the Russian missions
abroad addressed to the competent authorities in
Germany, Denmark and Sweden. It is clear from
that correspondence that we received nothing but
non-answers from the authorities of those States.
Accordingly, without an objective and transparent
international investigation into the truth of what
happened, we cannot ascertain what occurred. Russia
therefore, in an open and constructive manner, proposes
to Council colleagues to adopt a draft resolution
instructing the Secretary-General to make proposals
on the establishment of an independent international
commission to conduct a comprehensive, transparent
and impartial investigation into the circumstances of
what took place. That is especially important against
the backdrop of the emergence of new facts and
the proliferation of different versions in the media,
reflecting varying degrees of credibility or absurdity.
At the final stages of the discussions on our draft
resolution, the only argument we heard from colleagues
who doubted the expediency of an international
investigation boiled down to the fact that we first needed
to wait for the end of the national investigations. We
would like to respond by saying that such investigations
can go on for years in the same inefficient and
non-transparent manner. However, valuable time
is running out, and more and more suspicions are
emerging that the efforts of those investigations are not
aimed at clarifying the circumstances of the sabotage
that occurred, but at ensuring that evidence remains
concealed and cleaning up the crime scene.
We believe that the Council has a responsibility to
the international community in term of responding to
such acts, especially because our initiative in no way
limits national investigations. Rather, the text contains
a call to ensure wider-ranging cooperation between
Member States and the Commission. We trust that it
will help to ensure synergies with relevant efforts.
There is therefore no cause for concern.
Furthermore, the recent incident with the discovery,
in one of the Nord Stream lines, of an unidentified
item, and the authorization by the Danish authorities
23-08684

27/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

for Nord Stream AG to be involved in its inspection
confirm the need for an international procedure. We
doubt that such an authorization would have even
been possible had we not drawn the attention of the
international community to the egregious situation
regarding national investigations. If, in order to have
such a minimal degree of openness, full international
attention must be paid to the work of Governments, then
there is no doubt as to the need for such global efforts.
During the discussions on the draft resolution, the
Russian side acted in a responsible and flexible way,
trying to make the draft acceptable to all States. In
addition, the concerns expressed by members of the
Council were taken into consideration. We therefore
urge the Council to support the draft resolution. Its
adoption would send a clear signal that such acts of
sabotage regarding cross-border infrastructure are
unacceptable, and the perpetrators should be brought
to justice. We are convinced that is in the interests of
all States and the international community as a whole.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Brazil, China, Russian Federation
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 3
votes in favour, none against and 12 abstentions.
The draft resolution has not been adopted, having
failed to obtain the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): Let me
begin by reiterating our deep concern regarding the
sabotage that took place on the Nord Stream 1 and
Nord Stream 2 pipelines in September 2022. The
United States categorically refutes Russia’s unfounded
allegations levelled against us in relation to that act of

S/PV.9295

sabotage. The United States was not involved in any
way. As we have said previously, the international
community cannot tolerate any deliberate actions to
damage critical infrastructure.
However, let us be clear on what Russia’s draft
resolution (S/2023/212) was and what it was not. It was
an attempt to discredit the work of ongoing national
investigations and prejudice any conclusions they
reach that do not comport with Russia’s predetermined
and political narrative. It was not an attempt to seek
the truth. The competent national investigations by
Sweden, Denmark and Germany are proceeding in a
comprehensive, transparent and impartial manner. As
many Council members have said, they must first be
allowed to conclude.
That is why we did not support this draft resolution
and abstained in the voting today. We must ask why,
despite having failed to make its case to the Council,
Russia still chose to bring this draft resolution to a
vote. It is difficult to accept Russia’s posturing that it
seeks only an impartial, independent investigation. Let
it be clear, for the record, that the first draft of Russia’s
draft resolution clearly implicated the United States
based on mischaracterizations of statements made by
United States officials. The first draft criticized the
investigations of other Member States.
Over the course of many rounds of consultations,
Russia failed to provide any credible new information
to justify a United Nations investigation at this time. I
repeat that Russia has consistently sought to advance
a political agenda based on unfounded accusations
and predetermined culpability. Russia’s decision to
call for a vote on a draft resolution that has such little
support should make us all question what its true
intent is. United Nations resources for United Nations
investigations should be preserved for scenarios in
which States fail or are unable to carry out genuine,
impartial investigations. That is not the case today.
We cannot allow Russia’s continued spurious
allegations to distract the Council or unnecessarily
divert the Organization’s scarce resources from other
pressing matters deserving of the Council’s attention
and resources. If Russia were truly committed to
protecting civilian infrastructure, it would demonstrate
that through its actions. Russia’s claim to be concerned
about the sabotage of critical infrastructure belies the
fact that Russia is relentlessly attacking its neighbour.
It is striking cities and towns across Ukraine,

23-086843/9

S/PV.9295

Threats to international peace and security

damaging and destroying residential areas and medical
facilities. Russia’s attacks against Ukraine’s civilian
infrastructure have left millions displaced, without
power and in need of humanitarian assistance. Russia’s
calls for accountability today ring hollow.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Beyond
trying to shed light on the act of sabotage on the Nord
Stream pipelines, today’s vote is a particularly sombre
moment for international investigations. It is a requiem
or, at least, a dark day for the logic of attributing
responsibility in an independent, impartial manner in
the case of illicit acts with international consequences.
Given the perplexing outcome of the voting, it is
clear that it will be extremely difficult to get the world
to agree to an international investigation that would
be detrimental to its interests. For us Africans, who
regularly host all sorts of international investigations,
and independent experts and members of Parliament for
such investigations, who very often put into question
the sovereignty of our States, we do not know whether
we should be happy or be sad about this turn of events
and this confusion.
We abstained in the voting because we are
confused. Of course, we intend to avail ourselves of the
arguments put forward here today by all sides whenever
these questions are put to our countries. It goes without
saying that no one will accept any more moral lectures
from anyone on unlawful and reprehensible acts that
affect international security. It is clear that the death
knell of international responsibility that is now ringing
is, inevitably, heralding the advent of uncertainty for
the people of the world, who, in their distress and in the
face of illicit actions or facts that threaten international
security, risk more than ever being at the mercy of the
initiative of States, while knowing that States basically
only act according to their own interests. It certainly
works for the benefit of the sovereignty of each State,
and it is certainly to the detriment of impartiality,
transparency and independence.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Ghana considers
the preservation of peace as an overarching objective
of the mandate that underpins the important work of
the Security Council. That has underlined our overall
approach to the discussions on the attacks on the Nord
Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines. Ghana abstained in the
voting on draft resolution S/2023/212, submitted by
the Russian Federation, not because we are against
international investigations, but because we recognize
4/9

27/03/2023

that at this stage there are three ongoing investigations
by competent national authorities that have committed
to a fair and impartial process to establish the truth
surrounding a deliberate act of sabotage. While we
have noted the expression of some dissatisfaction with
the conduct of the current investigative processes, our
own assessment is that it may be premature to launch,
or advocate, parallel international investigations under
the auspices of the United Nations, which does not have
its own capacity for such investigations.
As a country, we used our statements in the two
previous meetings (see S/PV.9266 and S/PV.9144) on
this matter to urge all the parties and actors to exercise
restraint and cooperate in good faith with the national
investigations currently under way. We believe that call
for restraint is still relevant today. We call on all the
parties to foster trust and build confidence by avoiding
any unilateral actions that could potentially undermine
the efforts to establish the facts, unravel the truth and
pursue the need for accountability. At the same time,
we are mindful of the solemn responsibility conferred
on the Council by the Charter of the United Nations.
In that respect, we want to make three points that we
believe are necessary to help bring about a speedy
closure of the matter.
First, the ongoing national investigations should
be expedited. They should be time-bound, not openended, and should endeavour to keep the Russian
authorities and operators informed of all their actions
in a timely fashion, as well as seeking their cooperation
as necessary.
Secondly, given the global level of interest in the
matter, it is important to keep the Council regularly
updated on developments in the ongoing national
investigations. In that regard, we welcome, the joint
letters of 21 February and 24 March submitted by
Germany, Denmark and Sweden, and encourage
additional relevant and positive updates of that kind.
Lastly, we stress the necessity and importance
of upholding the provisions of resolution 2341 (2017)
on protecting critical infrastructure, especially of a
transnational kind. To that end, while we await the
completion of the national investigations, we believe
that as a Council we should work constructively to
find a unified voice with which to strongly condemn
the present attacks, in order to send a strong message
to would-be perpetrators that attacks on similar
23-08684

27/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

critical infrastructure will not be tolerated by the
international community.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I take the floor to explain Ecuador’s vote on draft
resolution S/2023/212, on the incidents involving the
Nord Stream pipelines. My delegation acknowledges
and is grateful that the penholder took into account
some of the suggestions that we made in the informal
consultations on the text and from our point of view,
improved it. It nonetheless remains inadequate.
Ecuador’s vote does not negate my country’s position
on acts of sabotage, which we unequivocally condemn.
On the contrary, as we stated at the Security Council
briefing (see S/PV.9266) on 21 February, nothing
justifies attacks on critical civilian infrastructure,
including energy facilities. Neither are we opposed
in principle to considering the establishment of an
international investigation commission. However,
in the light of the briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo, who called for avoiding
speculation and any unfounded accusations that could
escalate tensions in the region and hinder the search
for truth, we decided to abstain in the voting. Among
other things, Ecuador had proposed mentioning the
Security Council’s satisfaction with the conduct of the
ongoing national investigations by Denmark, Sweden
and Germany, as we have been informed by the joint
letter from their delegations (S/2023/126). We reiterate
our confidence in those investigations and encourage
continuing them without any disruption that might
limit or affect their scope.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): Malta once again reiterates its
deep concern about the damage to the Nord Stream
1 and 2 pipelines in September 2022 and condemns
any attack on critical infrastructure. Such acts are
dangerous and irresponsible, not least in the context of
a global energy crisis. We listened to the information
presented by the penholder of draft resolution
S/2023/212 and others, including during the briefing on
the subject last month (see S/PV.9266). Unfortunately,
so far, the information presented in support of the
draft resolution lacks credible supporting evidence.
Furthermore, investigations by Denmark, Germany
and Sweden are ongoing, and it is important to enable
those national processes to be concluded without
interference. We also welcome the updates provided
by those States last month. Malta therefore abstained
in the voting on the draft resolution on the basis that
at this point, any investigative action by the United

S/PV.9295

Nations would be premature and would undermine the
integrity of the ongoing national investigations, which
are being comprehensively undertaken by the parties
directly affected.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2023/212, submitted by the Russian Federation, on
the damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines.
Switzerland is concerned about those incidents, which
according to the information available were the result
of sabotage. We reiterate our condemnation of all acts
of sabotage against critical infrastructure, including
energy infrastructure. Denmark, Germany and Sweden
are conducting national investigations to shed light on
the facts. We advocate waiting for their results. In view
of the several investigations under way, we believe that
mandating an additional investigation would be of no
further benefit at this stage.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): Our delegation has been
continually engaged in the discussions on draft
resolution S/2023/212 since the negotiations on it began.
Japan is deeply concerned about the incident involving
the Nord Stream pipelines and is closely monitoring the
progress of the ongoing national investigations. Japan
abstained in the voting on the draft resolution because
we believe that the Security Council should first allow
the national investigations to be completed. After that,
based on the results, the Council can discuss ways
forward, as necessary.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom condemned the act of sabotage against the
Nord Stream pipelines, and we do so again now. We
full support the national investigations currently being
conducted by Denmark, Germany and Sweden and
look forward to their results. We support investigative
commissions by the Secretary-General, when mandated.
However, in the context of the ongoing national
investigations, we do not think that it is appropriate
to instigate one in this situation. It was clear during
the negotiations that Russia is not serious about an
impartial investigation. Last month, the Permanent
Representative of Russia claimed that Russia already
knew with a high degree of certainty who blew up the
pipelines and how. Throughout the process, Russia’s
goal has been to politicize the issue and target another
Council member. That is why the United Kingdom, with
the overwhelming majority of the Council, abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution.

23-086845/9

S/PV.9295

Threats to international peace and security

Finally, Russia’s apparent concern for civilian
infrastructure is hard to take seriously in the context of
its relentless assault on Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure
over the past year. That cynical aggression must stop.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
France has clearly expressed its concern following the
two underwater explosions that struck the Nord Stream
gas pipelines in September 2022. The information
available suggests that they were the result of a deliberate
act of human origin. The events are unprecedented and
must be thoroughly investigated. France abstained in
the voting on draft resolution S/2023/212, submitted
by Russia, precisely because investigations are being
conducted by Germany, Denmark and Sweden, and we
have no reason to doubt their resolve or their impartiality.
Those investigations must be brought to a close. France
regrets that Russia opted to request a vote that it knew
in advance that it would lose. We are surprised at the
zeal with which Russia requests the United Nations to
conduct an investigation when it has already attributed
responsibility in the matter. We cannot help but doubt
the sincerity of its approach.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): In the Security Council
meeting on the issue held in February (see S/PV.9266)
and during the follow-up consultations, we clearly
expressed our deep concern regarding the act of
sabotage on the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines in the
exclusive economic zones of Denmark and Sweden in
the Baltic Sea. Such acts are unacceptable. We fully
support the investigations by the national authorities of
Denmark, Germany and Sweden, which were promptly
launched and are ongoing. We are grateful for their
work to date and look forward to a comprehensive,
objective and impartial investigation.
We support United Nations investigative efforts,
whenever they are mandated. However, at the
moment we see no added value in initiating a parallel
international investigation. Any attempts to discredit
and/or politicize the ongoing investigation process,
including by deliberately accusing other States based
on prejudices, assumptions or convenience or reliance
on unverified press elements that are artificially put
together are wrong and unhelpful. They do not have our
support because such efforts impede the path towards
the conclusion of the issue.
Protecting civilian infrastructure is a legal
obligation for all States, anytime and everywhere.
It is not a menu from which to choose. In that
6/9

27/03/2023

regard, Russia’s credibility in the case — while it
intentionally, methodically and relentlessly destroys
the vital civilian infrastructure in Ukraine, with deadly
consequences — is at the very least dubious and at the
most cynical. That is why Albania abstained in the
voting on draft resolution S/2023/212.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): After
the Nord Stream pipeline explosion in September last
year, many members of the Council, including China,
immediately expressed concern about its major negative
impact on the global energy supply, the environment
and shipping security. That vicious act of sabotage
affects the security not only of European infrastructure
but also of global transnational infrastructure. It is in
the interest of every country concerned to conduct an
objective, impartial and professional investigation into
the incident, make the results of its investigation public
as soon as possible and hold perpetrators accountable.
China supports authorizing the United Nations
to set up an international, independent investigation
commission to investigate the incident. We thank Russia
for submitting draft resolution S/2023/212, after taking
more than one month to organize in-depth consultations
among Council members and demonstrating a flexible
and open attitude by incorporating amendments from
China and other members into the draft resolution.
China deplores the results of the voting on draft
resolution S/2023/212, on the Nord Stream pipeline.
Some members believe there is no need for the
Council to authorize an international investigation
given that the countries concerned are conducting
national investigations. Indeed, international and
national investigations do not contradict each other.
An international investigation, under the auspices
of the United Nations, can play a coordinating role
among different investigations, ensure the fullness and
integrity of the chain of custody and make the findings
of the investigation authoritative and widely acceptable.
Some members are of the view that the conclusions
of national investigations should be drawn before
international investigations are considered. Indeed, it
has been more than half a year since the Nord Stream
pipeline explosions. If an international investigation is
to be conducted, evidence must be collected on site as
soon as possible. The process must not drag on, lest it
become harder to collect evidence, which would affect
the results of the investigation. Some members advised
against making groundless speculations or accusations
or predetermining investigation results. Authorizing the
23-08684

27/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

United Nations to launch an international investigation
is precisely the best way to respond to such speculations
and allegations. If the countries concerned were to
welcome with open arms the Security Council’s mandate
for an international investigation into the Nord Stream
explosions, they would at least have some semblance of
a clear conscience. If, however, the countries concerned
block the Council’s authorization of an international
investigation, it only raises the suspicion that there
might be something to hide.
Council members have not yet reached an agreement
authorizing an international investigation, but they
all support determining the truth and bringing the
perpetrators to justice as soon as possible. China hopes
that the countries conducting national investigations
will embrace and elevate the sense of urgency, report the
progress of their investigations to the Council in a timely
and regular manner and publish their findings as soon
as possible. The Security Council has the responsibility
to remain seized of the incident, including by holding
regular briefings and taking necessary further actions
in an effort to discharge effectively its responsibilities
for maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I believe that, after today’s vote, suspicion
regarding who is behind the act of sabotage at the Nord
Stream pipeline only grows. I would like to remind the
Council of some basic facts.
In the eyes of the whole world, the United States
and its allies have done everything in their power to
ensure that there is no international investigation into
the explosions at Nord Stream in September 2022.
Initially, at the very highest level, Washington publicly
threatened to blow up the gas pipeline and has since
continued along the same lines. There has also been a
great deal of speculation in the media, as well as a lot
of, to put it mildly, contradictory and absurd versions of
who could have carried out the sabotage. All attempts
by Russia, as one of the countries affected by the Nord
Stream explosions, to get involved in the national
investigations carried out by Denmark, Germany and
Sweden, were met with refusals and non-answers, which
members of the Council could have seen for themselves.
Permit me to make a prediction. The so-called national
investigations — not to mention that they do not include
Russian participation — could go on for years. I would
therefore like to ask the representative of the United
States what he found to be predetermined about our
draft resolution. We have a saying in Russian similar

S/PV.9295

to “Liar, liar, pants on fire”. As usual, the United States
is tying the draft resolution to Ukraine, despite the fact
that there is not a word about Ukraine in the text.
When we raised the issue of an objective
international investigation, our American and European
colleagues’ tactics amounted to denying the United
States’ involvement, on the one hand, while preventing
any kind of transparent and impartial clarification of
the circumstances of the sabotage on the other. The
more evidence that has emerged of the involvement
of Washington and its NATO allies, the more firmly
the Western camp has insisted on the pointlessness of
an international investigation. What does that tell us?
One does not have to be a detective or an analyst to see
that the United States and its allies are trying to cover
their tracks, including by throwing around various
fabrications and delusional versions and by refusing to
respond to revelations about facts that Washington does
not like. Because if the United States really wanted
to establish the facts and punish those responsible, it
would behave completely differently.
Our vote today served as a litmus test of sorts
by which we all had to decide the kind of world we
are headed for — a world where international law is
respected and where those who attack international
pipelines and other infrastructure have to be punished,
or a world where some States do as they please while
formulating laws for everyone else that they call a rulesbased order and taking no responsibility for even the
most reckless and dangerous of acts. And today’s vote
has clearly confirmed that our former Western partners
believe that they can do whatever they like and get
away with it. The ugliest example is the West’s ongoing
collective support group in the Council, which leaves
the Council unable to carry out its functions. We will
of course draw the necessary conclusions for ourselves.
We are sure that more detailed facts will emerge and
that all concerned in the sabotage of the Nord Stream
pipeline will be exposed and the details of their crime
revealed. That is inescapable.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates unequivocally condemns
the September 2022 sabotage of the Nord Stream 1
and 2 pipelines. Those criminal acts caused severe
environmental harm and endangered global energy
security. The sabotage of transboundary energy
infrastructure is of serious concern to the international
community. The principles of sovereignty and
international cooperation are vital to addressing

23-086847/9

S/PV.9295

Threats to international peace and security

threats to global energy security. We recognize the
importance of the ongoing national investigations by
Denmark, Germany and Sweden and stress the need for
national authorities to conduct thorough inquiries. We
also urge transparency in sharing their findings with
the relevant actors. Global energy security demands
sovereign States’ collaboration. The United Arab
Emirates knows first-hand the necessity of cooperation
and information-sharing during investigations. For that
reason, we are encouraged by Denmark’s invitation
to the pipeline operator to retrieve an object possibly
related to the sabotage. We hope that it is a signal that
greater cooperation between investigating countries
and stakeholders will be forthcoming in the near future.
We abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2023/2212 because the national investigations are
continuing. We encourage the expansion of last week’s
cooperative efforts, as well as a clear deadline for the
investigations’ conclusions. Committed to addressing
the issue, we emphasize that global energy security
is vital to every country and reiterate the paramount
importance of protecting energy infrastructure.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Any proposal by a
Council member must be considered in a respectful
and objective manner. Brazil engaged constructively
in the negotiations from the start and proposed several
amendments with the aim of bridging different
positions and perceptions and trying to build consensus.
Brazil voted in favour of draft resolution S/2023/212,
on the explosions on the Nord Stream. As many
members of the Council rightly noted at our meeting
on 30 September (see S/PV.9144), this issue is about a
threat to international peace and security. Preliminary
information provided by the authorities of European
countries indicates that it was an act of sabotage with
the possible involvement of a State actor. Six months
after the explosions occurred, we still do not know what
caused them.
The caution with which the issue has been handled
by the authorities of Denmark, Germany and Sweden is
understandable. Brazil’s vote should not be interpreted
as a criticism of the conduct of the investigations or a
sign of mistrust, but as recognition of the importance
of additional and more comprehensive efforts on the
part of the United Nations. I would like to reiterate
our understanding that every proposal in the Security
Council should be analysed on its own merits. Since
we considered the explosions in the Baltic Sea to be a
threat to international peace and security, a commission
8/9

27/03/2023

established by the Secretary-General would be well
suited to assisting the Council in its decisions.
In view of the rejection of the draft resolution,
Brazil encourages those responsible for the ongoing
investigations to share their conclusions with the
Council as soon as possible. The seriousness of the
issue requires a quick and transparent response to the
concerns of Member States.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): My
apologies for taking the floor, but I need to respond
to points that were made by the representative of the
Russian Federation.
As has been mentioned, ever since the attacks took
place Russia has claimed that the United States was
responsible for carrying them out. With those comments,
it was very clear that Russia was not interested in an
impartial investigation. It had already decided who the
culprit was. Russia was simply playing politics.
The three countries that have launched
investigations are concerned about what is happening
to infrastructure around the world. We need to let
those investigations play out. I think it is a positive
sign that Russia is showing concern about a threat
to critical infrastructure, particularly that piece of
critical infrastructure. My hope is that it will show the
same concern for Ukraine’s infrastructure and what is
currently being rained upon it.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have a question for my colleague from the
United States. I would like to say that before the recent
revelations by Mr. Seymour Hersh, I do not recall
Russian officials specifically naming the United States
as the perpetrator of that tragedy. The discussions
of the matter emerged only after the publication of
Mr. Hersh’s article.
I would therefore ask my American colleague what
he would say about his President Biden’s words about
wanting to destroy the gas pipeline, long before the
pipeline was actually destroyed.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
23-08684

27/03/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Wood (United States of America): Typical
of the Russian playbook is to always pose a question
without really having any intent. First and foremost, I
do not read Seymour Hersh’s articles. And frankly, the
United States does not base its policies, or responds,
simply to charges by an individual journalist.
Let me just say that the charges that have been
made by Russian officials about supposed United
States culpability for carrying out these attacks are just
flat-out wrong, plain and simple. I would just submit to
my Russian colleague that, instead of playing politics
with such an important issue as this, Russia should
deal with the question of critical infrastructure and
responsibility. Again, I point to the fact that Russia has
no credibility when it comes to the issue of protecting
critical infrastructure. Just look at what it is doing
in Ukraine.

S/PV.9295

I would just say to my Russian colleague that,
instead of asking questions about the United States
and its views towards critical infrastructure, it needs
to ask itself about what it is doing in Ukraine and
whether that shows responsible behaviour with regard
to critical infrastructure.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not ask the representative of the United
States about the article by Mr. Hersh, which he did not
even read. I do really recommend that he read it. But I
did ask him a direct question: how does he understand
the words of his own President, who himself openly
said: “we will destroy Nord Stream”? I did not receive
a response to that specific question.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

23-086849/9
