United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.29

General Assembly

Official Records

Tenth Emergency Special Session

29

th meeting
Friday, 17 November 2006, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Haya Rashed Al Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.19)
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore try to be brief.
Given the increased human suffering in the
Palestinian territories and the bleak prospects for the
peace process, we believe that now is the time for
collective reflection on where we have gone wrong. In
that regard, what is transpiring in the Gaza Strip is
unacceptable. The killing of innocent civilians cannot
be justified by any means. We were particularly
shocked by the incident that occurred in Beit Hanoun
on 8 November. The images of dead women and
children, who posed no military threat whatever, were
truly heartbreaking.
We of course recognize Israel’s right and
obligation to defend its own citizens. Accordingly, we
condemn the Qassam rocket attacks into Israeli
territory. But we equally condemn the disproportionate
use of force against civilians, which breeds nothing but
more violence, hatred and insecurity. We therefore join
others in calling upon Israel to immediately cease its
military operations in Gaza and to bring to justice
those responsible for the tragedy in Beit Hanoun. At

the same time, we reiterate our appeal to the
Palestinian Authority to do whatever is necessary to
stop rocket attacks against innocent Israeli civilians.
In the light of the spiral of violence, it should be
obvious to everyone by now that there can be no
military solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The more
we rely on military means, the more we diminish the
chances for a lasting peace. I believe that to be the
irrefutable premise on which we should build our
efforts. To that end, we should first provide hope and
relief to the Palestinian people. We must create the
necessary conditions that will allow them to look
towards the future and see reliable prospects for
security, prosperity and stability. Of course, the Israeli
people deserve no less. They too should be able to live
in peace and security with their neighbours and reap
the benefits of cooperation and stability.
The only viable way to achieve those objectives
includes the resumption of meaningful negotiations
between the two sides on the basis of the Quartet’s
Road Map, which envisages a two-State solution. We
believe that the efforts of President Abbas to bring
about national unity along those lines will constitute an
important step in the right direction. We should
therefore spare no effort to support him in that
important endeavour.
Achieving a just and lasting resolution to the
conflict requires courage and a bold vision on the part
of both Israelis and Palestinians, as well as all
countries capable of influencing the situation. Difficult
though it may be, there is no other option. We should

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-67712 (E)

*0667712*

A/ES-10/PV.29

therefore all act responsibly and strive to put the peace
process back on track without further delay.
We hope that today’s meeting will serve as an
alarm bell as to the urgency of the matter, and that it
mobilizes all the necessary elements towards that end.
For its part, Turkey, in full cooperation with all the
parties concerned, will continue to make its best efforts
to bring peace and stability to the region.
Mr. Sen (India): I thank you, Madam President,
for reconvening the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly, on a matter of grave and abiding
concern to the international community: the situation in
the Middle East and, in particular, the core reason for
instability in that region, the question of Palestine.
We share the deep concern voiced today by many
delegations at the deteriorating situation in Gaza and
the recent tragic and terrible loss of life in the region.
We also share the deep sense of sorrow at the tragic
tale of death, destruction, injury and misery that has
been visited upon so many families as the tragedy has
continued to unfold over the past few months. The loss
of 19 lives on 8 November at Beit Hanoun is set in the
depressing context of a wider tragedy in the Middle
East.
While we join other delegations in conveying our
heartfelt condolences to all bereaved families at the
losses they have suffered, we believe that some form of
action is essential to avoid further tragedies. We have
noted the announcement by the Government of Israel
of an inquiry into that incident. We hope that its results
will be publicized and that action will be taken swiftly
against those responsible. We also note that the draft
resolution that is before us in document A/ES-10/L.19
calls for a fact-finding mission to the region. We hope that
the mission returns not only with a reconstruction of the
events of that tragic morning but also with suggestions
to avert the repetition of similar tragedies. These recent
incidents only reinforce our conviction that moral
courage of a very high order is needed to break the
vicious circle of violence and counter-violence.
It was not long ago that the situation in the
Middle East looked more promising. Just last year, we
welcomed the implementation by Israel of its plan for
disengagement from the Gaza Strip and parts of the
West Bank. At that time India described this as a
significant first step that we hoped would culminate in
a mutually acceptable, negotiated settlement in
accordance with the Road Map and the relevant

2

Security Council resolutions. We also hoped that
democratic elections in the Palestinian areas and the
formation of a new governing coalition in Israel would
stimulate a welcome resumption of the peace process,
just as we hoped that all concerned would show
flexibility to produce compromises that are essential to
transcend rigid positions.
Tragically, the outcome was the opposite. We
have watched with growing alarm as the reluctance of
the international community to deal with the newly
elected Palestinian Government has led to both an
almost complete suspension of international assistance
as well as to the withholding of Palestine’s share of
taxes and revenues. The resulting near-total collapse of
the Palestinian economy is fuelling an already volatile
situation, particularly among disaffected young people.
Renewed rocket attacks and suicide bombings in Israel
have led to civilian casualties. The abduction of an Israeli
soldier led to disproportionate and unjustifiable massive
military retaliation, besides the detention of elected
Palestinian representatives and Cabinet ministers. No
dialogue is possible in such circumstances. The use of
force and the evisceration of countervailing power can
only deepen the crisis by deepening the sense of loss.
We all agree that violence will produce no
durable solution. That can come only from meaningful,
sincere and results-oriented dialogue — a dialogue
aimed at finding a way forward. From the very
beginning, India has always advocated a peaceful
settlement. To give just one example, Jawaharlal
Nehru, in a note on Palestine written as early as 4 April
1948, envisaged a federation in Palestine, with fully
autonomous Israeli and Palestinian units. It is in that
context that we have consistently urged the resumption
of direct dialogue based on the Quartet principles.
To that end, we have joined the vast majority of
countries that have consistently affirmed their
commitment to a negotiated two-State solution accepted
by the two principals that would result in a viable,
contiguous, sovereign and independent Palestinian
State existing side by side with Israel in peace and
security. We have regularly reaffirmed that the Road
Map, as endorsed by Security Council resolution 1515
(2003), remains the fundamental framework to resolve
this bitter conflict. We support the call of the
Secretary-General to consider innovative ways by all
sides to fully implement the Road Map, which would
lead without delay to a solution to this conflict based

06-67712

A/ES-10/PV.29

on relevant United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolutions.
A source of anxiety is that continuing to sow
dragon’s teeth would make a viable Palestinian State
extremely difficult, besides creating bitterness for
generations. Some simple and moving words of
Edward Said, written in New York on 10 January 1992,
remain pertinent: “If Israelis and Palestinians can have
any decent future, it must be a common one not based
on the nullification of one by the other”.
We cannot but be deeply concerned by the
humanitarian cost, which is often overshadowed by the
larger and more gruesome headlines that violence
begets. The spiral of chaos and violence has long-term
implications for the stability of the entire region. We
call for the adoption of urgent measures to improve the
humanitarian and economic conditions of the
Palestinian people. In that context, we welcome the
announcement two months ago by the Quartet
principals of the continuation and extension of the
temporary international mechanism to provide a
channel for the donor community to extend assistance
directly to the Palestinian people.
We have launched our own modest efforts to help
avert a larger humanitarian crisis in Palestine. Apart
from earlier announcements of assistance, including a
grant of $15 million announced during the visit of
President Abbas to India last May, we have recently
delivered the first tranche of medicines and medical
supplies that formed part of an announced
humanitarian assistance package worth $2 million.
In conclusion, we hope that the Quartet and all
relevant regional players will work to de-escalate the
situation, end the cycle of violence and counterviolence and avert the humanitarian crisis that
currently faces us.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Madam President, for your speedy response to the
request to reconvene the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly to consider ongoing
Israeli violations, the most recent of which was the
Beit Hanoun massacre in Gaza. We also endorse the
statements delivered by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

06-67712

Undoubtedly, the Security Council’s failure to
shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and the protection of
Palestinian civilians from repeated acts of murder and
aggression at the hands of the Israeli war machine as a
result of the use of the veto by a member of the
Security Council, even after the draft resolution had
been amended, requires the General Assembly — the
most democratic body of the United Nations — to send
a strong message that the international community
strongly disapproves of the protection provided by the
Security Council to Israel despite that country’s crimes
and violation of international law and the commitments
incumbent upon it as an occupying Power under the
Fourth Geneva Convention and other principles of
international humanitarian law.
We can no longer continue to close our eyes to
repeated Israeli attacks on the occupied Palestinian
territories. It is unacceptable to interpret the legitimate
right to self-defence as the right to kill innocent people
in their sleep and to target essential Palestinian
infrastructure by every military means. It is also
unacceptable to claim that the incident at Beit Hanoun
was a tactical error. We oppose any Israeli aggression
against any Palestinian civilian, whether intentional or
caused by tactical or strategic error, as the human
rights of Palestinians are totally equal to Israeli human
rights in all fields.
The delegation of Egypt expresses its great regret
at the use of the veto against two consecutive Security
Council draft resolutions aimed at protecting the
human rights of Palestinians from Israeli aggression.
That contradicts the new vision that we initially
adopted to respect human rights in all countries
without distinction. That means that the General
Assembly, as the principal organ responsible for the
protection and respect of human rights, must intervene
through practical measures to ensure that respect and to
guarantee that such acts of aggression will not be
repeated in the future. This is particularly true given
that experience has proved that neglecting the
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security risks the continuation of selectivity,
politicization and double standards in dealing with
issues related to human beings.
We
therefore
support
draft
resolution
A/ES-10/L.19, which calls for the immediate cessation
of Israeli military assaults, Israel’s withdrawal from
Gaza to the positions held prior to 28 June 2006, the

3

A/ES-10/PV.29

establishment of a fact-finding mission on the incident
at Beit Hanoun and the establishment of an international
mechanism for the protection of Palestinian civilians. We
also emphasize the need to undertake other necessary
concrete measures to stabilize the situation and to
resume the peace process through the implementation
of a number of confidence-building measures that will
allow both parties to reach a new political horizon, and
not just to announce promises and implement limited
measures without finding a radical solution to the core
issue by ending the occupation.
In that context, Egypt would like to underscore
the importance of several measures that could help to
restore confidence and lead us back to the peace
process. First, as the occupying Power, Israel must
fulfil its responsibilities and duties under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. That includes refraining from
targeting civilians and from all the forms of violence
and collective punishment that it practices, which are
flagrant and repeated violations of the human rights of
Palestinians living under occupation and which also
constitute crimes punishable under international law,
and under criminal, civil and international human
rights law. In addition, a standing international
monitoring mechanism between the Palestinians and
the Israelis must be established to ensure that such
violations are not repeated.
Secondly, Israel must lift its blockade against the
Palestinian people and take swift action to address the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza and the
West Bank. Israel must also cease its construction of
the separation wall and resume compliance with the
Agreement on Movement and Access, implementing its
provisions to facilitate the movement of Palestinians
and allowing them to receive humanitarian assistance,
especially through the Rafah border crossing, which
should be reopened permanently.
Thirdly, the international community, through the
United Nations and its constituent bodies, must move
away from the policy of double standards in dealing
with the question of Palestine. The Security Council
must assume its abandoned responsibility to protect
Palestinian civilians. It must also end its silence in the
face of the human rights violations perpetrated by the
occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian territories
by dispatching a fact-finding mission to investigate
Israeli violations and to determine criminal and civilian
responsibility for the effects on the Palestinian people
of repeated Israeli aggression.

4

Fourthly, we must establish the appropriate
environment for the resumption of negotiations through
the release both of the abducted Israeli soldier and of
Palestinian prisoners, as well as the immediate release
of the Palestinian ministers, parliamentarians and
officials detained by Israel. Israel must also cease its
military operations, in parallel with a halt by the
Palestinian side to the launching of rockets into Israel
from Palestinian territory; this must take place under
international supervision.
Fifthly, all relevant international actors, and in
particular the members of the Quartet, must act
immediately to bring both Palestinians and Israelis
back to the negotiating table. They must also take
effective steps to address the question of Palestine in
all its dimensions through final-status negotiations, as
was requested by Arab Foreign Ministers during the
special meeting of the Security Council held on
21 September 2006 (see S/PV.5530). That would be the
best approach to achieve a just peace on the basis of a
two-State solution ensuring the establishment of a
sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel in security, peace and
stability.
In order to achieve a just and comprehensive
peace, Egypt welcomes all creative and innovative
initiatives based on a sincere desire to reach such a
peace without allowing the interests of one party to
prevail over those of the other. That would result in the
realization of international legitimacy based on justice,
equality and respect for international law.
In order to achieve such justice, we look forward
to speedy action by the Fifth Committee, before the
end of today’s debate. We also hope that the draft
resolution before the Assembly will be adopted at
today’s meeting. We have waited for it for too long.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): Just
yesterday, the Third Committee adopted a draft
resolution that stressed the need to avoid politically
motivated and biased country-specific human rights
resolutions. It called upon Member States to resist the
“selective targeting of individual countries” and to
avoid “double standards” (A/C.3/61/L.31/Rev. 1, para.
4). To be sure, many of the sponsors of that draft
resolution are notorious abusers of human rights
themselves and were seeking to deflect criticism of
their own policies. But we find it deeply ironic that we
are here, just one day after the Third Committee called

06-67712

A/ES-10/PV.29

upon Member States to act with “impartiality and
objectivity” (ibid, para. 3), discussing a highly
politically motivated and biased country-specific draft
resolution against a country that has for decades been
the target of the General Assembly: Israel. The United
States requests a recorded vote on draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.19, and we will vote “no”.
Once again, the General Assembly, meeting in
emergency special session, has been presented with a
one-sided and unbalanced draft resolution addressing
the Israel-Palestinian conflict. This draft resolution,
like others before it, masks an agenda that has little to
do with the Israel-Palestinian conflict, which in any
event is not addressed in an honest and even-handed
manner. This draft resolution’s deficiencies are
numerous and familiar. Because the draft resolution
fails to take a realistic, fair and constructive approach
to the Israel-Palestinian conflict, it will fail to advance
the aspirations of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples for
a more secure, peaceful and prosperous life, a goal so
many of us share.
Unfortunately, this type of draft resolution serves
only to exacerbate tensions by serving the interests of
elements hostile to Israel’s inalienable and recognized
right to exist. In doing so, it deepens suspicions about
the United Nations that will lead many to conclude that
the Organization is incapable of playing a helpful role
in the region.
The challenge of advancing towards the vision of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security requires serious and determined
efforts by the parties and the constructive support of
countries in the region and the international
community. Regrettably, we continue to see little in the
way of constructive support for genuine efforts to
move towards the two-State goal.
However, in a larger sense, the United Nations
must confront a more significant question, that of its
relevance and utility in confronting the challenges of
the twenty-first century. We believe that the United
Nations is ill-served when its Members seek to
transform the Organization into a forum that is little
more than a self-serving and polemical attack against
Israel or the United States. Moreover, the nature of
group dynamics in this Organization is seriously
hampering the principles on which the Organization
was founded. While we know there are many who
would prefer to see improved cooperation, a more

06-67712

effective General Assembly and the relevance of our
actions to the real world, this draft resolution is another
example of moderate elements being held hostage by a
few extreme States or those whose parochial political
agendas distort the ostensible purpose of this and other
draft resolutions.
Since its inception, earlier this year, the Human
Rights Council has quickly fallen into the same trap,
and has delegitimized itself by focusing attention
almost exclusively on Israel. Meanwhile, it has failed
to address real human rights abuses in Burma, Darfur,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other
countries. Sadly, the Human Rights Council appears to
be developing into an organ that is worse on this score
than its predecessor.
This problem of anti-Israel bias is not unique to
the Human Rights Council. It is endemic to the culture
of the United Nations. It is a decades-old systemic
problem that permeates the whole panoply of United
Nations organizations and agencies. Beyond the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council, the sponsors of today’s draft
resolution have diverted the efforts of non-political
United Nations bodies such as UNESCO, the
International Telecommunications Union, the Universal
Postal Union and the International Labour
Organization with one-sided polemics that are
irrelevant, and indeed harmful, to the non-political
mandates of those agencies — and unhelpful to the
cause of the Palestinian people and regional peace.
Those efforts serve only to erode the credibility of the
United Nations and to undermine the goal of resolving
the underlying conflict.
The
consequences
of
that
persistent,
unconstructive and biased approach are painfully clear:
not one Palestinian is helped, and the United Nations
continues to be discredited by its inability to confront
the serious challenge of the Israel-Palestinian conflict
in a serious and responsible manner. Member States
must choose. Do we desire a viable United Nations
system composed of agencies respected for their role in
conflict
resolution,
human
rights,
economic
development, education and culture, or will we
continue to acquiesce in a narrow agenda of bias,
stalemate and polemics? Member States must
demonstrate the will to break with the past and make
the United Nations a relevant voice not only for the
Israel-Palestinian conflict but for other conflicts and
issues worldwide.

5

A/ES-10/PV.29

Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to begin by extending to you, Madam President, my
delegation’s appreciation for reconvening the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly in
the wake of the inaction imposed on the Security
Council as a result of the abuse of the veto by the
United States. This meeting of the General Assembly is
indeed timely and essential to address the serious
threats that the Israeli regime’s carnage has posed to
peace and security in the region and beyond.
The latest Israeli war campaign in Gaza, carried
out through, inter alia, the shelling and air
bombardment of residential areas and vital
infrastructure, especially in Beit Hanoun, has led to the
deaths of more than 100 civilians, many of them
women and children, and the wounding of over 360. It
has also wreaked havoc on residential, administrative,
medical, educational and religious buildings, resulting
in the aggravation of the humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories.
It is necessary for this body to deal with this issue
because, on 8 November, the international community
was deeply appalled to learn that 19 innocent civilians,
including women and children, were massacred in cold
blood, with dozens of others wounded, when, in an act
of State terrorism committed by the Israeli regime,
their homes were shelled. That horrendous crime yet
again demonstrated the determination of that regime to
flout the most basic norms and principles of
international law, as well as its contempt for the United
Nations. It also exposed the policy of the United States
to continue to provide cover for the Israeli regime’s
continued criminal conduct.
While the international community was
impatiently awaiting resolute action by the Security
Council regarding Israeli crimes in Gaza last week, and
at a time when the majority of Council members were
ready to take such action, another veto by the United
States was cast in blatant disregard for the will and
desire of the international community. Protecting the
Israeli regime and providing it with cover and a shield
to continue its routine but no less dangerous and
criminal behaviour with total impunity entails
responsibility for the multifaceted regional and
international crises directly resulting from those
policies and practices.
The latest United States action to torpedo the
modest efforts in the Security Council should be seen

6

in the wider context of its attitude and behaviour
towards
the
United
Nations,
and
towards
multilateralism in general. While the United States
prevents the Security Council from addressing these
real threats to international peace and security, it
actively pushes to crowd the agenda of the Council
with fictitious concerns that serve its short-sighted
interests and those of a few of its allies. It is evident
that this runs counter to the interests of the
overwhelming majority of the members of the
international community, which the United Nations
was established to serve.
It is therefore incumbent upon the international
community and the General Assembly to effectively
deal with the illegitimate designs, unlawful policies
and atrocious crimes of the Israeli regime and to put an
end to Israel’s aggression and its ongoing unlawful
occupation of Palestinian territory. In doing so the
General Assembly should send a clear message to the
Israeli regime to stop its campaign of State terrorism,
aggression and occupation directed against Palestinians
and others. In that context, the General Assembly
should, inter alia, strongly condemn those crimes,
demand the immediate cessation of the Israeli military
assault against Palestinians, establish a fact-finding
mission on the recent round of Israeli aggression and
address the dire humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian people. We, the members of this universal
body, should not rest unless and until those goals are
fully achieved.
It is obvious that no amount of mudslinging and
recycling of baseless and tired allegations by the Israeli
regime and its friends against others, including those
we heard this morning and just now, will in any way
manage to distract the international community’s
attention from the Israeli barbarism in Palestine. In the
face of the persistent Israeli routine of crime and
aggression, which has plunged the whole region into a
protracted and growing crisis, and in view of the fact
that the ill-intentioned support of the United States has
rendered the Council incapable of tackling this
situation, there is a need for all of us to articulate ways
and means to empower the General Assembly to deal
with Israeli crimes in an effective and prompt manner,
and in the interest of international peace and security.
Mr. Tarragô (Brazil): Brazil cannot but express
great concern at the expanding spiral of violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories. It has led inevitably to
the loss of many lives, mostly as a result of Israel’s

06-67712

A/ES-10/PV.29

disproportionate military response in northern Gaza
during recent weeks. We are deeply disturbed by the
countless violations of international humanitarian law
that victimize the civilian population in Palestine and
cause extensive destruction of Palestinian property and
infrastructure.
In that connection, we deplore the deaths of more
than 20 Palestinians, including many children and
women, in Beit Hanoun and call for a full investigation
of the incident. We welcome the decision of the Human
Rights Council to establish a high-level fact-finding
mission to assess the situation from the perspective of
that Council. We expect Israel to carry out its own
domestic investigations and to determine responsibility
regarding the conduct of all its military actions.
Brazil also deplores the growing deterioration in
the living conditions of the Palestinian population.
According to special rapporteurs, they endure one of
the most serious humanitarian crises ever to befall the
region, which is unacceptable by any standards. Brazil
will support all activities by the international community
to mitigate the suffering of the civilian population in
Palestine and calls for the prompt resumption of
humanitarian assistance in the occupied territories.
The stalemate in the peace process keeps the
whole region under permanent instability. We voiced
our deep concern in the Security Council on
9 November (see S/PV.5564). Brazil has expressed its
condemnation of all acts of violence, and in particular
all forms of terrorism, on both sides. The use of force
should not be perceived as a substitute for a political
settlement to a conflict that clearly has no military
solution. Military actions in the region have served
many purposes, save that of peace.
This situation of virtual diplomatic paralysis
poses a renewed challenge for the United Nations, and
in particular for the Security Council. Unless prompt
and concrete measures are adopted, the Organization
may be faced with a full-scale crisis beyond its control.
Inaction in finding a permanent solution to this
intractable problem accentuates the perception of
ineptitude in the eyes of the international community.
Only the resumption of negotiations that involve all
interested parties can result in a just and
comprehensive agreement capable of paving the way
for lasting peace in the Middle East.
Particular attention must be paid to the sensitive
issue of the large number of Palestinian prisoners

06-67712

detained in Israel. It is critical, as a confidencebuilding measure, that the Palestinian political leaders
now detained in Israel be promptly released.
Furthermore, we call for the return of the abducted
Israeli soldier and the setting up of conditions for
achieving a durable solution to the crisis, including a
halt to the launching of Qassam rockets against the
Israeli population. The creation of a free, democratic
and economically viable Palestinian State, in line with the
legitimate aspirations of its people and as established in
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), within internationally
recognized borders, is a sine qua non condition for
ensuring peace and stability in the Middle East.
Brazil stresses the need to put in motion a
political process for the development of a strategy that,
while addressing the underlying causes of the conflict,
brings to fruition the vision of two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. Such a strategy should take into account the
Quartet Road Map, the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Brazil is convinced that the United Nations has
the duty to offer a peaceful solution to a conflict that
has such a powerful symbolic and emotional burden for
so many peoples throughout the world and that has
been dragging on for so long. That is why we will vote
in favour of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.19, put forth by
the Arab Group and other sponsors.
The international community should seize this
opportunity to put the Middle East peace process back
on track. In that regard, I wish to reiterate President
Lula’s proposal, made here at the beginning of the
sixty-first session of the General Assembly (see
A/61/PV.10), calling for a broad-based, United Nationssponsored conference, with the participation of countries
of the region and others that could contribute, through
their capacities and successful experiences, to assisting
Middle East countries and peoples to find ways to live
peacefully despite their differences.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s meetings at
the request of the League of Arab States.
Recently, the violent Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has continued to escalate, as evidenced by the Beit
Hanoun tragedy, which shocked the world. At the same

7

A/ES-10/PV.29

time, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues to deteriorate. We have been deeply
distressed by those developments. China is very
concerned at the deteriorating economic and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. China calls upon Israel to immediately end its
military actions. We hope that both sides will work
with the international mediating effort to avoid
aggravating the situation further.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the
Middle East issue. So long as a definitive solution to
the question of Palestine remains out of reach, peace
will never prevail in the Middle East. The parties
concerned should look towards the longer-term future,
in an effort to resolve the historical grievances between
the Arab and Jewish peoples and to achieve the
peaceful coexistence of all the countries of the region.
Military strikes cannot guarantee Israel’s safety and
security; nor can violent attacks bring about peace for
Palestine. History has proven time and again that
settling disputes through political negotiations is the
only proper approach to achieve lasting peace and
stability in the Middle East.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict poses a major
challenge for both the Middle East region and the
international community at large. It not only has an
impact on the level of international security and the
success of the war on terror; it also jeopardizes
peaceful coexistence among different civilizations and,
more important, the very credibility of the United
Nations. This emergency special session of the General
Assembly, which we have reconvened today, is most
timely. It is our hope that the United Nations can fulfil
its sacred obligation to maintain international peace
and security by taking practical steps without delay to
prevent further bloodshed and tragedy for the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples and by sending a clear
message to both parties to end the vicious cycle of
violence for violence and to quickly return to the
proper path of peace talks.
Ms. Nyamudeza (Zimbabwe): At the outset, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The resumption of the emergency special session
of the General Assembly is an expression by the
international community of its dismay at the
outrageous and wanton violation of all acceptable

8

norms and principles of international law by Israel in
the occupied territories of Palestine.
The cowardly shelling of innocent civilians by
the Israel Defense Force on the night of 8 November,
which resulted in the loss of 19 innocent lives, mainly
women and children, was as callous as it was
unjustified. The attempt by Israel to explain it away as
a mistake is not only insulting to the grieving people of
Palestine but also abhorrent to my delegation and to all
peace-loving people of the world.
My delegation is particularly saddened by the fact
that, in the light of such flagrant disregard for
respected norms and principles of international law by
the occupying Power, Israel, one super-Power, which
purports to champion democratic and just principles,
opted to condone that barbaric act by casting its veto
against a balanced Security Council draft resolution
(S/2006/878) submitted by the delegation of Qatar.
That further lends credence to our call for reform of the
Security Council as it pertains to the abuse of the
power of the veto. My delegation would have expected
that that member of the Security Council with the
power of the veto would have abided by the most
elementary of moral truths, that of the principle of
universality, which seeks to apply to ourselves the
same standards to which we hold others, if not more
stringent ones.
This is not the first time that that same member
— which, ironically, is part of the Quartet — has
shamelessly blocked the adoption of similar balanced
and meaningful Security Council draft resolutions
aimed at permanently resolving the problem of
Palestine and improving the plight of the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories; it has done this with
frustrating regularity.
In the light of the deteriorating situation
obtaining in the occupied Palestinian territories and the
failure by the Security Council to adopt the fairly
modest draft resolution put forth by Qatar, my
delegation would like to conclude by pledging its
strong support for the draft resolution before us in
document A/ES-10/L.19, and urges all civilized nations
present to do the same.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Migliore (Holy See): As the General
Assembly resumes its tenth emergency special session,

06-67712

A/ES-10/PV.29

on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
my delegation takes this opportunity to express its
closeness to the civilian populations suffering the
consequences of recent violence. I would also like to
convey the invitation of Pope Benedict XVI to join him
in prayer that God will enlighten the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities, as well as those nations that
have a particular responsibility in the region, so that
they may do all they can to put an end to the
bloodshed, increase humanitarian aid initiatives and
encourage the immediate resumption of direct, serious
and concrete negotiations.
While regretting the new toll of deaths and
condemning the spiral of violence caused by both
military operations and terrorist attacks, we cannot but
note that those horrendous occurrences form part of a
much larger issue that, as we all know, has festered far
too long in the region. Each time the Assembly holds
an emergency meeting such as this, we recite the
seemingly endless list of difficulties and differences
separating Israelis and Palestinians, which make it all
the more urgent for States to address the problem of the
fundamental injustice at the heart of this question. To
make a litany of symptoms without addressing the root
causes is hardly helpful to either party. Each is forced
to live under the horrible tensions of potential
explosive acts of terror or military incursions, which
result in death, casualties and the destruction of
infrastructure.
The centrality of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to
the persistent instability in the Middle East cannot be
ignored. It is a sad fact that the international
community has failed to engage Israelis and
Palestinians in significant and substantive dialogue or
in the resolution of disputes, in order to bring stability
and peace to both. It falls squarely upon the
international community to use its good offices to
facilitate, with all deliberate speed, a rapprochement
between the two sides.
This is a time of both urgency and opportunity:
urgency because the situation is not static — rather, it
is deteriorating by the minute, as the reconvening of
the emergency special session testifies — and
opportunity because, in addition to some favourable
elements at this political juncture, civilian populations
everywhere have seen and suffered the devastation of
the conflict and are surely more willing than ever to
strive for an honourable peace.

06-67712

The only peace with a chance of lasting in the
region will be a truly comprehensive one. It will
involve all major players in the Middle East region and
it will have to be based upon bilateral peace treaties
and multilateral agreements on all questions of
common concern, including issues pertaining to water,
the environment and trade. To do so requires a new and
all-embracing vision that will usher in concrete plans
for peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
Before we continue, I should like to inform members
that the Fifth Committee is still considering the
programme budget implications of draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.19. I shall therefore suspend the meeting to
enable the Committee to continue its work.
The meeting was suspended at 5.15 p.m. and
resumed at 7 p.m.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Qatar to introduce a revised text of
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.19.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the sponsors of draft resolution A/ES10/L.19, which was introduced this morning, I have the
honour to introduce to the General Assembly revised
text of the draft resolution, preliminary copies of which
are now being distributed in the Hall.
One word has been omitted from paragraph 7 of
the revised text; that paragraph should read as follows.
(spoke in English)
“Expresses grave concern about the dire
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people,
and calls for the continued provision of
emergency assistance to them”.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before we
proceed with our work, I should like to draw the
attention of members to the provisional report of the
Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.19, as orally
revised. The provisional report, which for the time
being has been issued in English only, is now being
distributed in the General Assembly Hall. It will be
issued as document A/61/582 at a later date.
Before we proceed to take a decision on the draft
resolution, I should like to inform the Assembly that
the following countries have become sponsors of draft

9

A/ES-10/PV.29

resolution A/ES-10/L.19, as orally revised: Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cuba, Ghana, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malawi, Myanmar, Namibia,
Pakistan, Senegal, South Africa, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/ES-10/L.19, as orally revised,
which is entitled “Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,

10

Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Papua New Guinea,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.19, as orally revised,
was adopted by 156 votes to 7, with 6 abstentions
(resolution ES-10/16).
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted, I
should like to remind delegations that statements in
explanation of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): The members of the
European Union voted in favour of draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.19. We very much appreciate the
constructive spirit of the negotiations that resulted in a
text that enabled the European Union to support the
draft resolution.
The European Union underlines that an
immediate cessation of violence is needed to allow for
an urgent return to a comprehensive peace process in
the Middle East with a clear political perspective. We
reiterate our intention to actively contribute to the
work within the Quartet to get the peace process
urgently back on track.
The European Union strongly deplores the Israeli
military action in Gaza resulting in a growing number
of civilian casualties, including women and children,
and deplores the unacceptable military operation in
Beit Hanoun on 8 November 2006. While recognizing
Israel’s legitimate right to self-defence, we urge Israel
to exercise the utmost restraint and underline that
actions should not be disproportionate or in
contradiction to international humanitarian law.

06-67712

A/ES-10/PV.29

The European Union also strongly deplores the
firing of rockets into Israeli territory, and calls on the
Palestinian leadership to put an end to such acts.
Violence is not the solution. We call for an end to
violence and for restraint from all sides.
We must bear firmly in our minds the overriding
goal: an early resumption of dialogue between the two
parties with a view to relaunching negotiations on the
basis of the Road Map, relevant Security Council
resolutions and the commitments made at Sharm elSheikh in 2005. The European Union reiterates its
continued support for Israeli and Palestinian efforts to
advance the peace process.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada is deeply
concerned about the escalation of violence and the
ongoing and tragic loss of life in the Middle East. The
road to peace is not through violence. Ultimately, a
negotiated settlement of this conflict is the only way
forward.
We know that this resolution, unlike many that
come before the Assembly, includes a more accurate
picture of the events and of the responsibilities of both
sides. We would hope to see this approach adopted in
other draft resolutions. Having said that, it is Canada’s
position that there already exist a number of
resolutions in the General Assembly alone that deal
with the conflict in the Middle East. Canada is of the
view that we should seek to reduce the overall number
of resolutions on the Middle East, to deal with core
issues and concerns. Furthermore, we are not
convinced that the establishment of a fact-finding
mission on the tragic events in Beit Hanoun on 8
November would be productive, and further note that
Israel has undertaken to investigate those events.
The Canadian Government therefore decided to
abstain in the voting on the resolution.
Mr. Gharibi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution ES-10/16.
However, our vote for the resolution is intended to
support the cause of the Palestinian people and does
not indicate a change in my Government’s position on
the situation in the Middle East. Nor should it be
interpreted as recognition of Israel.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the
delegation of Palestine, the Palestinian people and our

06-67712

leadership, I would like to thank all those who voted in
favour of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.19. Such
overwhelming support, with almost everyone voting in
favour, with the exception of a very few, should send a
very significant message, especially to the Israeli
delegation, which insulted all of us in its statement
delivered earlier by disrespecting and disregarding the
collective wish of the international community. We
sincerely hope that they conclude from this additional
lesson that they cannot act above international law.
They must comply with the law. If they want to be
respected members within the United Nations system
like all the rest of us, they have to abide by the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of international law,
especially those of international humanitarian law.
Tonight the Assembly has sent our people a very
powerful message: that the cause of justice is a very
strong cause in the General Assembly Hall. I am
confident and certain that this vote will give the
Palestinian people some small hope in the right
direction: that one of these days their national rights
will be realized, occupation will end and they will
become a free independent nation living side by side
with Israel. We hope that day will come very soon. We
are sure that, with the help of the General Assembly
and the struggle and steadfastness of our people, that
day will come very soon.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): Before I start, I just want
to say that I had indicated that I wanted to raise a point
of order, but the President did not notice. I wanted to
make a brief comment, not out of disrespect or in an
effort to insult, but on the basis of procedure. I think
that we have dealt with procedure for most of today;
we have been dealing with misusing procedure in
order, I must repeat, to highjack the Assembly into
adopting this resolution. I would just like to make a
brief comment. We feel that there is no place for a nonvoting observer mission to make remarks during the
time allocated for explanations of vote, because they
do not vote. They have sufficient time and place to
make their remarks, but not during explanations of
vote. That is the procedural remark I wanted to make.
Another remark I must make to the respected
observer of the PLO to the United Nations is that Israel
or our Mission, Government and people have never had
any intention or wish to insult the people of Palestine
or the Palestinian Authority. What we do not respect is
terrorism; we do not respect those who fight us. We are

11

A/ES-10/PV.29

fighting back within our fundamental right to selfdefence. We will continue to fight back against
terrorism. The problem is not what we have seen here;
the problem is not what is written in the resolution. The
problem is the situation on the ground.
I must add that, because what we see taking place
here does not really reflect what is happening on the
ground, we hope and pray very soon to be able to
report to the Assembly on what is happening on the
ground between us and the Palestinians — not what is
happening at the United Nations in New York, but in
the real world. On the ground, we really hope that very
soon we will be able to get together and to solve the
problems between us and our neighbours without —
sometimes — interference from the outside, which is
not really helpful.
It is surely no surprise to anyone that today’s
resumption of the emergency special session has been
conducted almost as business as usual — as it is usual
here at the United Nations. It delivered what it
promised: a parade of theatrics, dramatic speeches
oblivious to reality and harsh exchanges of words and
accusations, all resulting in the passage of another
resolution condemning Israel for simply fighting for its
survival.
Let there be no mistake: Israel has great respect
for the Assembly and the noble principles for which it
stands. It is precisely because of that respect that we
cannot but be dismayed that harmful and politicized
interests too often seek to gain control of this body’s
mandate and its activities.
We have much to say about the resolution that has
been adopted. Of course, we are not going to enter into
that. But I would like to make a brief comment with
regard to something that bothers us a great deal, to say
the least. For the sake of a supposedly moderate text, in
this resolution the international community and the
General Assembly have equated actions of terrorism,
which are usually condemned by the international
community, with the actions taken by Israel in selfdefence to fight terrorism. That is something that the
resolution deplored; but let me tell the Assembly that
Israel deplores what is written in the resolution.
Sadly, the Assembly has missed yet another
opportunity to make a relevant contribution to the
cause of peace, by pandering to Member States that
seek to demonize Israel by focusing on the response to
terrorism but not on terror itself, and, as I said before,

12

by equating terrorism with the legitimate right to fight
terrorism. A resolution like this cannot but embolden
the true enemies of peace and of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples alike.
In not addressing the responsibility of the
Palestinian leadership to fulfil its responsibility to curb
terror and violence against Israel, the Assembly has
written the terrorists a blank cheque to carry on as they
please.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, who has asked for the floor in the exercise of
the right of reply, I would like to remind members that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats. I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): With their positive votes, 156 delegations
have spoken out today to defend Palestine, whose
delegation Israel has tried to prevent from taking the
floor in the General Assembly. We very much hope that
the delegation of Israel will draw lessons from this and
change its way of thinking with regard to positive
cooperation with the international community. We also
hope that Israel will understand the will of the
international community, which is attempting to protect
the Palestinian people from Israel’s war machine and
occupation forces.
We are meeting here today as representatives of
the international community for perhaps the thousandth
time since the establishment of the Organization and
the beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict to discuss the
question of Palestine. We are here again to determine
how we can strengthen the cause of peace, and to ask
Israel, the occupying Power, to end its forces’ crimes
and collective punishment against the defenceless
Palestinian people. We the peoples of the United
Nations have resolved in the preamble of the Charter to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
We have voted in favour of hundreds of resolutions
calling on Israel to end its occupation of Arab and
Palestinian territories. As the international community,
we have heard with strong indignation and
condemnation the Hollywood-style warning that the
representative of Israel dared to make in the Assembly,
threatening the Members of the United Nations and

06-67712

A/ES-10/PV.29

accusing them of supporting terrorism and being
complicit in it for having voted in favour of this
resolution, thereby also accusing the majority of them
of supporting terrorism and working with terrorists. By
that convoluted logic and distortion of facts, States
supporting a resolution condemning the terrorism of
the State of Israel are thereby preventing the
Palestinian people from establishing an independent
State, with Jerusalem as its capital.
The unrealistic analyses we periodically hear
from Israel’s representatives transcend time and reality.
Israel makes desperate failed attempts to
convince everyone that the suffering of the Palestinian
people began just 15 months ago, following the
holding of legitimate elections by the Palestinian
people. It wants us to believe that the unilateral
withdrawal of its forces from the Gaza Strip ended the
occupation and that it has stopped building new
settlements. Israel would also have us believe that the
launching of a few rockets into Israeli villages is
preventing children from sleeping, and that the capture
of an Israeli soldier, who was shooting at Palestinian
civilians, is a flagrant violation of international law.
Surely the reason for the current state of affairs is
Israel’s massacres, suppression and siege, its building
of the separation wall, its construction and expansion
of settlements, its Judaization of Palestine, its State
terrorism, its targeting of children in playgrounds, its
detention of cabinet ministers, its cruel policies against
the Palestinian people, its launching of rockets and its
daily bombardment of Palestinians. We need to
understand that Israel’s arrogance and distortion of
facts merited the adoption of a resolution condemning
Israel, which has accused the international community
of sponsoring terrorism and which pretends that it is
the only dove of peace in the world.
The victims of Israeli State terrorism are not just
Palestinians, Lebanese, Syrians and other Arabs; there
are also victims in other countries who have been
assassinated by the Israeli “dove of peace” for
denouncing
injustice,
occupation,
collective
punishment and massacres in the occupied Arab
territories. The victims include, for example, members
of United Nations peacekeeping forces; Count
Bernadotte, the first United Nations mediator in the

06-67712

Middle East; and Europeans and Americans crushed by
bulldozers for daring to protest the confiscation of
Palestinian land. Lebanese and Syrian women and
children have also been Israel’s victims in their homes
and villages, as well as Palestinians blown apart by
Israeli mines.
Peace is not a market open to speculators
gambling on the stability of the Middle East. Peace is
above all a matter of international political will. When
the desire for peace is present in the Israeli
Government, in its political parties and in its policies,
there will be no need for us to meet here. More than
anything else, peace is a question of policy and real
political will.
The holding of three special sessions of the
Human Rights Council in less than a year was surely a
clear indication that the policy of Israeli occupation
and aggression has weighed heavily on the
international conscience. Preventing the Security
Council from meeting its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security and from protecting
Palestinian civilians has fuelled Israel’s murderous
policy in the occupied Palestinian territories. It is for
that reason that the international effort towards peace
has waned. The Madrid terms of reference have not
been respected; nor have the various international
resolutions adopted in recent years, or the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.
Peace is an international political responsibility.
It is a need of people aspiring to a better future. Peace
cannot be established while Israel continues to hide
behind a country claiming to be a super-Power.
Occupying forces must withdraw. There must be
recognition of the fact that life is a precious gift given
equally to everyone. No one is better than anyone else.
All people are equal in life and in death.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the only speaker in the exercise of the right of reply.
In accordance with the provisions of the final
paragraph of resolution ES-10/16, which we have just
adopted, I shall now adjourn the tenth emergency
special session temporarily.
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

13
