S/2011/466

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 July 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 27 July 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter, dated 20 July 2011, from the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, requesting the transmission of the
communiqué of the 286th meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which took place on 19 July 2011 (see annex).
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-43590 (E) 040811

*1143590*

S/2011/466

Annex
Letter dated 20 July 2011 from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to forward, herewith, the communiqué adopted by the 286th
meeting of the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council (PSC), which took
place on 19 July 2011, to review the situation in Darfur and the operations of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (see
enclosure).
As you will observe in the communiqué, the Peace and Security Council, in
renewing the mandate of UNAMID for one year at the end of its current term, on
31 July, in line with the hybrid nature of the Operation, also urged the United
Nations Security Council to take similar action at its forthcoming meeting on
22 July 2011. This is all the more important given the critical role that UNAMID
continues to play, including regarding the protection of civilians in Darfur, and the
increasing contribution expected from the mission in the coming months,
particularly with respect to the implementation of the Doha document for peace in
Darfur and efforts to make it more inclusive, the launching of the Darfur political
process, building on the encouraging outcome of the Doha process, early recovery
and other related tasks. As Darfurians continue to strive for the achievement of
peace in their region, it is critical that our two organizations continue to stand by
them and support their efforts, in particular through the continued presence of
UNAMID.
I would like to seize this opportunity to seek your support and that of the
Security Council, in order to facilitate the effective launching of the Darfur political
process, which was one of the key recommendations of the African Union
High-level Panel on Darfur. The Darfur political process, which was endorsed at the
highest level by the African Union, including at the 17th ordinary session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government held recently in Malabo, provides, in
our view, the best opportunity to consolidate the gains made so far, ensure
ownership by the Sudanese in resolving their own problems and empower the
various stakeholders, as well as achieve an inclusive and comprehensive settlement
addressing the interrelated issues of peace, justice and reconciliation in Darfur, in its
communiqué, and as a follow-up to earlier pronouncements of the African Union on
the Darfur political process, the Peace and Security Council strongly appealed to the
Security Council and its members to rally behind this initiative, which will be
implemented on the ground by the AU High-level Implementation Panel and
UNAMID.
While we should continue to urge all stakeholders, including the Government
of the Sudan, to do everything in their power to create a conducive environment for
the success of this initiative, it is equally important to bear in mind that making the
launching of the Doha political process contingent upon the fulfilment of certain
preconditions will be counter-productive to our joint efforts. Indeed, such
preconditions have the potential to provide room for spoilers to undermine the quest
for peace, to defeat the principle of ownership by the Sudanese stakeholders and to
make it impossible to grasp opportunities, as they arise, to advance peace, justice
and reconciliation in Darfur.

2

11-43590

S/2011/466

I would be most grateful if you could urgently circulate the Peace and Security
Council communiqué to the members of the Security Council before their
impending meeting so that they can take it into consideration and reflect the African
Union’s position and views when considering the renewal of UNAMID’s mandate.
Let me seize this opportunity to, once again, reiterate the appreciation of the
African Union to the United Nations and to you, personally, for your continued
commitment to the promotion of lasting peace, security and stability on our
continent.
(Signed) Jean Ping

11-43590

3

S/2011/466

Enclosure
Communiqué of the 286th meeting of the Peace and
Security Council
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU), at its 286th
meeting, held on 19 July 2011, considered the situation in Darfur and the activities
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and
adopted the following decision:
The Council,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the situation
in Darfur [PSC/PR/2(CCLXXXVI)], and the statements made by the Joint AU-UN
Special Representative for UNAMID, Professor Ibrahim Gambari, and the
representative of the Government of the Sudan;
2.

Recalls its previous decisions and communiqués on the situation in Darfur;

3.
Notes with satisfaction the progress made in the deployment of UNAMID
military and police components, which have now reached 18,002 and 2,751, that is
92% and 73%, respectively, of the total authorized strength, as well as the civilian
component, which has reached 4,466, representing 82% of the authorized strength.
The Council also takes note of the new robust policy of UNAMID in implementing
its mandate, and expresses satisfaction with the positive results thus far achieved;
4.
Expresses concern at the prevailing insecurity in some parts of Darfur,
leading to the loss of human lives and the displacement of civilian populations, with
the attendant negative impact on the humanitarian situation. The Council appeals to
all parties concerned to urgently exercise maximum restraint and refrain from any
action likely to aggravate the security situation on the ground;
Strongly condemns the recent attacks on the personnel of UNAMID and that
5.
against humanitarian agencies operating in Darfur, including the attempted ambush
by unknown elements, on 30 June 2011, which resulted in the death of an Ethiopian
peacekeeper. The Council calls on the Government of the Sudan to spare no efforts
to identify the perpetrators of these criminal acts and bring them to justice;
6.
Commends the efforts of the AU-UN Joint Special Representative for
UNAMID, Professor Ibrahim Gambari, and his continued focused and dedicated
leadership, as well as those of the personnel of the Mission, for their dedication and
contribution to the promotion of lasting peace, security and reconciliation in Darfur,
including through the holding of the first-ever International Water Conference on
Darfur and the launching of “Operation Spring Basket”;
7.
Stresses that achieving peace in Darfur is a matter of urgency, recognizing that
the people of Darfur have been waiting for peace for too long. In this respect, the
Council notes with satisfaction the conclusion of the Doha political talks, in
particular the signing of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur (DDPD) by the
Government of the Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Movement, on 14 July
2011, as a positive development that will greatly contribute to the promotion of
peace and security in Darfur. The Council commends both the Government of the
Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Movement for their commitment and for
putting the interests of the Darfurian people above any other consideration. The
Council also commends the former Joint Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibril Bassole, as

4

11-43590

S/2011/466

well as the Government of Qatar, in particular Mr. Ahmed Bin Abdullah
Al-Mahmoud, State Minister for Foreign Affairs, for their tireless efforts;
8.
Appeals to the other armed movements to join the peace process and adhere to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. In this respect, the Council encourages the
African Union and the United Nations to pursue their efforts aimed at bringing on
board the armed movements that have not yet joined the peace process. The Council
welcomes the recent appointment of Professor Ibrahim Gambari as the Joint Chief
Mediator ad interim, and looks forward to the early formalization of this
appointment;
9.
Reiterates all earlier African Union decisions and pronouncements, including
the relevant paragraph of the decision on the Report of the Peace and Security
Council on its Activities and the State of Peace and Security in Africa, adopted by
the 17th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union, held in Malabo, from
30 June to 1 July 2011, relating to the Darfur Political Process (DPP). The Council,
once again, stresses the need to fully launch the DPP, building on the positive
outcome of the Doha process, as a way of sustaining the progress made so far and
ensuring that the Darfuris truly own the quest for peace, justice and reconciliation in
their region;
10. Requests the AU High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) on the Sudan and
UNAMID to intensify their efforts for the launching of the DPP, including the
preparatory work and the consultations with the Government of the Sudan and other
stakeholders, to ensure the creation of an environment that will enable all
constituents to freely participate in the process. The Council stresses the primary
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan, welcomes its expressed commitment
to spare no efforts in this regard, including the early lifting of the state of emergency
in Darfur, and urges it to extend all necessary cooperation to the High-level
Implementation Panel and UNAMID;
11. Reiterates the call made by the 17th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government to the AU partners, in particular the United Nations
Security Council and its members, to fully support the DPP, which has been
endorsed at the highest level by the AU, and to take the steps expected of them to
facilitate the work of the High-level Implementation Panel and UNAMID in this
respect. While recognizing the need to create a conducive environment for the
success of the DPP, the Council strongly urges all members of the international
community to fully support the DPP, without making its launching contingent upon
the fulfilment of preconditions that have the potential to provide room for spoilers
to undermine the quest for peace, defeat the principle of ownership by the Sudanese
stakeholders, and make it impossible to grasp opportunities to advance the cause of
peace, justice and reconciliation in Darfur. The Council stresses that the launching
of the DPP will empower the Sudanese stakeholders and make it possible to create
the peaceful environment the people of Darfur are yearning for;
12. Decides to extend, for a further period of 12 months, the mandate of
UNAMID, as defined by communiqué PSC/PR/Comm(LXXIX) of the 79th meeting
of the Peace and Security Council, held on 22 June 2007, and United Nations
Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007. The Council requests the
United Nations Security Council to do the same, bearing in mind the central role
that UNAMID plays on the ground, particularly with respect to the protection of
civilians, and the increasing contribution expected from the Mission to advance the

11-43590

5

S/2011/466

search for lasting peace in Darfur, including support for the implementation of the
DPDD, the launching of the DPP, early recovery and facilitation of the return and
reintegration of internally displaced persons and refugees, building on the
encouraging trend already observed on the ground;
13. Requests the Commission to actively follow up on the implementation of this
decision and to mobilize all necessary support in this respect. The Council further
requests the Commission and UNAMID to report to it regularly on progress made,
including the implementation of the DDPD, the effective launching of the DPP,
challenges that may be encountered in this respect and the extent of support
received from international partners, as well as the implementation of UNAMID
mandate for the next 12 months, starting from 31 July 2011;
14.

6

Decides to remain actively seized of this matter.

11-43590
