A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/103
30 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 88 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/728/Add.2)]
49/103.

Food and agricultural development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance and continued validity of the Declaration on
International Economic Cooperation, in particular the Revitalization of
Economic Growth and Development of the Developing Countries, 1/ the
International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development
Decade, 2/ the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the
1990s, 3/ the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
1990s, 4/ the Cartagena Commitment, 5/ Agenda 21, 6/ and the various

1/

Resolution S-18/3, annex.

2/

Resolution 45/199, annex.

3/

Resolution 46/151, annex, sect. II.

4/
Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, Paris, 3-14 September 1990 (A/CONF.147/18), part one.
5/
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Eighth Session, Report and Annexes (TD/364/Rev.1) (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.II.D.5), part one, sect. A.

6/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
95-76327

/...

A/RES/49/103
Page 2

consensus agreements and conventions that were adopted in the context of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
Reaffirming also its resolutions 45/207 of 21 December 1990, 47/149 of
18 December 1992 and 47/193 of 22 December 1992,
Recognizing that freshwater resources are a scarce commodity in a
growing number of countries and that there is a need to increase food
production in developing countries, in part through the improved use of
irrigation and water-resource management suitable for agricultural production,
and stressing in this context the need to give special attention to the issues
agreed upon by the Commission on Sustainable Development, in particular those
in paragraph 139 of the report of the Commission on its second session, 7/
Recognizing also the importance of rehabilitating and upgrading present
projects and conserving scarce water and land resources by the improved use of
irrigation and water-resource management for agricultural production,
Stressing the importance of the full implementation of the decisions of
the Commission on Sustainable Development, and, in particular, recognizing the
importance of the work undertaken by the Commission in the area of freshwater
resources,
Stressing with concern that hunger and malnutrition have been increasing
in many countries, particularly in Africa,
Reaffirming its commitment to helping to improve the living conditions
of rural women, recognizing their critical role as farmers and food producers,
Stressing the need to provide the organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system that operate in the areas of food and agriculture with adequate
resources to implement their mandates,
Recognizing the importance of stimulating food production and
productivity in developing countries through appropriate policies, taking
fully into account Agenda 21,
in particular its chapter 14, and of ensuring a sustainable economic
environment, including a more open trading system, for the development of a
viable agricultural sector and improved food security,
1.
Takes note with interest of the report of the Secretary-General on
food production, including agro-industrial products, international markets for
agricultural and tropical products and global food security; 8/
2.
Notes with concern that, in the face of the enormous challenges in
the area of agricultural development and food security, the overall resource
allocation for the development of food and agriculture in developing countries
has continued to decline;
3.
Urges the international community to place food and agricultural
development high on the development agenda and to mobilize resources at the

7/

E/1994/33.

8/

A/49/438.
/...

A/RES/49/103
Page 3

national, bilateral and multilateral levels in support of sustainable
productive agriculture and food security in developing countries;
4.
Affirms that increasing food production and improving access to
food by low-income people in developing countries will contribute to the
alleviation of poverty and the elimination of malnutrition and help to raise
their standard of living;
5.
Notes that the agreements reached in the context of the Final Act
of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations 9/ have established a
basis for initiating a process of reform of trade in agriculture and will have
an important impact on the development of food production, agro-industrial
products and international markets for agricultural and tropical products and
on global food security;
6.
Urges all countries, particularly developed countries, to
strengthen their efforts to create a more favourable international economic
environment, in particular a more open agricultural trading system which will
stimulate food production and productivity in developing countries, and in
this context stresses the importance of the urgent and full implementation of
the agreements contained in the Final Act of the Uruguay Round;
7.
Notes with satisfaction the individual and collaborative efforts
of the food and agricultural bodies based in Rome, namely, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for
Agricultural Development and the World Food Programme, calls upon these
organizations to strengthen their collaboration in the area of food and
agriculture, including with the United Nations Development Programme, and
welcomes the programmes of these organizations directed to food production for
food security in low-income food-deficit countries, including the initiation
of two special programmes of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations;
8.
Attaches special importance to the assistance from the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to developing countries on
policy transformation and technical assistance in the light of the Final Act
of the Uruguay Round and in the context of the Uruguay Round decision on
measures concerning the possible negative effects of the reform programme on
least developed and net food-importing developing countries;
9.
Urges the international community to give special attention to the
promotion and revitalization of economic growth and sustainable development in
developing countries through, inter alia, a more diversified food and
agricultural sector, focusing in particular on agro-industrial activities in
developing countries;
10.
Invites the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
and the multilateral financial institutions working in the field of food and
agriculture to support developing country efforts in the development of small
and medium-sized agro-industries and cooperatives and in the improvement of

9/
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT
secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7), vol. 1.
/...

A/RES/49/103
Page 4

processing, transportation, distribution and marketing modalities of their
food and other agricultural products;
11.
Welcomes the successful conclusion of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa 10/ and hopes that the
Convention will attract the support of the international community towards
solving the important problem confronting, in particular, Africa in that area,
and in that regard supports the contribution made by, inter alia, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to deal with the problem of land degradation in
Africa and invites those organizations to consider extending their programmes
to other affected regions;
12.
Urges relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, the multilateral financial institutions and non-governmental
organizations to strengthen their efforts towards a comprehensive assessment
of freshwater resources, with the aim of identifying the availability of such
resources, making projections of future needs and identifying problems to be
considered by the General Assembly at its special session in 1997;
13.
Requests the organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, and the multilateral financial institutions, to assist interested
developing countries in the formulation and implementation of national water
policies and strategies;
14.
Invites Governments, international organizations and, as
appropriate, scientific/technical organizations to promote sustainable water
use for food production and rural development by improving the efficiency of
current water use for irrigation in developing countries, particularly at the
village level;
15.
Requests the relevant regional and international organizations to
assist the cooperative efforts of developing countries in the area of
conservation, sustainable use and integrated management of water, and stresses
the need for full implementation of the decisions of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, particularly in the area of fresh water;
16.
Welcomes the pledges that have been made by Member States to the
Fourth Replenishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development,
and in that context invites countries that have not yet done so to consider
their pledges as soon as possible, taking into account the decisions taken by
the Fund's Special Committee on Resource Requirements and Related Governance
Issues;
17.
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the relevant
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to submit to
the General Assembly at its fifty-first session a report on the implementation
of the present resolution, focusing in particular on the use of freshwater
resources, as well as on the effects of the results of the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations on food production, including agro-industrial
products and global food security in developing countries;

10/

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II.
/...

A/RES/49/103
Page 5

18.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the sub-item entitled "Food and agricultural development" under the
item entitled "Sustainable development and international economic
cooperation".
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
