S/PV.8973

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8973rd meeting

Wednesday, 23 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Doumbeneny Ndzigna
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Bastaki
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26571 (E)
*2226571*

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

High-level dialogue between the Israeli and
Palestinian leadership has led to welcome commitments
and some economic steps, but those efforts must be
rapidly turned into substantial, durable achievements
and significantly expanded, alongside policy changes
on both sides.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: This month has witnessed a
worrisome continuation of the trends I have outlined
repeatedly in the Security Council, particularly the
destabilizing deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
Across the West Bank, daily violence continues.
Tensions in East Jerusalem and the refugee camps
are mounting. And settler violence remains a serious
concern. Illegal settlements and planning processes
are steadily advancing, alongside demolitions and
evictions, including in and around Jerusalem. Those
factors increase the territorial fragmentation of the
West Bank, undermine the Palestinian Authority (PA)
and further erode prospects for peace.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority continues
to face a prolonged financial crisis, which severely
undermines its capacity to deliver services and has
crippled the economy. Economic and political reforms,
driven from inside the Palestinian Authority, are a
critical first step to changing that situation. The PA
must be strengthened, and the international community
should support actions to that end.
2/20

23/02/2022

Recent efforts by Israel to reduce settler violence
in the West Bank and avoid further provocative steps in
Jerusalem are well-noted.
In Gaza, a fragile calm currently prevails. However,
absent fundamental change, that is only temporary.
Hamas control of the Strip, Palestinian divisions and the
Israeli closure regime are creating a generation that has
experienced multiple wars and humanitarian crises and
few prospects for a better life. In line with resolution
1860 (2009), Israel should further ease restrictions on
the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza,
with the goal of ultimately lifting them.
Daily violence continued throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory during the reporting period. In
the occupied West Bank, six Palestinians, including
two children, were killed by Israeli security forces
during demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest
operations, attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis
and other incidents, and 205 Palestinians, including 25
children, were injured. Israeli settlers or other civilians
perpetrated 55 attacks against Palestinians, resulting in
18 injuries and/or damage to Palestinian property.
In all, nine Israeli civilians, including at least one
woman and two children, and eight Israeli security
personnel were injured by Palestinians in clashes,
shooting, stabbing and ramming attacks, the throwing
of stones and Molotov cocktails and other incidents.
In total, Palestinians perpetrated 108 attacks against
Israeli civilians, resulting in injuries and damage to
Israeli property.
On 8 February, Israeli security forces entered
Nablus, in Area A of the occupied West Bank, and
shot and killed three Palestinians in a car. According
to Israeli authorities, the three were members of a
cell that had carried out attacks on Israeli forces,
were planning additional attacks and tried to shoot at
Israeli security forces during the incident. The Fatahaffiliated Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades later claimed
the men as members. The Palestinian Cabinet and
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs condemned the
killing, calling it an assassination and demanding an
international investigation. Palestinians across the
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

West Bank protested the killing, and a general strike
was announced in some areas.
On 13 February, a 16-year-old Palestinian boy was
shot and killed by Israeli security forces in the village
of Silat Al-Harithiya, near Jenin. The boy was killed
amid clashes that erupted after Israeli forces entered
the village to demolish the family home of one of the
perpetrators of a December 2021 shooting attack that
killed an Israeli civilian. On 15 February, a 19-year-old
Palestinian man was shot and killed by Israeli security
forces in the village of Nabi Saleh, near Ramallah.
The incident occurred near an Israeli checkpoint in
a confrontation between Israel security forces and
youths, where the man was reportedly shot in the back.
On 18 February, during demonstrations in Beita
village, near Nablus, 26 Palestinians were injured,
including four by live ammunition. Two of the injured
were first responders from the Palestine Red Crescent
Society. On 22 February, Israel security forces shot
a 13-year-old Palestinian boy in Al-Khader, near
Bethlehem. Israeli security forces evacuated the
boy, who was later pronounced dead. According to
conflicting reports, the boy was either throwing stones
or a Molotov cocktail when shot. All loss of life is
deeply regrettable, and I reiterate that children must
never be the target of violence or put in harm’s way.
Security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when it is strictly unavoidable in
order to protect lives.
Settler-related violence remained a concern
throughout the reporting period. On 21 January,
adjacent to Burin village, near Nablus, settlers injured
five Israeli activists involved in a tree-planting activity
with local Palestinians, set one of their vehicles ablaze
and damaged another. On 7 February, three residents
of the outpost of Givat Ronen were arrested for
suspected involvement in the attack. On 24 January,
Israeli settlers drove a convoy through the Palestinian
town of Huwwara, near Nablus, throwing stones at
Palestinians, their vehicles and shops and causing
significant damage. Three Palestinians, including a
17-year-old boy, were injured. Israeli police opened an
investigation and on 16 February announced the arrest
of 17 Israelis in relation to the incident.
Following those incidents, several senior Israeli
Government members and members of the Knesset
condemned the violence carried out by settlers and
pledged to act against it. I note such constructive

S/PV. 8973

statements and urge tangible action in line with Israel’s
obligation, as the occupying Power, to ensure the safety
and security of the Palestinian population. I reiterate
that perpetrators of all acts of violence must be held
accountable and brought swiftly to justice.
With regard to settlement advancements, on
24 January, the Jerusalem District Planning Committee
advanced plans for some 400 new housing units in
place of an existing 80 units in the settlement of Gilo,
in occupied East Jerusalem.
On 1 February, Israel’s Attorney-General published
a legal opinion allowing Israeli authorities to advance
plans for a settlement in the partially evacuated
outpost of Evyatar and authorize accelerated planning
procedures for that purpose. The opinion was issued
following a land survey by Israel’s Civil Administration.
Advancement of the plan requires a decision by Israel’s
Defence Minister. I reiterate that all settlements are
illegal under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace.
Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forced
owners to demolish 72 Palestinian-owned structures
in Area C and seven in East Jerusalem, displacing 73
Palestinians, including 32 children. The demolitions
were carried out owing to the lack of Israeli-issued
building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain. I remain particularly concerned
about the potential eviction of a number of Palestinian
families from homes in which they have lived for
decades in Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan, in occupied
East Jerusalem.
On 30 January, Israeli authorities authorized the
eviction of a Palestinian family comprising 11 people,
including four children, from their home in Sheikh
Jarrah during the month of March. In the wake of that
decision, tensions increased in the neighbourhood, with
numerous reports of violent altercations and damage to
property. The already-sensitive situation escalated on
13 February, when a far-right Israeli Knesset member
set up a makeshift office near the family’s home and
called for supporters to come to the neighbourhood. On
22 February, an Israeli court suspended the eviction,
pending consideration of an appeal by the family and
contingent on the family’s depositing approximately
$8,000 as collateral. I call on Israeli authorities to
end the displacement and eviction of Palestinians and
approve additional plans that would enable Palestinians
to build legally and address their development needs.

22-265713/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

From 6 to 9 February, the Palestinian Central
Council met for the first time since 2018, electing a
new leadership for the Palestinian National Council and
new members for vacant positions in the Palestinian
Liberation Organization Executive Committee. In its
final statement, the Central Council called for a halt to
security coordination and the suspension of recognition
of Israel until it recognizes the Palestinian State based
on the June 1967 borders and halts settlement activity,
and reiterated decisions from the previous Central
Council meeting.
I once again underscore that the fiscal condition of
the Palestinian Authority remains dire. Revenues are
not keeping pace with needed expenditures, leading
to accumulated debt, and investment in important
sectors, including health, education and infrastructure,
is virtually non-existent. Urgent action is required by
the PA, Israel and donors to avert its fiscal collapse and
pave the way for long-term fiscal reforms.
To that end, I welcome the current work of the
mission of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to
support the PA’s important work on fiscal stability and
reform. The IMF is expected to provide its report to
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians later in
the spring. I also welcome ongoing efforts by Israel to
facilitate greater access for Palestinian workers from
Gaza and the West Bank to the labour market in Israel,
which should be continued.
With regard to Gaza, the further easing of restriction
on access of materials into Gaza remains a key priority.
I welcome the parties’ engagement in that regard over
the past weeks, including the entry of white cement
into Gaza, required for reconstruction, but more needs
to be done. The United Nations continues to highlight
to the Government of Israel priority items that need to
enter Gaza, largely for United Nations health, water
and sanitation projects, some of which were requested
more than a year ago. Significant delays in the approval
of items under the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
impact humanitarian operations and should also be
resolved without delay.
I hope that the resumption of technical-level
trilateral meetings on the Mechanism will lead to
improvements and facilitate reconstruction and muchneeded development projects. I urge both parties to build
on recent momentum to continue to enhance access to
trade. However, I am concerned that recent steps taken
4/20

23/02/2022

by Hamas authorities risk compromising the Palestinian
banking system in Gaza, with potential repercussions
for humanitarian and development activities conducted
by the international donor community. With funding
from Qatar, gradual reconstruction has begun of
housing units that were totally demolished during the
May 2021 escalation, so far reaching approximately
115 households. Rebuilding destroyed homes remains a
priority and needs to be scaled up quickly.
Similarly, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) has completed the repair of the nearly 7,000
housing units and is currently working with 700 families
whose homes were totally demolished, in part thanks to
the contributions by the United States and Germany.
Let me reiterate the Secretary-General’s call to
provide UNRWA with predictable, sustainable and
sufficient funding to provide essential assistance to
Palestinian refugees in the region. If we act early enough
this year, we can prevent a financial crisis of the scale
of last year and the risk that millions of refugees be left
without education, health services and life-saving cash
and food assistance. Any reduction or disruption of
services could have significant humanitarian, political
and security consequences for the region and beyond.
Preserving UNRWA’s services is a joint responsibility
of all United Nations Member States.
Turning to the region, while a ceasefire between
Israel and Syria has been generally maintained, the
situation remains volatile, with continued violations of
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement by the
parties. That includes firing by the Israeli Defense Forces
into the area of separation and the continued presence
of Syrian armed forces in the area of separation. It is
important that the parties respect the obligations under
the Agreement and support the liaison with the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force to de-escalate
the situation during heightened tensions.
In Lebanon, following a three-month stalemate,
the Cabinet reconvened on 24 January and shortly
thereafter passed the 2022 State budget, now with
Parliament for approval. Preparations are ongoing for
the 15 May parliamentary elections, although resources
have not yet been fully allocated.
The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations remained
relatively calm, notwithstanding a number of incidents.
UNIFIL remains engaged with the parties in order
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to contain incidents and defuse tensions, including
through a tripartite meeting on 11 February.
In conclusion, while we have seen some
encouraging economic activity, we must push beyond
the paradigm of managing rather than resolving the
conflict. Economic steps alone — while essential
and desperately needed — will not put us on the path
towards a just and lasting peace. There is no substitute
for a legitimate political process that will resolve the
core issues driving the conflict.
Nevertheless, we must begin somewhere. There
is a need for a package of incremental steps that are
significant and durable and that reflect a more coherent
strategy to strengthen the Palestinian Authority and
clearly chart the way towards a two-State reality.
Getting there requires political leadership. I
urge Israelis, Palestinians, regional States and the
broader international community to take firm action
to enable the parties to re-engage on the path towards
meaningful negotiations. Only an end to the occupation
and the achievement of two States, living side by side
in peace and security, based on the 1967 lines, in line
with United Nations resolutions, international law and
previous agreements, will resolve the conflict.
I remain actively engaged in advancing these efforts
with my counterparts in the Middle East Quartet, key
regional partners and Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
briefing. We fully support his close engagement to
work with all the parties and his continued efforts to
foster dialogue.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of
the situation: the progress supported by the Abraham
Accords, the heightened tensions that we have heard
about in Sheikh Jarrah and throughout the West Bank
and the humanitarian support we can offer those in need.
First, the United States remains committed to
widening the circle of peace between Israel and its
neighbours and deepening cooperation among the
participants in the Abraham Accords. In that vein, we
are encouraged by Israeli Prime Minister Bennet’s visit

S/PV. 8973

to Bahrain on 14 February and the warm welcome he
received from Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad Al
Khalifa. We were similarly encouraged by the 7 February
visit of the Emirati Federal National Council delegation
to the Israeli Knesset. Those visits demonstrate that
good faith engagement can build confidence and can
create a path to cooperation towards greater security,
prosperity and dignity.
In addition to those visits, we support the efforts
by the signatories to the Abraham Accords to further
their relationships through working groups and other
initiatives in order to develop trade, cultural and
people-to-people ties. Those deepening relations offer
new opportunities for the people of the region.
Secondly, notwithstanding this welcome progress
between Israel and its Arab neighbours, we heard today
that the situation on the ground in Israel and the West
Bank and Gaza remains fragile. We are particularly
concerned about tensions and violence in the Sheikh
Jarrah neighbourhood and throughout the West
Bank. Let me be clear — all sides must refrain from
unilateral actions in order to not heighten tensions and
further undercut prospects for a negotiated two-State
solution. Furthermore, when actions violate the law, the
perpetrators — whether Israeli or Palestinian — should
be held accountable.
Thirdly, we need to address the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and for Palestinians, more broadly. In
Gaza, the need for humanitarian relief, reconstruction
and recovery remains acute, which is why the United
States supports regular, predictable and sustained access
to Gaza for humanitarian actors through the Kerem
Shalom and Rafah crossings. We urge all Member
States to support those life-saving humanitarian efforts,
in which civil society organizations have an important
role to play.
Similarly, we also strongly encourage States
to join us in funding the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) so that it can continue to run schools
and health services that support Palestinian families.
Supportive statements by Governments for UNRWA
are, frankly, too often not accompanied by financial
contributions. At the same time, we invite Member
States to join us in promoting efforts by UNRWA to
strengthen the Agency’s efficiency, effectiveness and
financial sustainability. We will also continue working
with UNRWA in order to strengthen the Agency’s

22-265715/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

accountability, transparency and consistency with
United Nations principles, including the principle
of neutrality.
I want to make clear that the United States is here
and stands ready to support the parties in the pursuit of
peace. The fundamental reality is that any solution must
be agreed by the parties themselves. In that context,
holding meetings for the sake of meetings is not going
to help. But when the parties are ready to move forward,
the United States will be here to support them. In the
meantime, we value our close coordination with other
members of the Quartet, and we will continue to strive
to keep us all focused on tangible progress that brings
us closer to a lasting peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
I would like to reiterate Albania’s position in
support of a just and sustainable resolution of the
conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians based
on a negotiated two-State solution, with two democratic
States living side by side in peace and security and full
respect for the equal rights of Israelis and Palestinians.
Over the years, the Security Council has laid down
the legal framework for the peaceful resolution of this
conflict. We encourage and commend all efforts and
initiatives that seek to implement this framework and
end the conflict. We regret and oppose all unilateral
actions that slow down or prevent the peaceful
resolution of the conflict.
We find encouraging and welcome the continuation
of high-level contacts between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, most recently in a meeting between
Minister Lapid and Hussein Al-Sheikh. Such meetings
are critical for the creation of a climate conducive to
opening a political horizon for peace. We call for more
engagement between the parties to foster the climate of
trust that is vital for the resumption of negotiations and
to make peace a reality.
We see no alternative to the path of dialogue and
negotiations to resolve the long-standing conflict.
We believe that settlement activities and the resulting
violence exacerbate the conflict and endanger the
prospects of a viable Palestinian State.
We reject, in the strongest terms, all forms of hatred
and violence directed against Israelis or Palestinians,
especially civilians, who want to live in peace and
dignity. Violence, no matter where it originates from,
6/20

23/02/2022

should be condemned and properly dealt with, as it
can lead only to further violence. We condemn, in the
strongest terms, rocket attacks by Hamas and other
terrorist groups. Such indiscriminate attacks against
civilians can never be justified. We respect and support
the right of Israel to defend itself.
We also recognize that a fundamental change is
needed to improve the political, security and economic
situation across the West Bank and to improve the
humanitarian situation in Gaza in particular. We
welcome the easing of some restrictions on Gaza, but
more needs to be done to reverse that negative trend and
create the basis for a political resolution to the conflict
at large.
The situation on the ground and periodic flare-ups
of violence remind us that the current status quo is
unsustainable. The Council should redouble its efforts
to create conditions that are conducive to starting
meaningful negotiations between the Israelis and the
Palestinians. A negotiated settlement in accordance
with international law is what is needed to open the
path to peaceful coexistence and the enjoyment of
equal rights by all.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.
Entering the new year, the international community
had genuine hopes for a new outlook for peace in the
Middle East. Regrettably, however, since the beginning
of the year, the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories has remained tense and the plight faced by
the Palestinian people has continued to deteriorate.
In his briefing just now, the Special Coordinator
once again relayed similar information on the situation.
China is deeply concerned by Israel’s escalating
settlement activities. Recent stories of the fate of the
Salem family and other families in East Jerusalem have
tugged at the heartstrings of many.
It is estimated that, in the Sheikh Jarrah and
Silwan communities of East Jerusalem, 218 Palestinian
families face the threat of forced eviction from their
homes, where they have lived for generations. Nearly
1,000 Palestinians live in fear every day, including 424
children. In 2021, the number of Palestinian structures
demolished reached a high not seen since 2016. Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories constitute a violation of international law.
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We urge Israel to stop evicting Palestinians, expanding
settlements and demolishing Palestinian homes and
instead create conditions conducive to the development
of Palestinian communities in the West Bank.
Equally worrisome is the security situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Since the beginning of
the year, Israeli military and police operations have led
to many Palestinian casualties, gravely intensifying the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Escalating settler violence
has continued to cause the Palestinian people physical
injury and property loss. We urge Israel, the occupying
Power, to fulfil its obligations under international law,
to guarantee the safety and legitimate rights of the
people in the occupied Palestinian territories and to
thoroughly investigate incidents of violence and human
rights violations.
We also call on the parties concerned to stop
inciting violence and to refrain from provocative
rhetoric and acts in order to prevent the situation in
Jerusalem spiralling out of control. The ceasefire in
Gaza must also be consolidated.
Improving the Palestinian economy and ensuring
people’s livelihoods are also matters of urgency. The
international community should provide assistance to
Palestine through multiple channels to help it alleviate
its financial crisis, guarantee public services, fight the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and speed
up the reconstruction of Gaza.
At present, China and Egypt are jointly donating
500,000 COVID-19 vaccine doses to the Gaza Strip to
help people there fight the pandemic and to improve the
humanitarian situation on the ground. We must also pay
attention to the situation of Palestinian refugees and
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in carrying out
its relief work.
It is necessary to take a long-term perspective
by strengthening the Palestinian Authority and
empowering it to exercise its sovereign functions in
fields such as security and finance. We support the
necessary coordination between Palestine and Israel in
the economic and civil fields and reiterate our call to
lift the blockade and siege of Gaza as soon as possible.
Earlier this month, Secretary-General Guterres said
that piecemeal approaches to the question of Palestine
will ensure only that the underlying issues perpetuating
the conflict remain unaddressed. We cannot lose sight

S/PV. 8973

of the long-sought-after goal of ending the occupation
and realizing a two-State solution. We urgently need to
intensify collective efforts to resolve the conflict and
end the occupation. We fully endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s views.
We expect Palestine and Israel to maintain the
positive momentum of the recent high-level contact,
gradually build up mutual trust and resume dialogue
on an equal footing at an early date towards achieving a
two-State solution. We hope that all Palestinian factions
will be able to unite and achieve internal reconciliation
through dialogue and consultation.
We support broader and more effective peace
efforts by the United Nations, the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We also expect the Security Council to demonstrate
greater responsibility.
China supports the establishment of a fully
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, based on
the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
China supports the peaceful coexistence of Palestine
and Israel, as well as the common development of the
Arab and Jewish peoples. China is ready to work with the
international community to promote a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue so that
security, stability, development and prosperity in the
Middle East can be achieved at the earliest opportunity.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, I join
other Security Council members in expressing my
appreciation to Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
The situation, as presented, is dire and requires the
international community’s enduring commitment in
pursuit of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. The worsening security and humanitarian
situation in the region amid the crisis brought about by
the coronavirus disease pandemic is alarming and calls
for renewed attention to advance the implementation
of the commitments of the 1991 Madrid Conference,
as well as the 1993 Declaration of Principles and
subsequent agreements.
The regional implications of the unresolved Middle
East situation and the impact of the conflict between
Israel and Palestine on the peoples of the two nations
is a burden that the Security Council must continue
to shoulder in pursuit of its mandate to maintain
international peace and security. Ghana reaffirms its

22-265717/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

belief that the path towards lasting peace and stability
in the Middle East lies in a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side on the basis of
the 1967 borders.
We recognize the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people as well as the aspiration of the countries of the
region to live in security. The aspirations for peace
and prosperity for the peoples of Israel and Palestine
should be pursued only through constructive dialogue
and negotiations. In that regard, we urge the parties
to resume direct negotiations for a comprehensive
and lasting peace in the spirit of cooperation and in
good faith.
Ghana welcomes the continuing high-level
diplomatic engagement within the context of the Madrid
Quartet and encourages active engagement with the
parties. We further welcome the commitment of the
Munich Group to continue working to reinvigorate an
effective political process towards the achievement
of a two-State solution, as expressed during its fifth
meeting, held in the margins of the 2022 Munich
Security Conference.
In supporting those tracks of engagement and the
other channels of the Middle East process, it is time,
perhaps, for the United Nations and the international
community to build synergies around a coordinated
approach that will enhance the outcomes of the
political processes and ultimate address the just and
comprehensive demands of the decades-long conflict.
Ghana encourages the parties to remain committed
to the cessation of hostilities, which has held since May
2021. We urge the parties to take further immediate steps
to de-escalate all existing tensions and build confidence
to generate the political momentum for negotiations.
As a result, we caution against the expansion of new
settlements by Israel, especially advancement projects,
evictions and demolitions, and urge the abatement of
unilateral actions that could escalate tensions and
prejudice the peace process.
We hope that through the intra-Palestinian peace
talks taking place under the auspices of Algeria, the
Palestinian factions will commit to genuinely bridging
the internal differences among them and build a unified
and stable front to pursue dialogue with Israel.
In response to the dire humanitarian situation in
Palestine, particularly in Gaza, we call for continued
support on the part of all relevant stakeholders by
8/20

23/02/2022

ensuring the easing of humanitarian access and
movement. Ghana also welcomes Israel’s intention
to engage the Palestinian Authority to address the
fragile situation that the fiscal crisis has created and
the institutional instability that the Authority has
experienced. We hope that the engagement by the
parties will create vistas of cooperation to further
move forward the political negotiations required by the
Middle East process of the parties.
The financial contribution of Member States to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to play
a critical role in providing essential services to the
4.9 million Palestinians in the occupied territories and
the more than 1.5 million in refugee camps. We urge
increased support to reverse the critical funding deficit
of UNRWA and to enable it to aid those affected by the
conflict. More sustainable and predictable humanitarian
funding for the Middle East is needed.
In concluding my remarks, I would like to urge the
Council to be seized of the consideration of how the
United Nations can support a coordinated peace process
that will build on past initiatives as well as recent highlevel engagements to explore new possibilities through
which Israel and Palestine can both realize their
national aspirations.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): We thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing and
continued engagement with his counterparts in the
Middle East Quartet. I would also like to recognize the
presence of the representatives of Israel and Palestine
who are with us today.
Kenya condemns the extremist and terrorist acts
perpetrated by Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and other affiliated militia groups, which continue to
pursue ideological aims far outside of the principles of
the United Nations Charter.
As we have stated before, their continuing threat
to the peace and security of the Middle East has a
damaging domino-like effect reaching many other
parts of the world, including our region, Africa.
We have also noted the importance of championing
grass-roots efforts that contribute to harmonious
coexistence as a way to create the conditions for
progress in official negotiations.
We urge all parties to refrain from provocative acts
such as the recent reopening of a makeshift law office
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in Jerusalem’s Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood. That one
act sparked clashes between Israelis and Palestinians
last week, with the potential of a wider escalation in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Those trends make clear
the urgent need for Israelis and Palestinians to frame
a negotiated peaceful settlement of this protracted
conflict. That should remain the Council’s focus and
premise of engagement with the Israeli-Palestinian
situation. The Security Council should collectively
encourage talks that advance the realization of the twoState solution, based on the 1967 lines. The path to that
requires strong confidence-building measures at the
official level and at the people-to-people level.
As such, Kenya continues to commend regional
efforts, including those of Egypt, Qatar and Algeria,
which are working to ensure the unity of the Palestinian
Authority. We also reaffirm the progress made,
particularly when it comes to cooperation between the
Israelis and the Palestinians.
In that regard, we look forward to the
operationalization of the outcomes of the 28 December
meeting last year between the Israeli Defence Minister
and President Mahmoud Abbas.
The
implementation
of
those
proposals,
including
strengthening
security
coordination,
preventing terrorism and violence, and promoting
confidence-building measures in the economic
and civilian fields, will be an important step in the
actualization of peace. We also welcome the fact that
the 19 February ministerial Munich joint statement by
Egypt, France and Jordan spoke of the importance of
mutual confidence-building measures and the creation
of realistic political and economic horizons.
We believe that the cessation of Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and demolitions, including those that
pose a risk to the territorial contiguity of a viable
Palestinian State, are also important peace- and
confidence-building measures.
The reinforcement of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
also remains critical to ensuring equitable economic
advancement and recovery from the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing.

S/PV. 8973

First of all, let me address the situation in Sheikh
Jarrah. In January, we condemned the eviction of the
Salihiya family from their home. In the last couple of
weeks, tensions have again increased significantly.
Evicting Palestinian families from their homes in
Sheikh Jarrah is unacceptable. Attempts to do so can
escalate the conflict, as we saw in May last year.
Norway urges Israel to halt all evictions in East
Jerusalem indefinitely and to respect the rights of the
Palestinians living there. Freedom of expression and
assembly, as well as the right to peaceful protests,
must be upheld. Furthermore, the integrity of the holy
sites and the historical status quo must also be upheld
and fully respected. That applies to Christian holy
sites and property in Jerusalem too. I reiterate that
Israeli settlements in the occupied territory, including
in East Jerusalem, are illegal under international
law. Settlement-building, demolitions and evictions
must stop.
Let me once again address the need for a vibrant
civil society and respect for human rights. Civil-society
actors must be allowed to do their work, and room for
civil-society actors must be protected, while human
rights defenders must be respected. The Palestinian
leadership should take steps to enhance democratic
legitimacy. Reconciliation and unity in Palestine must
be a priority. We welcome the contacts and dialogue
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority following
up on the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians meeting in November
last year.
It is crucial that the parties work on achieving
progress, in particular on fiscal questions, before
the next meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
scheduled for 10 May in Brussels. I would like to thank
Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom for
their support in organizing hands-on discussions and
the follow-up in the Committee.
The financial situation of the Palestinian Authority
continues to be critical. We hope to also see progress on
the much-needed reforms of the Palestinian Authority
that were announced in Oslo. However, talks between
the parties should not be limited to economic issues.
The aim should be to discuss a political horizon and a
return to negotiations for a two-State solution. Norway
remains ready to assist.

22-265719/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

23/02/2022

It is positive that the number of Gazans permitted to
work in Israel is increasing, and we welcome measures
to improve the living conditions for the population in
Gaza. We reiterate that it is essential for the civilian
populations that the calm be preserved and made into a
long-term and stable ceasefire. Calm is needed for the
current work on basic infrastructure, including water,
sewage and energy, to be completed, as well as for
creating more jobs.

and fiscal crisis worsens the prospect for political
stability and intra-Palestinian reconciliation. Free, fair
and transparent elections in Palestine are essential to
renew the democratic legitimacy of its institutions.
International efforts towards Gaza should continue
to aim at the recovery of infrastructure, economic
empowerment and the provision of aid to the population
there. Humanitarian assistance should continue to flow
in a predictable, responsible and regular way.

In conclusion, let me highlight the need for
increased donor support to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). The acute and continuous funding
shortfalls are undermining UNRWA’s ability to carry
out its vital work, thereby threatening stability in
the region. Norway recently increased its assistance
to UNRWA and will provide a total of 1.1 billion
Norwegian krone — about $125 million — over a
period of four years. We encourage more donors to
provide increased and predictable multi-year funding.

Brazil hopes that the Abraham Accords may set the
path to dialogue and diplomacy in the region, with a
positive impact on the resumption of the peace process.
The high-level meetings that followed the signing of
the normalization agreements are encouraging. We
must be committed to finding a political solution to this
long and painful conflict. We welcome, in particular,
the recent mediation efforts made by third countries,
as well as innovative diplomatic initiatives, as long as
they are truly grounded in international law and are
committed to long-term peace and stability.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks
Mr. Wennesland for today’s updates. We welcome the
representatives of Israel and Palestine to this meeting.

Brazil reaffirms its long-standing commitment to
the achievement of a just and sustainable peace in the
Middle East and to the two-State solution. We aspire
to a future in which Israelis and Palestinians live side
by side in peace in two democratic, prosperous and
sovereign States within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

At the outset, I would like to recall that last
month, on 20 January, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 76/250 by consensus, calling for active
measures to combat anti-Semitism and all Holocaust
denial or distortion. Brazil praises Israel and Germany
for the initiative to present the text, which states that
the Holocaust will forever be a warning to all people
of the dangers of hatred, bigotry, racism and prejudice.
Nevertheless, news coming from Sheikh Jarrah,
in East Jerusalem, is very concerning. The current
scenario is a flashback of last year’s events that led
to violence, the deaths of civilians and destruction
in Gaza. The escalation of tensions puts the already
fragile ceasefire at risk. Provocative actions by all sides
will only incite more violence.
Brazil calls on all parties to exercise restraint and
to take steps to restore calm in Jerusalem, Gaza and the
West Bank. International humanitarian law provides for
the protection of civilians from the hazards of conflict.
Civilians must never be the deliberate target of attacks.
Violence and terrorism in all forms and manifestations
must be condemned.
Brazil encourages continued cooperation to address
the economic needs of the Palestinians. The economic
10/20

Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Special Coordinator for his
briefing and for his work. I welcome the presence of the
Palestinian and Israeli representatives here among us.
The two-State solution, as defined by the agreed
parameters, the resolutions of the Security Council and
international law, is the only solution that can meet
the legitimate aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples and bring about a just and lasting peace. Any
attempt to deviate from it carries risks for the region,
for Israeli democracy and for Israel’s security, on which
France will never compromise.
Given the continuing undermining of the two-State
solution, it is the responsibility of the Council to work
to preserve the prospect for peace. That involves, as
a priority, putting an end to unilateral actions, which
only exacerbate an already very worrisome situation on
the ground. The evictions of Palestinian families, such
as in Sheikh Jarrah, are fuelling already high tensions
in East Jerusalem. They must be suspended, and
sustainable and permanent solutions must be found.
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Otherwise, we risk facing a sharp deterioration of the
situation, particularly during the month of Ramadan.
France also reiterates its call on Israel to definitively
suspend its plans for the creation of a new settlement
in Atarot and those aimed at expanding Area E-1.
We also remain concerned about the record levels of
demolitions, including in Ras Al-Tin, as well as the
settler violence against Palestinians.
In parallel, we must work to consolidate the
ceasefire in Gaza and facilitate the implementation
of confidence-building measures between the parties.
France calls on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
strengthen their cooperation in all areas, rather than
considering suspending it.
In that context, France, together with its European
partners, will continue to support Palestinian civil
society and work for the strengthening of the rule
of law. In that respect, we are concerned by the
designation of six Palestinian non-governmental
organizations as terrorist organizations by Israel. In the
absence of evidence, France will continue to support
those organizations.
We are equally concerned about the human rights
violations in the Palestinian territories. It is also high
time for the Palestinian Authority to take the necessary
measures to allow for a thorough renewal of the
democratic legitimacy of its institutions, as called for
by the Palestinian population.
France also calls for the preservation of
humanitarian space. In particular, the aid and personnel
needed to implement the humanitarian response plan
and United Nations early recovery and reconstruction
activities must be allowed into Gaza. We reiterate our
full support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and we
call on all Member States, particularly in the region, to
contribute to its budget.
We recall that Israel has an obligation under
international humanitarian law to protect all civilians,
including Palestinians. The disproportionate use of
force must be investigated, and those responsible for
crimes must be brought to justice.
In conclusion, it is unrealistic to think that peace
can be bought with economic measures alone. France
will continue to work alongside its main partners
to recreate a credible political horizon to halt a new
crisis and relaunch negotiations between the parties or

S/PV. 8973

under the auspices of the United Nations, including by
involving the Quartet. Minister Le Drian committed
himself to that with his German, Egyptian and Jordanian
counterparts in Munich on 19 February.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
the Special Coordinator for his comprehensive briefing
this morning.
Ireland is seriously concerned about the escalation
in tensions in recent weeks across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Incidents of provocation,
violence, including settler violence, and escalatory
acts in the occupied Palestinian territory serve only to
inflame an already tense situation.
We are deeply disturbed by the continued reports
of the use of excessive force by Israeli security forces.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has reported that, between 25 January and
7 February alone, 215 Palestinians, including 28
children, were injured by Israeli forces in the West
Bank. The killing of a Palestinian teenager by live
ammunition on 13 February was shocking but, sadly,
is not an isolated case. Ireland also wishes to raise the
issue of the killing of a 13-year-old boy just yesterday,
south of Bethlehem. As the Special Coordinator said,
children must never be targeted. It is the responsibility
of the Israeli authorities, as the occupying Power, to
ensure that all incidents involving the disproportionate
use of force are thoroughly investigated, and to hold
those responsible accountable for their actions.
Ireland reiterates the long-standing European
Union position that Israel must end settlement
expansion, confiscations, demolitions and evictions.
Such practices, all of which further entrench Israel’s
illegal occupation, are underlying causes of tension and
violence. The continued escalation of settler violence,
including in sensitive areas in East Jerusalem, is acutely
worrisome, as was the recent burning of the home of a
Jewish family in Sheikh Jarrah.
Ireland continues to be concerned about the
disparity in conviction rates between Israeli settlers
and Palestinians who have committed acts of violence.
Ireland calls on the Israeli authorities to bring to justice
those responsible for carrying out violent attacks and
ensure that they are held fully accountable.
We are seriously concerned about threatened
evictions and demolitions in Sheikh Jarrah, which will
inevitably fuel tensions. The Lower Aqueduct Plan and

22-2657111/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

other settlement plans threaten the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State and should not proceed. We recall the
importance of upholding the historic and legal status
quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem and acknowledge
Jordan’s important role in that regard.
Ireland remains extremely troubled by how the
policies of the Israeli authorities impact the human rights
of Palestinians. Ireland is particularly concerned about
the unequal treatment of Palestinians, the application of
different standards in the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel’s failure to ensure the protection and welfare
of Palestinians living under its occupation.
Practices around the detention and trial of
Palestinian children, and the misuse of the Israeli
military court system in particular, are unacceptable.
We call on Israel to comply with its obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
I reiterate Ireland’s concern about Israel’s decision to
designate certain Palestinian civil society organizations
as terrorist entities. Ireland will continue to support
Palestinian civil society and human rights defenders
and their critical role in promoting international peace,
human rights and democratic values.
Meeting the essential needs of Palestine refugees
remains a significant challenge. Ireland continues to
encourage support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which provides assistance, protection and stability in a
challenging regional environment.
Finally, it is important for intra-Palestinian divisions
to be addressed, and we support all efforts to that end.
We maintain our position that national Palestinian
elections are essential for renewing the legitimacy of
national institutions. Such a process of democratic
renewal is a critical element of State-building and will
help support political efforts to resolve the conflict
and make progress towards the realization of the twoState solution.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): My thanks go to
the Special Coordinator for his briefing today.
Let me start by welcoming Israeli Prime Minister
Bennett’s recent visit to Bahrain. We are pleased to see
the continuing positive relations between two longstanding friends of the United Kingdom.
12/20

23/02/2022

The United Kingdom actively supports the pursuit
of regional stability through normalized relations. We
are committed to ensuring that normalization is an
enduring success, and will continue to support efforts
that bring us closer to that goal. However, the United
Kingdom is concerned about the negative trends on
the ground in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including an increasing level of violence and incitement
to violence.
The United Kingdom condemns the firing of
missiles by Palestinian militants in Gaza at the start of
February. We are resolute in our commitment to Israeli
security. We continue to call upon Hamas and other
terrorist groups to permanently end their inflammatory
action against Israel.
As we have heard again today, violence in the West
Bank, including settler attacks against Palestinian
people and property, is rising. It is the responsibility
of the Government of Israel to provide protection to
Palestinian civilians, ensure all such incidents are
thoroughly investigated and bring those responsible to
justice. We are concerned about clashes between Israeli
security forces and Palestinians. Since the last time the
Council met to discuss the issue (see S/PV.8950), two
Palestinian children have been killed in the West Bank.
We urge restraint on all sides.
We have witnessed tensions in Sheikh Jarrah,
where scheduled evictions have led to violent clashes
in the neighbourhood. We call once again for the
halting of forced evictions and demolitions in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Such practices
fuel tensions on the ground, and we urge a permanent
end to settlement activity, which threatens the twoState solution.
The United Kingdom opposes the authorization
to legalize the Evyatar outpost in the West Bank. We
recall that Evyatar has been a source of instability since
May, and that such outposts are illegal under Israeli law
and international humanitarian law.
The Palestinian Authority’s (PA) fiscal crisis is
worsening. Rapid action is needed to improve the
situation. We continue to call on the PA to implement
the necessary reforms. The United Kingdom wants
to see continued cooperation between Israelis and
Palestinians, including on economic initiatives, to help
boost the Palestinian economy and improve the lives of
all in the occupied Palestinian territories. Doing so is
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

beneficial to the safety and prosperity of Israelis and
Palestinians alike.
Finally, as we approach a convergence of Muslim,
Jewish and Christian religious holidays in April, it is
crucial that all parties commit to respecting the historic
status quo and to taking steps to avoid exacerbating
tensions so as to prevent escalation.
Mr. Doumbeneny Ndzigna (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his enlightening briefing.
I welcome the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of the Observer State of
Palestine to today’s meeting.
The overall situation in the Middle East remains an
issue of genuine concern. The repeated terrorist attacks
that have targeted the United Arab Emirates and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in recent weeks, the attack on
the Blue Helmets of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the security and humanitarian situation
and numerous human rights violations in Afghanistan
paint a deeply alarming picture. My country reiterates
its staunch condemnation of such terrorist acts and
expresses its grave concern regarding the plight of
women and young girls in Afghanistan.
With regard to the situation between Israel and
Palestine, and in the light of the detailed briefing
we have just heard, we note that the daily life of the
people in that region remains marked by violence,
namely, violence arising from the establishment of new
settlements and the attendant frustration. The ongoing
situation serves to create a permanent source of tension
on the ground. Much of the violence, which also takes
the form of brutality and the disproportionate use of
force against civilians, claims an ever-increasing
number of women and children as its victims. My
country condemns all violence against civilians
and calls for respect for international human rights
and international humanitarian law conventions. It
is imperative to improve the detention conditions,
especially for women and children, and end mass arrests
and attacks on schools, which, like places of worship,
must be sanctuaries. Similarly, it is necessary to ensure
the protection of property, particularly livestock and
the agricultural production of the population.
My country reiterates its support for a two-State
solution. In that regard, intercommunal actions on
the ground are necessary to initiate daily cultural

S/PV. 8973

exchanges between Israelis and Palestinians and
ultimately promote living together. Such actions can
support, and serve as a foundation for, creating the
necessary conditions for a climate of trust and better
use of international diplomacy.
In conclusion, we encourage the parties to follow
the logic of de-escalation, and we remain convinced
that only diplomatic initiatives, especially dialogue
between the parties, must prevail.
Mr. Bastaki (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Process, for
his comprehensive briefing.
What we heard today about the fragile humanitarian,
security and political situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory serves to underscore the need to
actively relaunch a credible peace process that leads to
the two-State solution, with the State of Palestine and
the State of Israel living side by side in peace, security
and mutual recognition. As Mr. Wennesland previously
stated, current efforts must focus on providing a political
context that will ensure that the positive engagement
we have witnessed in recent months is not squandered.
Accordingly, we hope that the two parties will
continue to meet to build confidence and address
the most pressing issues in the interest of achieving
security and stability. We commend the recent increase
in cooperation and coordination between the United
States and the two parties in support of the Middle East
peace process. We also welcome the recent meetings
of the Middle East Quartet, and we look forward to
their outcome.
On the other hand, we stress the need to maintain
the recent ceasefire for the long term to avoid another
escalation, as well as support opportunities for peace.
We underscore the importance of continuing to build
on regional and international endeavours to end the
conflict and reiterate that diplomacy and peaceful
dialogue are the best options to achieve tangible
progress. Creating an environment conducive to peace
requires safeguarding the prospects for a two-State
solution and stopping illegal practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
To that end, we note the continued construction
and expansion of settlements, including the recent
construction of new settlement units in the West Bank,
as well as the continued displacement of Palestinians,

22-2657113/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

especially in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood in
Jerusalem. It is also important to note that more than
905 Palestinian homes and structures were confiscated
or demolished in 2021, in addition to restrictions on
the movement of Palestinians, which have exacerbated
humanitarian and economic conditions. In that regard,
Israel should uphold its responsibilities in accordance
with international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. We also reiterate the need to preserve the
legal and historical status of Jerusalem and respect the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s guardianship over its
holy sites.
Concerning the difficult conditions of the
Palestinian people, we stress the need for the
international community and the relevant United
Nations agencies to continue taking concrete measures
to respond to their increasing humanitarian needs.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, two out of five Palestinians will
require some form of humanitarian assistance in 2022.
As for the Gaza Strip, it is suffering particularly from
a significant shortfall of development, food and health
aid, owing to its collapsing infrastructure, in addition
to the unemployment rate, which is nearing 44 per cent.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates is continuing to
provide aid to the Palestinian people, especially in the
Gaza Strip. Recently, our efforts have also focused on
helping Palestinians combat the pandemic, including by
providing support to Gaza hospitals.
In conclusion, I reiterate the firm commitment
of the United Arab Emirates, which is in line with
the Arab position to achieving the independence of a
sovereign Palestinian State, based on the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and other agreed international terms
of reference.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing. I welcome the
Permanent Representatives of Palestine and Israel to
our meeting.
While India welcomes the recent high-level
interactions
between
Israeli
and
Palestinian
authorities, we remain deeply concerned about the
recent developments on the ground, in particular the
violent attacks against and killing of civilians. We have
consistently advocated against all acts of violence.
14/20

23/02/2022

We urge all sides to take immediate steps towards the
complete cessation of violence.
We are closely following the developments in
Sheikh Jarrah, where tensions have risen once again
over the potentially illegal eviction of some Palestinian
families. Recent provocative actions and statements
from both sides, which can quickly reverse the gains
made so far, must stop. We appeal for calm to be
maintained in Sheikh Jarrah and encourage parties to
exercise restraint.
Resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted by the Security
Council to reaffirm the international community’s firm
commitment to preventing the erosion of the two-State
solution. It calls on parties to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians and to refrain from provocative acts
of incitement and inflammatory rhetoric and stresses
that all settlement activities must cease. Any action
that unduly alters the status quo on the ground and
undercuts the viability of the two-State solution must
be eschewed in the larger interests of securing peace
and stability.
Parties must instead focus on addressing the
urgent security and economic challenges, including
the precarious financial situation of the Palestinian
Authority, and chart a concrete path for discussing
key political issues. We reiterate the need for an
early resumption of the political course by launching
credible negotiations on all final-status issues. India
has consistently called for direct peace negotiations
between Israel and Palestine based on the internationally
agreed framework, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people for statehood and
Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The absence of such direct talks on key political
issues has asymmetric costs for both Israelis and
Palestinians and does not augur well for longterm peace. We call on the United Nations and the
international community, in particular the Middle East
Quartet, to prioritize the revival of those negotiations.
Let me conclude by reiterating India’s firm and
unwavering commitment to the peaceful resolution of the
Palestine question. India’s developmental partnership
with the Palestine Authority in its nation-building
efforts and financial assistance to United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East is a reflection of the same. India has always
supported a negotiated two-State solution leading to the
establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8973

State of Palestine living within secure and recognized
borders, side by side at peace with Israel, taking into
consideration the legitimate security concerns of Israel.

undermine the demographic, historical, cultural and
religious character of Jerusalem. We call for respect for
the special status of this city.

India has been supportive of international efforts
towards achieving a comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict and stands ready to contribute
constructively to future efforts.

Finally, the precarious financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority and the budgetary crisis of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East adversely affect the provision
of basic services to the population. We reiterate the
importance of the international community continuing
to financially support the Palestinian people.

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the briefing provided by
Special Coordinator Wennesland welcome the presence
of Israeli and Palestinian delegations
Once again, we have heard about the deteriorating
situation in the Middle East. Today I will refer to
three issues: intra-Palestinian political dialogue
and reconciliation, violence and settlements and the
precarious financial situation in Palestine.
The stalemate in the political dialogue between the
parties continues to be a cause for concern. The recent
announcement by the Palestinian Central Council that
it has decided to suspend the recognition of Israel until
Israel recognizes the State of Palestine is an example
of that. This comes precisely at a time when civil,
fiscal and security cooperation is crucial. Likewise,
my country takes note that some political factions did
not participate in that Central Council meeting, which
indicates that intra-Palestinian reconciliation continues
to be stalled.
Another cause for alarm is the persistent violence
in East Jerusalem, especially in the Sheikh Jarrah
neighbourhood. We urge political and religious
leaders to refrain from provocations and the use of
inflammatory rhetoric.
The first six weeks of 2022 saw the demolition of
130 Palestinian structures, causing the displacement
of numerous families. Mexico urges the Israeli
Government to suspend all eviction orders.
The expansion and construction of Israeli
settlements is contrary to international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council. Mexico deplores
those practices and urgently calls for an immediate
end to the construction of additional housing in the
Palestinian territories. Those unilateral actions not only
fuel violence, but they also undermine the viability of
any just and sustainable prospect for peace.
In addition, Israel’s plans to expand national
parks in the basin of the Old City of Jerusalem could

Before concluding, I reiterate Mexico’s support for
the two-State solution, in accordance with international
law and United Nations resolutions. That is the only
alternative that will allow us to lay the foundations for
the peace and security that Palestinians and Israelis
yearn for. Mexico also reiterates its support for all
initiatives in favour of dialogue and reconciliation. We
therefore urgently call for a resumption of peace talks.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East in the
context of the Middle East peace process.
From the Special Coordinator’s briefing, it is clear
that the stagnation and de facto stalemate of PalestinianIsraeli dialogue is leading to a spike in violence in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. Against that backdrop,
settlement construction and expansion continues, as
does the confiscation of land, the forced eviction of
Palestinians, the demolition of houses, arbitrary arrests
and detentions and attempts to change the historical
status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque complex.
Other growing concerns are the reported recent
sharp rise in settler attacks and the disproportionate
use of force by the Israeli military against Palestinians,
which has led to numerous civilian casualties. A clear
illustration of that is a high-profile eviction and house
demolition of a Palestinian family that took place in
January in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of East
Jerusalem. That incident led to a wave of protests on
the streets of Palestine.
Moreover, we are concerned about Tel Aviv’s
announced plans to expand settlement activity in the
occupied Golan Heights, which directly contradicts the
provisions of the 1949 Geneva Convention. We stress
Russia’s unchanging position — we do not recognize

22-2657115/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, which are
an integral part of Syria.
In that context, the primary tasks are achieving
lasting stabilization, eschewing provocations and
unilateral steps that create irreversible facts on
the ground, and restoring political prospects for
revitalizing the peace process on the universally
recognized international legal basis for the Middle East
peace process. We are convinced that that is possible
only through direct negotiations between the parties.
Another key prerequisite for breaking this deadlock
is overcoming intra-Palestinian divisions. We welcome
the efforts of Arab countries, in particular Egypt and
Algeria, aimed at fostering dialogue between Palestine’s
main political forces. Our proposal to convene another
intra-Palestinian meeting in Moscow as soon as the
participants are able to agree on general approaches
and to reflect them in a relevant document remains on
the table.
Moreover, we continue to collaborate with
Palestinians and Israelis, as well as international and
regional stakeholders, including in the framework
of the Middle East Quartet — currently the only
internationally recognized format to support the
Middle East peace process that has been endorsed by
Council resolutions. We intend to continue working
actively with our partners in the Quartet in an effort to
enhance the effectiveness of the work of this mediation
mechanism by defining collective steps to advance
the implementation of the two-State solution endorsed
by the United Nations. We reiterate the importance of
holding a ministerial Quartet meeting and ensuring
that that mechanism works closely with Palestinians,
Israelis and key regional stakeholders.
In that connection, we would like to draw attention
to another important point. Conditions for resolving a
conflict and making collective efforts are never ideal.
If they were, there would be no conflict. However,
if no action is taken because the environment is not
yet conducive, then there will be no progress. We
therefore call upon all stakeholders to be receptive to
our initiatives.
We also highlight the importance of providing
comprehensive humanitarian assistance to those in
need in the occupied Palestinian territories and Gaza,
as well as to Palestinian refugees in neighbouring Arab
States. On our part, we support the efforts of specialized
international agencies, particularly the United Nations
16/20

23/02/2022

Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). In that connection, we draw
attention to the Agency’s appeals to the international
community accumulate the much-needed funds so that
it can continue to render comprehensive humanitarian
assistance to Palestine refugees in the Middle East.
Russia continues to provide constant financial support
to UNRWA through an annual voluntary contribution
to its budget.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting and for the Russian Federation’s leadership
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing
on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
Speaking to a journalist about my decision to
take the floor today, he responded: “What for? Your
voice will be drowned by the drums of war”. But in
my country the war is ongoing, even when the drums
cannot be heard. It is a war that has been waged daily
against our people for nearly 75 years now. It is a war
of dispossession, displacement and the denial of rights.
It is a war waged against one Palestinian generation
after another; a war that Palestinians endure from the
moment they are born, in every aspect of their lives,
and even after they die.
Israel proclaims that, if one is Jewish, one has a
right of return that withstood the passage of thousands
of years, yet is outraged that Palestinians still claim
their right to return to the land and homes they were
uprooted from 70 years ago. It does not see the irony
in its outrage and denial of their right to return. Why is
that? The answer is: apartheid.
Israel states that Israeli Jews are entitled to reclaim
and retrieve any property they owned prior to 1948.
Meanwhile, it has passed laws to expropriate Palestinian
properties and land — both the ones they owned then
and the ones they live in now. That is apartheid.
Israel proclaims the right to self-determination for
Jews everywhere in the land, yet denies the Palestinian
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people their right to self-determination anywhere in
their ancestral land. Again, that is apartheid.
Different laws apply to Israeli settlers and
Palestinians under occupation, which explicitly
privilege those who are illegally present on our land
and discriminate against its lawful inhabitants. That is
settler colonialism and apartheid.
Israel’s zoning and planning policies ensure the
confinement of Palestinians, when it does not forcibly
displace them, to the areas where they already lived
decades ago, as well as granting unlimited expansion
to Israeli settlers. It is maximum Palestinian geography
with minimum Palestinian demography. That is
textbook apartheid.
In occupied East Jerusalem, Palestinians can build
only within 13 per cent of the city, most of which has
already been built up. They have to watch as their houses
are demolished while settlements grow everywhere
around them, reaching their doorsteps.
In the so-called Area C of the occupied West Bank,
Palestinians are confined to 1 per cent of the land, while
two thirds of that area, including the Jordan Valley and
its resources, are confiscated and dedicated to Israeli
settlements. Israel establishes so-called national parks
as a pretext to expropriate our land while uprooting trees
that are thousands of years old. All of that is apartheid.
In the Gaza Strip, 2 million Palestinians have
endured a 15-year-long blockade and one aggression
after another, targeting all and sparing no one.
Israel considers that its right to security
justifies all of its crimes, yet it denies the right of
the Palestinian people to security, depriving them
of the most elementary form of protection and any
right to defend themselves. Israel kills and maims
Palestinians — including children, women, the elderly
and people with disabilities, in the streets, in their
schools and in their homes — and openly claims that
it does not have to answer for its actions. Why? Once
again, apartheid.
Israel says that it is barbaric to withhold bodies and
deprive loved ones of their ability to offer their deceased
a dignified burial. However, by that it refers only to the
withholding of the bodies of Israeli Jews — because it
sees no problem in withholding hundreds of Palestinian
bodies to this very day, some for over three decades.
We all know why that is: apartheid.

S/PV. 8973

Israeli laws and courts have guaranteed impunity
to Israeli settlers and occupation forces while
criminalizing the very presence of Palestinians on their
land and their legitimate struggle for freedom. That is
persecution and apartheid.
Israel labels Palestinian human rights defenders
and civil society organizations as terrorists, while
Israeli leaders, who incite State and settler terrorism or
themselves commit terrorist acts, sit within the Israeli
Knesset and Government.
Israel has arrested nearly 1 million Palestinians
during its occupation, not for what they have done
but for who they are. Yet not a single Israeli has been
condemned for all the crimes committed against our
people. The occupying Power is always innocent ,and
the people under its occupation are always guilty.
Israel has proclaimed that actions that ought to
be condemned under international law are acceptable
if committed by Israel, loudly declaring that anything
else would be purely anti-Semitic. The Security
Council condemning settlements is anti-Semitic.
The General Assembly calling for the realization
of Palestinian rights and the achievement of a just
and lasting peace on the basis of international law
is anti-Semitic. The Human Rights Council calling
for a halt to human rights violations is anti-Semitic.
The International Court of Justice determining the
illegality of the wall and settlements and calling for
their dismantlement is anti-Semitic. The International
Criminal Court opening an investigation into war
crimes is anti-Semitic. Amnesty International issuing
a fact-based, evidence-based, law-based report is
anti-Semitic.
But it is apartheid. If Israel could challenge the
facts or the law, it would not resort to such ruthless
smear campaigns. Irrational arguments that are neither
law-abiding nor human rights-respecting are its offence
of choice. The Council may not be ready to use the word
“apartheid”, but apartheid is and has been our reality
for a while now. Israel may be outraged by the word
“apartheid”, but everyone else should be outraged by
the policy.
One month ago, the Israeli representative brought
a stone into this Chamber to help members visualize
the violence by Palestinians that Israelis are confronted
with (see S/PV.8950). I am terribly sorry, but the doors
of this Chamber could not fit Israeli F-16 planes, tanks,
warships, military jeeps, drones, bombs and missiles

22-2657117/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

or the rest of their mighty military arsenal. They could
not fit the streets of Jerusalem or Al-Khalil, the Gaza
Strip, the Jordan Valley or the villages under Israeli
settlers’ constant attacks and terror. They could not fit
the millions of Palestine refugees denied the right to
enter their own land. They could not fit Palestinians of
the village of Al-Araqib, in the Negev, demolished 197
times by Israel and rebuilt 198 times by Palestinians.
Al-Araqib, along with Beita, Bil’in, Ni’lin, Khan
Al-Ahmar, Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan, Al-Shuja’iya, Beit
Hanoun, Beit Lahia, Zeitoun, Al-Khader, Nablus, Jenin
and every single refugee camp show that apartheid is
real. They also show that our people will not surrender
to it.
Everyone was against apartheid in South Africa
once it had been defeated. But history remembers well
those who actually fought against it. Israel was an ally
of the apartheid regime in South Africa. That is not
surprising given that they shared the same vision and
the same policies. Our people are resilient, and they will
carry on with their legitimate struggle for freedom and
dignity, regardless of what the rest of the world does.
But the reality is that we need international
mobilization. Peoples around the world are standing
by our side. All present here condemned the unlawful
policies and actions of Israel. But condemnations alone
will never suffice to deter Israel. It is time to translate
words into action, action that provides protection to
all our long-suffering people, action to end this illegal
occupation, action to end apartheid.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): While Asaf Avigal spent the
last two years working from home, one person was
delighted that Asaf spent so much time in the house.
Ido, Asaf’s 5-year-old son, would constantly come to his
desk and say, “Daddy, enough with the screens, come
play with me”. Although Asaf did not always have the
time then, today he would give anything for even one
more minute with his sweet child. But, tragically, Asaf
will never play with Ido again. Ido was supposed to turn
6 exactly today, but he will forever remain 5 years old.
That innocent child spent his final moments huddled in
a sheltered room trying to protect himself from another
barrage of Hamas rocket attacks.
Despite the fact that he was hiding in a concrete
shelter, a stray piece of shrapnel pierced the window and
killed him. Ido, like many other Israeli civilians, was
the target of those attacks, because Hamas, the radical
terror organization, fires rockets that deliberately target
18/20

23/02/2022

civilian populations, all in the name of advancing the
destruction of the State of Israel.
Countries all around the world have recognized
Hamas as the terror organization that it is, but, sadly,
the Security Council has failed to do so.
What is shocking is that despite Hamas’s clear
intention of murdering Israeli civilians while using its
own population as human shields, the United Nations
continued to do what it does best. It proceeded to
demonize the only vibrant democracy in the Middle
East, the State of Israel. In response to Hamas’s rocket
fire, the Human Rights Council voted to establish a
supposedly impartial and neutral commission of inquiry.
But here is the truth: that commission of inquiry is the
furthest thing from being impartial and neutral. In fact,
establishing a truly impartial and neutral commission
of inquiry would completely defeat its true purpose:
the delegitimization of the State of Israel. After all,
the Human Rights Council was merely adhering to
the tradition of singling out and demonizing Israel in
every way possible that is so prevalent among United
Nations bodies.
Sometimes they do so in order to whitewash and
ignore the inhumane crimes that members of the
Human Rights Council are committing against their
own people every single day. Can anyone honestly look
me in the eye and tell me that Israel is not the most
discriminated-against State Member of the United
Nations? That commission of inquiry has been given
an unprecedented open-ended scope, in terms of both
its time frame and its geographic coverage. Can any
fair-minded person justify such an overbudgeted
commission? The budget of the commission is nearly
double the budget of those investigating Syria and
Venezuela, some of the worst human rights violators
around the globe.
But, most importantly, can the findings of that
commission possible be unbiased when all its members
hold anti-Israel views? For that reason, Israel refuses to
cooperate with a biased investigation whose conclusions
against Israel were determined and written before its
work even began. That distorted investigation is only
the latest in a long line of toxic anti-Israel actions by
the Human Rights Council.
But it is not only open season on Israel for biased
United Nations bodies. Amnesty International, Human
Rights Watch and other so-called human rights
organizations have chosen to launch a jihad war against
22-26571

23/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the only vibrant democracy in the Middle East. Some
of the very same organizations that could not find the
time to write up reports on Syria, Myanmar, Iran or
other horrific human rights abusers managed to find
the time to write up hundreds of pages delegitimizing
the existence of Israel. Those recent reports have
attempted to brand Israel with absurd claims and
heinous accusations. One can see the campaign that
started here today on the mask of my counterpart.
But make no mistake: this is a joint campaign
between those organizations and the Palestinians,
with the mission of delegitimizing Israel as a Jewish
democratic State. But a quick glance at the diverse State
of Israel is more than enough to show how unfounded
those accusations are.
Can anyone honestly look me in the eye and tell
me that Israel, a country that protects the social
and political equality of all its citizens, is guilty of
systematic injustice? A country in which Arab doctors,
Arab members of Parliament and Arab ministers serve
alongside their Jewish counterparts? Can any decent
person justify associating Israel with this most horrific
form of discrimination?
Just this week, Khaled Kabub, a Muslim judge, was
elected in Israel to the Israeli Supreme Court, while an
Israeli-Arab member of our Parliament was appointed as
Israel’s Counsel General to Shanghai. These delusional
reports have the audacity to ignore the facts, focus on
the fabrications and echo a narrative of lies promoted
by terror organizations and the corrupt Palestinian
Authority just to single out and delegitimize Israel as
a Jewish State.
Fortunately, this time moral and like-minded
democratic countries have condemned these egregious
reports, while the only ones who commended them
are terror groups and the Palestinian observer, who
referenced them today. Scrutiny is a crucial tool for
any democracy, but such inciting lies and deplorable
accusations should be reserved for the real perpetrators
of such crimes. While these organizations, in addition
to United Nations bodies, spend countless hours and
resources demonizing Israel, in order to find true
discrimination and human rights violations they do not
have to look far. All they have to do is look at how
the Palestinian Authority and Hamas treat political
dissidents, minorities, women and the lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and queer community. Where are
the reports condemning the Palestinian law threatening

S/PV. 8973

life imprisonment for selling land to someone
only because they were born a Jew? Where are the
humanitarian organizations decrying the Palestinian
Authority’s pay-for-slay policy?
Just last week, President Abbas continued to
incite the murder of Jews: “If we had only a single
penny left, we would pay it to families of the martyrs
and prisoners.” Rather than bettering the lives of his
people, President Abbas prefers to incentivize acts of
terror. Where is the outcry? While 2 million Arabs live
as free citizens in the State of Israel, when Israeli drivers
mistakenly drive into Ramallah, Nablus or Jenin, they
are immediately lynched by bloodthirsty Palestinian
mobs. That is what generations of incitement and
institutionalized anti-Semitism look like. If one asks
why such forms of discrimination and violence are not
worthy of a human rights investigation, at this point
the answer should be very clear. All these reports and
commissions have one, and only one, goal. Their goal
is not to help resolve the conflict or to defend human
rights. Their only goal is to delegitimize Israel’s very
existence. Even in this debate, as in every debate on
the Middle East, the Council spends the vast majority
of its time hearing regurgitated claims against Israel
from the Palestinian observer, who represents the very
body that, itself, promotes hate, incitement, violence
and terror.
Over the past two months, there have been
nearly 500 terror attacks against Israelis, that is, 500
attacks — nearly 500 incidents of rock throwing,
firebombs, shootings and stabbings carried out against
Israelis, all within less than two months. Despite those
attacks being the main obstacle to peace, they are not
the focus of this debate. They never are.
As we sit here debating legal disputes and false
allegations, the clouds of unrest, violence and war cast
long shadows across the world. One might wonder
what the urgency was to turn a closed monthly debate
into an open one, while such critical matters to global
security are being discussed in the General Assembly
as we speak.
If we are here today to discuss the situation in the
Middle East, the real threat to the region must be the
focus of this meeting. Iran, the world’s number one
State sponsor of terror, spreads chaos and death across
the region. It funds an army of six terrorist proxies,
dedicated to establishing a Shi’ite hegemony throughout
the region. With Hamas and the Islamic Jihad in Gaza,

22-2657119/20

S/PV.8973

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Hizbullah in Lebanon and Syria and the Houthis in
Yemen, the Iranian regime is hell-bent on leaving a
wake of destruction in every place that it touches.
If that is how Iran acts now, it is frightening to
imagine what the region will look like when Iran
becomes a nuclear threshold State. Just last week,
Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hizbullah, proudly
declared his ability to manufacture, with the help of
Iran, precision missiles and attack drones in Lebanon.
What will the situation be like when they are protected
by an Iranian nuclear umbrella? If the Houthis now
launch unmanned aerial vehicles and rockets against
civilians, how much worse will those attacks become
once their Iranian sponsors have a nuclear arsenal and
cash flow?
The predicted outcome of the current negotiations
in Vienna will, unfortunately, lead to an agreement
that will create a far more volatile and violent Middle
East. As a result of the quickly approaching sunset
clauses included in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, a renewed Iran deal will permit the ayatollahs
to develop and operate the most advanced centrifuges,
while shrinking the breakout time for a nuclear Iran to
almost zero.
While the world, including the Security Council,
continues to turn a blind eye to Iran’s destructive
and dangerous aspirations, the State of Israel will not
hesitate to act as required. A nuclear threshold Iran
is an existential threat to Israel. While the Council

20/20

23/02/2022

repeatedly refuses to address it, Israel will act to ensure
the safety of its citizens. Israel will not be bound by
the outcome in Vienna and will continue to maintain
full freedom to act anywhere, at any time and with no
constraints in order to defend its security. We will do
whatever is necessary to stop Iran’s nuclear drive and
counter the threat from its armies of terror proxies.
Today Ido Avigal, a sweet and innocent boy, was
supposed to celebrate his sixth birthday. However, as
we all know, he never will. None of us want to see one
more child fall victim to such violence. Yet, shamefully,
when Israeli children fall victim to terror, the silence of
the Council is deafening. It is the duty of the Council
and of this institution to ensure that no more children
like Ido are killed by such deplorable acts of terror.
While the world teeters on the edge of a dark
abyss, shifting the blame and focus to places where
it most surely does not belong only further endangers
our precarious balance. The focus of this debate must
no longer be the State of Israel, especially not at a
time when a regime that openly called for Israel’s
annihilation is on the brink of becoming nuclear. The
time has come to brush away all the lies and distortions
that consume so much of the Council’s time and to
focus on the pressing issues at hand. That is the only
way to ensure a future of peace and stability for the
Middle East and for the world.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-26571
