322

General Assernbly-Forty-ORh Session

those of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordina­
tion, where pertinent, are issued in accordance with ex­
isting regulations for the timely receipt of documenta­
tion;
(c) To make every effort to shorten its reports,
using comparative tables and graphics whenever appro­
priate, and to include therein an executive summary of
its recommendations in order to facilitate the consider­
ation of its reports;
(d) To provide a more detailed commentary in its
annual report to the General Assembly on the im­
plementation of its recommendations by the United
Nations and by the other participating organizations of
the Unit;
(e) To concentrate on specific and practical opera­
tional problems and to address more precisely defined
questions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to review, in the
context of the proposed programme budget for the bi­
ennium 1992-1993, the research and analytical capacity
of the secretariat of the Joint Inspection Unit in order
to enhance its performance, with due respect to the
statute of the Unit;
4. Tak.es note with appreciation of the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit on budgeting in organizations of
the United Nations system,24 which may encourage the
harmonization of procedures within the United Nations
system, and in particular the recommendations con­
tained therein to facilitate a more equitable and com­
parable development of budgeting of the organizations
in the system, as well as the comments of the Adminis­
trative Committee on Co-ordination on the report;25
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the Joint In­
spection Unit, in bringing to the attention of the appro­
priate bodies of the United Nations system all reports
of the Unit on matters within their respective spheres
of competence, to arrange for the earliest possible in­
troduction of reports of the Unit;
6. Invites Governments that are represented on the
governing bodies of organizations and programmes for
which the Joint Inspection Unit has issued reports to
ensure that the reports are given full consideration;
7. Encourages all governing bodies of the organiza­
tions and programmes to invite, when appropriate, a
representative of the Joint Inspection Unit to be pres­
ent at their meetings when considering the reports of
the Unit;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the pres­
ent resolution to the attention of the executive heads of
the participating organizations of the Joint Inspection
Unit and to transmit to the General Assembly at its
forty-sixth session a re{>ort on actions taken by those
organizations to enhance consideration of the reports
of the Unit by their respective governing bodies.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990

24 See N45/130.
25 N45/130/Add. l, annex.

45/238.

Pattern of conferences
A

REPORT OF THE COMMITl"EE ON CONFERENCES

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Conferences,26
Taking note of the various conclusions and recom­
mendations of the Committee on Conferences as in­
cluded in its report,
Recalling its resolution 44/196 A of 21 December
1989,
1. Approves the draft revised calendar of conferen­
ces and meetings of the United Nations for 1991 as sub­
mitted by the Committee on Conferences;27
2. Requests the Committee on Conferences to re­
view, within its mandate, the existing procedures with
regard to inter-sessional departures from the approved
calendar of conferences and meetings and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth ses­
sion;
3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to
make adjustments in the calendar of conferences and
meetings for 1991 that may become necessary as a re­
sult of action and decisions taken by the General As­
sembly at its forty-fifth session;
4. Calls upon the Committee on Conferences to
continue to explore new ways to improve its effective­
ness in carrying out its mandate as approved by the
General Assembly;
5. Notes the efforts made by a number of United
Nations organs to improve the utilization of confer­
ence-servicing resources;
6. Invites United Nations bodies, in making re­
quests for conference services in accordance with their
respective mandates, to ensure that the conference ser­
vices requested are sufficient to enable them to carry
out their tasks fully and that they match, to the extent
possible, their actual requirements;
7. Urges all United Nations organs and bodies to in­
tensify their efforts to improve their utilization of re­
quested conference-servicing resources;
8. Calls upon the Committee on Conferences to
consider, within its mandate, further measures to im­
prove the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the use
of conference-servicing resources, bearing in mind the
relevant recommendations contained in the report of
the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to
Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Finan­
cial Functioning of the United Nations,28 as approved
by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/213 of 19
December 1986, and to report to the Assembly at its
forty-sixth session;
9. Requests the Chairman of the Committee on
Conferences and the Secretary-General to maintain
their contacts with all United Nations organs in order
26 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Sup­
plement No. 32 and addendum and corrigendum ( N45/32 and Add. I
and Add. I/Corr. I).
27 Ibid., annex II.
28 Ibid., Forty-first Session, Supplement No. 49 (N41/49).

VIII.

323

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Flnh Committee

to ensure the most efficient and effective use of confer­
ence services allocated to those organs;
10. Requests the Chairmen of United Nations or­
gans to bring the concerns about the utilization of con­
ference-servicing resources to the attention of the or­
gans concerned;
11. Requests the Committee on Conferences, in im­
plementing the new methodology on conference-servic­
ing utilization rates, to consider additional elements
proposed in the discussions in the Fifth Committee and
to report thereon to the General Assembly;
12. Also requests the Committee on Conferences to
remain seized of the matter of the improved utilization
of conference-servicing resources on the basis of fur­
ther reports from the Secretary-General;
13. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General
in the area of system-wide co-ordination of conference
services and invites him in this regard to use more ex­
tensively the co-ordinating potential of the Consulta­
tive Committee on Administrative Questions;
14. Also welcomes the revised work-load standards
for conference-servicing staff, which, as noted in sec­
tion II, paragraph 2, of General Assembly resolution
45/248 A of 21 December 1990, reflect a further step
towards enhanced productivity of conference-servicing
staff;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of con­
tinuing investments in technologies, to continue to ex­
plore ways to achieve optimum use of all resources in
the area of conference-servicing.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
B
CONTROL AND LIMITATION OF DOCUMENTATION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 44/196 B of 21 December
1989,
Recalling also its resolution 41/213 of 19 December
1986,
Taking into account the continuing financial crisis
and the need to improve efficiency and effectiveness,
1. Requests the Committee on Conferences to con­
tinue to review the question of the provision of sum­
mary records on a regular basis and to report thereon
to the General Assembly as appropriate;
2. Decides that, pending a further decision of the
General Assembly on the recommendations of the
Committee on Conferences, no subsidiary organ of the
Assembly shall be entitled to summary records, with the
exception of the following:
(a) Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean;
(b) Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People;
(c) International Law Commission;
(d) Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
(e) Special Committee against Aparthrid:

(j) United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law;
3. Decides that summary records shall continue to
be provided to regular and special sessions of the fol­
lowing governing bodies: the Executive Board of the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Executive Com­
mittee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and the Governing Coun­
cil of the United Nations Development Programme;
4. Renews its appeal to Member States to exercise
restraint in their requests for the circulation of commu­
nications as United Nations documents and to keep
their submissions as brief as possible;
5. Also renews its appeal to Member States and or­
ganizations of the United Nations system to respond in
a timely manner to requests for information for inclu­
sion in documents;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appro­
priate measures to ensure that pre-session documents
for meetings are distributed not less than six weeks be­
fore the meetings, simultaneously in all official lan­
guages of the organs of the United Nations, in accor­
dance with General Assembly resolutions 33/56 of 14
December 1978 and 36/117 B of 10 December 1981, and
to circulate eight weeks before the opening of a session
of an intergovernmental body, with the annotated
agenda of the session, a report on the state of prepara­
tion at that time of all the documents in all languages
required for the session;
7. Requests the secretariats of subsidiary organs to
bring the recommendations of the General Assembly
on the desirable thirty-two-page limit for their reports
to the Assembly to the attention of the subsidiary or­
gans at the start of substantive sessions;
8. Requests that intergovernmental organs exercise
restraint in their authorization of recurrent publica­
tions;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to maximize the
use of internal printing facilities, revising the format of
United Nations documents for which external printing
is now required, as appropriate;
10. Requests the Committee on Conferences to
keep the matter under review and to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its forty-seventh session.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
45/239.

Personnel questions
A

COMPOSITION OF THE SECRETARIAT

The General Assembly,

I
Recalling Articles 97, 100 and 101 of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Reaffirming its resolutions 33/143 of 20 December
1978, 35/210 of 17 December 1980, 41/213 of 1 11 Decem­
ber 1986, 42/220 A of 21 December 1987, 43/224 A of
21 December 1988 and 44/185 A of 19 December 1989,
