Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Approves the special report 5 on economic conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories as a supplement to the report 6 approved in 1951;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to communicate the
special report to the Members of the United Nations
responsible for the administration of N on-Self-Governing Territories, to the Economic and Social Council,
to the Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agencies concerned for their consideration ;
4. Expresses its agreement with the suggestion in the
report that the Secretary-General should convene the
sixth session of the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Te;ritories for the spring of
1955;
5. Invites the Committee to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its tenth session, paying particular
regard to social conditions in Non-Self-Governing
Territories as indicated, in particular, in the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in 1954;
6. Decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of
paragraph 4 (a) of General Assembly resolution 218
(III) of 3 November 1948, the full summaries and
analyses of the information transmitted during 1955
should be submitted to the General Assembly in 1956.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.

k47 (IX). Information on problems common to
regional groups of Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having since 1950 approved annually special reports
on economic, social and educational conditions in NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Considering that these reports express general views
and recommendations applicable to Non-Self-Governing Territories as a whole,
Recognizing that conditions in the various regions
and in particular Territories may present special problems,
Believing that the consideration of these special
problems by the General Assembly should provide an
opportunity for the expression of views and recommendations of concrete value to certain regional groups
of Territories,
1. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories at its 1955 session to
study the manner in which the future reports prepared
for the General Assembly may most appropriately be
directed to the consideration of information or recommendations concerning the particular problems common
to certain regional groups of Territories;
2. Further requests the Committee to examine
whether any amplification or amendment of the Standard Form is necessary so as to assist the Administering
Members in providing concrete information on the
particular problems common to certain regional groups
of Territories;
3. Suggests that the Committee give full consideration to the views expressed on these subjects during
5
6

Ibid., part two.
Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 14, part three.

17

the discussions in the Fourth Committee at the ninth
session of the General Assembly.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
848 (IX). Voluntary transmiHion of information on political development in Non-Self.
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the functions it bears over peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories under the principles
and objectives set forth in Article 73 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Considering that these principles and objectives relate
to the political as well as the economic, social and educational advancement of the peoples concerned,
Recalling that by resolutions 144 (II), 327 (IV) and
637 B (VII) it has sought to secure the transmission
by Members administering Non-Self-Governing Territories of voluntary information on the manner and
extent to which the peoples of Territories under their
administration are being developed for self-government,
Noting with satisfac.tion that some Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories already have voluntarily transmitted some
information on the development of self-governing institutions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
But noting further that other Members have not yet
transmittecl such information,
1. Reiterates the view that voluntary submission of
information on the political development of peoples in
Non-Self-Governing Territories is fully in accord with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter;
2. Invites the Administering Members concerned to
give the United Nations their utmost co-operation in
this regard.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
849 (IX). Cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Greenland

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 222 (III) of 3 November 1948, the General Assembly, while welcoming any
development of self-government in Non-Self-Governing Territories, considers it essential that the United
Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional
status of any such Territory as a result of which the
responsible Government concerned thinks it unnecessary to transmit further information in respect of
that Territory under Article i3 e of the Charter,
Having received from the Government of Denmark
a communication 7 dated 3 September 1953 informing
the Secretary-General that, as a result of the constitutional amendment adopted on 5 June 1953, Greenland
has become an integral part of the Danish Realm with
a constitutional status equal to that of other parts of
Denmark and that, as a consequence of this constitutional change, the Danish Government regarded its
responsibilities under Chapter XI of the Charter in
7

See documents A/ AC.35/L.155 and Corr.l

28

General Auembly -

respect of Greenland as terminated and had, therefore,
decided to bring to an end the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that resolution 742 (VIII) adopted by
the General Assembly on 27 November 1953 instructs
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories to study any documentation transmitted
under resolution 222 (III) in the light of the list of
factors approved by resolution 742 (VIII) and other
relevant considerations that may arise from each concrete case,
Having studied the report8 prepared by the Committee 9n Information from Non-Self-Governing Territori~s during its session of 1954 on the question of
the cessation of the transmission of information on
Greenland and presented to the General Assembly in
conformity with paragraph 2 of resolution 448 (V)
of 12 December 1950,
Having examined the communication of the Government of Denmark in the light of the basic principles
and objectives embodied in Chapter XI of the Charter,
the criteria established by the list of factors, and of all
the other elements of judgment pertinent to the issue,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General Assembly to decide whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory has or has not attained a full measure of selfgovernment as referred to in Chapter XI of the
Charter,
1. Takes note of the conclusions set forth by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories in its resolution ;9
2. Takes note of the opi'lion of the Government of
Denmark that due to the new constitutional status of
Greenland the Government of Denmark regards its
"responsibilities according to Chapter XI of the Charter
as terminated" and that consequently the transmission
of information under Article 73 e of the Charter in
respect of Greenland should be brought to an end;
3. Commends the action of the Member State concerned in including in its delegation to the General
Assembly representatives elected by the National Council of Greenland for the purpose of furnishing information on constitutional changes in Greenland;
4. Takes note that when deciding on their new
constitutional status, through their duly elected representatives, the people of Greenland have freely exercised their right to self-determination;
5. Expresses the opinion that, from the documentation and the explanations provided, Green1and freely
decided on its integration within the Kingdom of Denmark on an equal constitutional and administrative
basis with the other parts of Denmark;
6. Notes with satisfaction the achievement of selfgovernment by the people of Greenland;
7. Considers that due to these circumstances the
Declaration regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the provisions established under it in Chapter XI
of the Charter can no longer be applied to Greenland;
8. Considers it appropriate that the transmission of
information in respect of Greenland under Article 73 e
of the Charter should now cease.
499th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18, part onP <Prt;n,, lX.
• Ibid., para. 61.

Ninth Session

850 (IX), Consideration of communications re•
lating to the cessation of the transmission
of information under Article 73 e of the
Charter

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by resolutions 222 (III), 448 (V)
and 742 (VIII), it has approved principles which
should be followed in evaluating situations indicative
of the attainment of a full measure of self-government
by the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories and
the consequent cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Having approved in 1953 and 1954 resolutions10
relating to the cessation of the transmission of information concerning Puerto Rico and Greenland respectively.
Considering that the experience gained should be
used by the General Assembly to perfect the methods
and procedures to be followed in such cases,
Considering further the necessity of laying down
procedures enabling the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories to discharge its
functions under General Assembly resolution 742
(VIII),
1. Expresses the opinion that communications received from the Members concerned relating to the
cessation of the transmission of information under
Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of any Non-SelfGoverning Territory should be examined, as indicated
in resolution 742 (VIII), with particular emphasis on
the manner in which the right of self-determination has
been attained and freely exercised;
2. Considers that, in order to evaluate as fully as
possible the opinion of the population as to the status
or change in status which they desire, a mission, if
the General Assembly deems it desirable, should, in
agreement with the Administering Member, visit the
Non-Self-Governing Territory before or during the
time when the population is called upon to decide on its
future status or change in status ;
3. Considers that the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories might study
means by which it could, at the appropriate time,
draw the attention of the General Assembly to the
forthcoming changes in the status of the Territory
concerned;
4. fovites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to include in its report to
the General Assembly at its tenth session any proposals
that it considers desirable concerning the implementation of the present resolution.
499th plenary muting,
22 November 1954.
851 (IX). Report of the Committee on South
West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having established by resolution 749 A (VIII) of
28 November 1953, "until such time as an agreement
is reached betwten the United Nations and the Union
of South Africa, a Committee on South West Africa",
10

See resolutions 748 (VIII) and 849 (IX).
