VI. Resolutlom adopted on 1be repor1I of the Third Committee
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly, according to
which:
"[Such an act is] an offence to human dignity and shall
be condemned as a denial of the purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations and as a violation of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [and other international human rights instruments]."
(b) The Declaration defines torture as follows:
" ... torture means any act by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted by or at the instigation of a public official on a
person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a
third person information or confession, punishing him
for an act be bas committed or is suspected of having
committed, or intimidating him or other persons. It
does not include pain or suffering arising only from,
inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions to the extent consistent with the Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners. " 111
(c) The term "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment" bas not been defined by the General Assembly
but should be interpreted so as to extend the widest possible
protection against abuses, whether physical or mental.
Article 6
Law enforcement officials shall ensure the full protection of
the health of persons in their custody and, in particular, shall
take immediate action to secure medical attention whenever
required.
Commentary:
(a) "Medical attention", which refers to services rendered
by any medical personnel, including certified medical practitioners and paramedics, shall be secured when needed or
requested.
(b) While the medical personnel are likely to be attached
to the law enforcement operation, Jaw enforcement officials
must take into account the judgement of such personnel
when they recommend providing the person in custody with
appropriate treatment through, or in consultation with, medical personnel from outside the law enforcement operation.
(c) It is understood that law enforcement officials shall
also secure medical attention for victims of violations of law
or of accidents occurring in the course of violations of law.
Article 7
Law enforcement officials shall not commit any act of corruption. They shall also rigorously oppose and combat all such
acts.
Commentary:
(a) Any act of corruption, in the same way as any other
abuse of authority, is incompatible with the profession of law
enforcement officials. The law must be enforced fully with
respect to any law enforcement official who commits an act
of corruption, as Governments cannot expect to enforce the
law among their citizens if Qtey cannot, or will not, enforce
the law against their own agents and within their own
agencies.
(b) While the definition of corruption must be subject to
national law, it should be understood to encompass the commission or omission of an act in the performance of or in
connexion with one's duties, in response to gifts, promises or
incentives demanded or accepted, or the wrongful receipt of
these once the act has been committed or omitted.
(c) The expression "act of corruption" referred to above
should be understood to encompass attempted corruption.

Article 8
Law enforcement officials shall respect the law and the present
Code. They shall also, to the best of their capability, prevent
and rigorously oppose any violations of them.
111 First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of O.ienders: report prepared by the
Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. 1956.IV.4),
annex I.A.

117

Law enforcement officials who have reason to believe that a
violation of the present Code has occurred or is about to occur
shall report the matter to their superior authorities and, where
necessary, to other appropriate authorities or organs vested with
reviewing or remedial power.
Commentary:
(a) This Code shall be observed whenever it has been incorporated into national legislation or practice. If legislation
or practice contains stricter provisions than those of the present
Code, those stricter provisions shall be observed.
(b) The article seeks to preserve the balance between the
need for internal discipline of the agency on which public
safety is largely dependent, on the one hand, and the need for
dealing with violations of basic human rights, on the other.
Law enforcement officials shall report violations within the
chain of command and take other lawful action outside the
chain of command only when no other remedies are available
or effective. It is understood that law enforcement officials
shall not suffer administrative or other penalties because they
have reported that a violation of this Code has occurred or is
about to occur.
(c) The term "appropriate authorities or organs vested
with reviewing or remedial power" refers to any authority or
organ existing under national law, whether internal to the law
enforcement agency or independent thereof, with statutory,
customary or other power to review grievances and complaints
arising out of violations within the purview of this Code.
(d) In some countries, the mass media may be regarded
as performing complaint review functions similar to those
described in subparagraph (c) above. Law enforcement officials may, therefore, be justified if, as a last resort and in accordance with the laws and customs of their own countries
and with the provisions of article 4 of the present Code, they
bring violations to the attention of public opinion through
the mass media.
{e) Law enforcement officials who comply with the provisions of this Code deserve the respect, the full support and
the co-operation of the community and of the law enforcement agency in which they serve, as well as the law enforcement profession.

34/170.

The right to education

The General Assembly,
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 2200 A (XXI) of 16 December
1966, which recognizes the right of everyone to
education,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Convention
against Discrimination in Education, 112 adopted on 14
December 1960 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Convinced of the topicality of the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, containing the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development which, inter alia, stresses the
importance of the training of national personnel and
cadres for the over-all development of society,
Emphasizing the paramount importance of the implementation of the right to education for the full development of human personality and for the enjoyment
of other fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Considering that the educational process could bring
a substantial contribution to social progress, national
development, mutual understanding and co-operation
among peoples and to strengthening peace and international security,
112

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 429, No. 6193, p. 93.

188

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Reaffirming the decisive importance of the training
of national personnel and cadres, including the establishment of, and improvement in, the legislative framework, which should ensure the implementation and
guarantee the full enjoyment of the right to education,
Recalling that the establishment of the new international economic order requires effective support for the
improvement and expansion of educational systems and
for the training of specialized personnel and qualified
cadres for the economic development of the developing
countries,
Convinced that the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, could continue to
play an increasing role in supporting the implementation
of the right to education, the development of education
and the training of national personnel needed by all
sectors of activity in conformity with the requirements
of the over-all progress and development of the developing countries,
Bearing in mind the valuable work of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
in the education and training of national personnel, as
~ell as the importance of its contribution to the preparation and implementation of the new international development strategy, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 33/193 of 29 January 1979,
1. Invites all States to consider the adoption of
appropriate legislative, administrative and other measures, including material guarantees, in order to ensure
the full implementation of the right to universal education through, inter alia, free and compulsory primary
education, universal and gradually free-of-charge secondary education, equal access to all educational facilities and the access of the young generation to science
and culture;
2. Appeals to all States, in particular the developed
countries, actively to support through fellowships and
other means the efforts of the developing countries in
the education and training of national personnel needed
in industry, agriculture and other economic and social
sectors;
3. Requests the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a preliminary report and, at its thirty-sixth session,
a final report containing:
(a) Information on the activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
in relation to support for education and training of
national personnel of developing countries;
(b) His views and suggestions, in accordance with
the organization's mandate and after consultation with
Member States and specialized agencies, on the need
for and the possibility of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization reinforcing
its programmes and activities for the purpose of cooperating with developing countries in their efforts to
ensure adequate education networks at all levels as well
as fellowships and facilities for the training of qualified
national personnel, bearing in mind also the proposals
contained in General Assembly resolution 33/135 of
19,December 1978;
(c) Information on the difficulties and obstacles encountered in the full implementation of the right to
education, particularly in developing countries, in conformity with their own requirements of over-all progress

and development, as well as his conclusions on action
to be taken in this regard.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34 / 171.

Regional arrangements for the promotion
and protecdon of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/127 of 16 December
1977 and 33/ 167 of 20 December 1978 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 24 (XXXIV) of 8
March 1978,113
Mindful of the report of the Secretary-General on
regional arrangements for the promotion and protection
of human rights, 114
1. Notes with satisfaction that a United Nations
Seminar on the Establishment of Regional Commissions
on Human Rights with Special Reference to Africa was
held at Monrovia from 10 to 20 September 1979 and
adopte~ the Monr<;w~a Proposal for the setting up of
an Afncan Comm1ss10n on Human Rights, 115 as well
as other conclusions and recommendations, 116 and expresses the hope that the recommendations of the Seminar will be given due consideration by the Governments
and organizations concerned;
2. Reiterates its appeal to States in areas where
regional arrangements in the field of human rights do
not yet exist to consider agreements with a view to the
establishment within their respective regions of suitable
regional arrangements for the promotion and protection
of human rights;
3. Requests once again the Secretary-General, under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights, to explore with the States in the regions
concerned the possibility of holding a seminar as soon
as possible for the purpose of discussing methods for
the promotion and protection of human rights;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
I 06th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34 / 172.

Measures to improve the situation and ensure
the human rights and dignity of all migrant
workers

The General Assembly,
Affirming the need to establish international cooperation by resolving international problems of an
economic, social, intellectual or humanitarian nature
and by developing and encouraging human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling in this connexion the provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 117 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
113 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
114 A/34/359 and Add.I.
115 A/34/359/ Add.I, annex I.
116 ibid., annex II.
117 Resolution 217 A (Ill).
