UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/975
13 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 12 DECEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
10 December 1997, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-36697 (E)

131297

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/975
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 10 December 1997 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
eleventh monthly report on Stabilization Force operations. I would appreciate
your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/975
English
Page 3

Appendix
Eleventh monthly report to the United Nations Security
Council on SFOR operations

SFOR operations
1.
There are approximately 35,600 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all the NATO nations and from
20 non-NATO countries. Over the reporting period (21 October-20 November), a
modest number of temporary reinforcements deployed to the theatre in order to
provide increased support to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) during the Republika Srpska Assembly elections, which were held on
22 and 23 November.
2.
Over the reporting period, SFOR continued to conduct surveillance and
reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols. A total of 2,750 sorties
were flown by combat aircraft, with the SFOR helicopter fleet flying 131 hours.
3.
Support continues to be provided to the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES), with
SFOR maintaining its regular, coordinated training missions over Eastern
Slavonia in order to exercise plans to conduct close air support if necessary.
4.
Over the reporting period, SFOR troops continued to secure the
transmission towers used by Srpska Radio Television (SRT) at Udrigovo, Duga
Nijva and Veliki Zep in Multi-National Division North, and at Mount Trebevic and
Leotar in Multi-National Division South-East. SRT transmission links into the
eastern part of the Republika Srpska, which had been interrupted because of the
apparent sabotage of the Veliki Zep tower on 18 September, were re-established
by SFOR on 31 October by means of satellite links at the Udrigovo, Trebevic and
Leotar towers, with a back-up system installed during the first week of
November.
5.
On 15 November, approximately 100 people took part in a demonstration
at the Trebevic tower directed against the SFOR troops securing the facility,
and demanded that they relinquish control of the tower. The demonstration was
peaceful, and dispersed without incident after approximately 3 hours. At the
same time, in apparent coordination with the demonstration, civilian buses, cars
and taxis blocked traffic in the vicinity of SFOR's Butimir compound, near
Sarajevo. This demonstration also dispersed without incident after 3 hours.
6.
As a result of the actions of the Republika Srpska Police AntiTerrorist Brigade in Banja Luka on 8 and 9 September (see the ninth monthly
report (S/1997/794, annex, appendix, para. 7)), and the subsequent failure of
the Republika Srpska political authorities adequately to explain those actions,
SFOR troops entered the Republika Srpska Specialist Police Unit in Doboj on
10 November and confiscated a total of 10 long-barrelled rifles, 101 pistols and
24,617 rounds of ammunition, together with 9 vehicles, communications equipment
and files, and de-certified the officers assigned to the Unit. Although only 10
Specialist Police officers were present when the SFOR troops arrived, the
/...

S/1997/975
English
Page 4

Commander of the Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade instructed the remaining officers
to return to the Unit, which they did over the following three days. During
this time, SFOR encountered no resistance. All specialist police from the Unit
were de-certified for a period of 180 days, and the Unit will remain
non-operational for six months while the International Police Task Force (IPTF)
conducts a police re-training programme. A review will take place in 90 days.
7.
On 13 November, the SFOR Deputy Commander for Operations and the IPTF
Commander met with Minister Paleksic, General Saric (Police Anti-Terrorist
Brigade Commander) and General Borovcanin (local police commander) with the aim
of providing direction for the restructuring of the Republika Srpska Specialist
Police. The Bosnian Serb officials indicated their willingness to cooperate
fully with IPTF and the restructuring programme. On 20 November, SFOR and IPTF
officials reached an agreement with Republika Srpska representatives on the
future role of a new police force, to be integrated into the civilian structure,
and on a force development concept. A schedule for re-certification of
Specialist Police officers is now being developed.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
8.
The parties remain generally compliant with most military aspects of
the Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations.
9.
During the reporting period, SFOR inspected 513 military weapons
storage sites: 176 Bosniacs; 150 Bosnian Croat; 186 Bosnian Serb; and 1
Federation. The following weapons were confiscated: from the Bosniacs, 2 heavy
machine guns, 61 OSA rockets and 26,136 rounds of ammunition; from the Bosnian
Croats, 3 rocket-propelled grenades and 1 SAGGER missile; and from the Bosnian
Serbs 1 M80 grenade launcher, 1 M55 air defence weapon, 2 SA7s and 24 M71 rocket
launchers. The parties are on track to reduce the number of storage sites by
25 per cent no later than 20 December, as required by SFOR.
10. SFOR continues to support the inspections by IPTF of local police
stations and over the reporting period confiscated the following weapons: from
the Federation, 18 grenades, 1 anti-tank mine, 11 long-barrelled weapons, 62
rifles, 15 pistols and 2 mortar rounds; and from the Republika Srpska, 148
grenades, 12 anti-personnel mines, 5 anti-tank mines, 16 long-barrelled weapons,
3 rifles, 18 pistols and 1 mortar round. All these confiscated weapons will be
destroyed, after a period of time to allow for appeals.
11. Over the reporting period, 2 illegal checkpoints were dismantled by
IPTF with SFOR support: on 22 October, an illegal Serb checkpoint was
dismantled 5 km north of Pale; and on 12 November an illegal checkpoint manned
by two Federation policemen was dismantled near Sarajevo.
12. SFOR continues to monitor the movement of displaced persons and
refugees, much of which is taking place across the Inter-Entity Boundary Line.
However, with the onset of winter, no significant number of returns is now
likely to take place before the spring.
13. Over the reporting period, SFOR monitored a total of 611 training and
movement activities: 308 by the Bosniacs; 111 by the Bosnian Croats; 7 by the
/...

S/1997/975
English
Page 5

Federation; and 185 by the Bosnian Serbs. Two training and movement bans which
had been in place were lifted (see S/1997/893, annex, appendix, para. 15). The
ban on the 820th Bosniac Brigade was lifted on 30 October, and that on the 7th
Bosnian Serb Army Corps on 2 November. However, on 14 November, having exceeded
the time allotted for radar maintenance training, the Bosnian Serb Air Force was
banned from conducting radar maintenance at Zaluzani, which had been programmed
for the following week.
14. Owing to the Republika Srpska Assembly elections on 22 and
23 November, a theatre-wide general training and movement ban was put into
effect from 19 to 26 November.
15. Over the reporting period, Entity personnel, under SFOR supervision,
removed 2,515 explosive devices from a total of 690 mined areas: 254 anti-tank
mines; 2,190 anti-personnel mines; and 71 items of unexploded ordnance. No bans
were imposed for non-compliance with the counter mine campaign and the Entity
Armed Forces have improved their mine-clearing activities, with a continued
willingness to achieve the scheduled activities despite the winter weather
conditions. SFOR is now working with OSCE and Parties on a plan to convert a
number of T-55 tanks into mine rollers.
Cooperation with international organizations
16. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre, and supports the work of IPTF, as noted
above, the Office of the High Representative, OSCE and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
17. SFOR supported OSCE during the conduct of the Republika Srpska
Assembly elections on 22 and 23 November through the provision of a robust
force, with modest reinforcements, to ensure increased security during the
polling period, and through the provision of significant logistics support, such
as the transportation of ballots and other election materials. SFOR also
provided personnel to the OSCE/SFOR Joint Elections Operations Centre.
18. SOFR continues to participate fully in the OSCE Election Results
Implementation Committees which were set up at national and regional levels
following the September municipal elections. In addition, SFOR is providing
appropriate support to implementation activities, including through the
provision of area security when necessary.
19. SFOR continues to support the implementation of the article IV
Sub-Regional Arms Control Agreement. With the end of the Phase II reduction
period on 31 October 1997, the parties began their first round of the fourmonth-long Residual Level Validation Period. At the start of this period, SFOR
conducted an inspection of all cantonment sites in Bosnia and Herzegovina and,
in line with established practice, transmitted its data to the appropriate
officials in Vienna.
20. SFOR continues to work with the Office of the High Representative
towards the opening up of the regional airports in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On
18 November, Banja Luka airport was opened for commercial air traffic at a
/...

S/1997/975
English
Page 6

formal opening ceremony attended by President Plavsic, the SFOR Commander and
representatives of the Office of the High Representative. Further work is in
hand to prepare the Mostar and Tuzla airfields for opening.
Outlook
21. While isolated acts of intimidation and violence may occur as a result
of the Republika Srpska Assembly elections, the overall situation in the theatre
is expected to remain stable. NATO is now in the process of conducting the
12-month review of SFOR operations, in consultation with the non-NATO SFOR
contributors.

-----
