V.

ResolutioDB adopted on the reporfll of the Second Committee

Recalling also, in particular, section I, paragraphs 3
and 4, of the annex to General Assembly resolution
32/197,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions 1979/1 of 9 February 1979, 1979/41 of 10 May
1979 and 1979/69 of 2 August 1979 on control and
limitation of documentation and General Assembly resolution 34/ 50 of 23 November 1979 on the same
subject,
1. Decides to maintain on the agenda of its Main
Committees during its regular sessions the item entitled
"Report of the Economic and Social Council" but, in the
light of the decision contained in paragraph 5 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 / 41, to consider the chapters of the report of the Council under the
relevant items of its agenda;
2. Recommends to the Secretary-General that the
items of the agenda which are normally allocated for
consideration to the Second Committee should in future
be drawn up within the indicative framework outlined
in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Recommends also that the Second Committee
should organize its programme of work and the substantive debates on the agenda items allocated to it taking into account the regrouping and reorganization of
items outlined in the above-mentioned annex;
4. Decides that all introductory statements to be
made in the Second Committee on behalf of the organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
should normally be made during the first two weeks of
the substantive work of the Committee, in order to
facilitate maximum utilization of the remaining time in
the manner most convenient for Member States;
5. Decides that the Second Committee, in setting
deadlines for submission of proposals, should allow for
the possibility of addressing discussions on various items
to proposals submitted under those items, as envisaged
in paragraph 3 (c) of the annex to General Assembly
resolution 32/ 197;
6. Decides to review at its thirty-fifth session, with
a view to minimizing delays in the submission of documentation in all the working languages, the requirements in respect of document symbols, covers and related procedures in respect of reports for different intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations, and requests
the Secretary-General to submit recommendations in that
regard;
7. Also decides to consider at its thirty-fifth session
the possibility or desirability of examining some of the
items of its agenda allocated to the Second Committee
on a biennial basis, including the possibility of assigning
some items to the Economic and Social Council for consideration and final decision;
8. Further decides to review at its thirty-fifth session, in the light of experience, the arrangements outlined in paragraphs 2 to 4 above.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
ANNEX
Indicative reorganization of agenda items to be allocated
to the Second Commlttee225
1. Development and international economic co-operation:
(a) International development strategy;
2 25 The items listed in this annex are based on the agenda of
the thirty-fourth session; future changes within the broad framework outlined are not excluded.

149

(b) Round of global negotiations relating to international
economic co-operation for development;
(c) Trade and development;
(d) Industrialization;
(e) Science and technology for development;
(/) Natural resources;
(g) Food and agriculture;
(h) Transfer of real resources to developing countries;
(i) Financial, monetary and related matters;
(j) Economic and technical co-operation among developing
countries;
(k) Restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the
United Nations system;
(I) Environment;
(m) Human settlements;
(n) Effective mobilization and integration of women in
development.
2. Report of the Economic and Social Council.
3. Operational activities for development:
(a) United Nations Development Programme;
(b) United Nations Capital Development Fund;
(c) United Nations Revolving Fund for Natural Resources
Exploration;
(d) United Nations Fund for Population Activities;
(e) United Nations Volunteers programme;
(f) United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries;
(g) United Nations Special Fund;
(h) United Nations Children's Fund;
(i) World Food Programme;
(j) Technical co-operation activities undertaken by the
Secretary-General.
4. Training and research:
(a) United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
(b) United Nations University;
(c) University for Peace;
(d) Unified approach to development analysis and planning;
(e) Examination of long-term trends in economic development.
5. Special economic and disaster relief assistance.
6. Other matters brought to the attention of the General
Assembly.

34/213.

Implementation of section V of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 32/197 on the
restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, by which it, inter alia, established the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic
and Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprehensive and
effective manner, and to make it more responsive to the
requirements of the provisions of the Declaration and

150

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order as well as those of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 32/197 of 20 Dece~ber
1977, by which it, inter alia, endorsed the ~onclus10ns
and recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee,
Recalling further its resolutions 3 3 / 202 of 29 January
1979, in which it, inter alia, requested certain actions
and measures within the framework of the implementation of the conclusions and recommendations of the Ad
Hoe Committee,
Reaffirming that the process of restructuring the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system is
an integral part of the efforts required to ensure the
equitable, full and effective participation of the developing countries in the formulation and application of all
decisions within the United Nations system in the field
of development and international economic co-operation,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1979/66 of 3 August 1979, in particular subparagraph
(c) thereof,
Taking note also of decision 79 / 30 of 2 July 1979 of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme, 226
Having considered the progress repo11 of the Secretary-General for 1979 on the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system 221
as well as the annual report of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination for 1978/ 1979, 228
1. Regrets that the major premise underlying the integration measures proposed in section V of the annex
to General Assembly resolution 32/ 197, namely that it
would stimulate substantially higher levels of voluntary
contributions to operational activities for development,
is yet to be fulfilled;
2. Decides, therefore, in the context of the comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development, called for under General Assembly resolution
33/201 of 29 January 1979, to pay special attention to
the question of increased levels of voluntary contributions for operational activities for development without
prejudice to paragraph 2 of the said resolution;
3. Takes note of the text of the proposed standard
letter of designation of the resident co-ordinator of the
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, 229 to be signed in each case by the Secretary-General, affirms in this context that the resident
representative of the United Nations Development Programme would normally be designated as resident coordinator and draws attention to the fact that paragraph
2 of the standard letter may not be applicable to those
exceptional cases in which the resident co-ordinator is
not the resident representative of the Programme;
4. Reaffirms the principle that the assistance provided by the United Nations system should be in conformity with the national objectives and priorities of the
recipient countries and that, therefore, the co-ordination
of various assistance inputs at the national level is the
prerogative of the Government concerned, while reaffirming also that over-all responsibility for, and co218 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. JO (E/1979/40 and Corr.I), chap. XXI,
sect. B.
HT E/1979/81.
21& E/1979/34 and Add.I/Rev. 1.
1au E/I979/34, annex.

ordination of, operational activities for development of
the United Nations system carried out at the country
level is entrusted to the resident co-ordinator;
5. Reaffirms further that the tasks of the resident
co-ordinator should be carried out in conformity with
the criteria and priorities established by the competent
national authorities and that they, including the reporting arrangements, should pertain exclusively to operational activities of the United Nations system;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, in consultation with the Governments and the executive heads
of the organizations concerned, that in the exercise of his
functions the resident co-ordinator shall be enabled:
(a) To take adequately into account the objectives
set forth in paragraphs 28 (b) to (d) of the annex to
resolution 32/197;
(b) To assist Governments in achieving the objectives and priorities set by them by ensuring the coherence
of action and effective integration of the various sectoral
inputs from the United Nations sys!em, as defined in
paragraph 33 of the annex to resolution 32/ 197;
(c) To assume over-all responsibility for, and coordination of, operational activities for development of
the United Nations system carried out at the country
level, in conformity with paragraph 34 of the annex to
resolution 32/ 197;
(d) To be responsible, in accordance with the policies and priorities of the Government concerned, for
evolving at the country level a multidisciplinary dimension in the programming, implementation and evaluation of sectoral development assistance programmes, as
set forth in paragraph 34 of the annex to resolution
32/197;
(e) To help in the implementation at the country
level of the objective stated in paragraph 32 of the
annex to resolution 32/197, namely the achievement of
maximum uniformity in administrative, financial, procurement and other procedures;
7. Decides that the guidelines set forth in paragraph
6 above do not affect relations between Governments
and individual organizations of the United Nations system or the direct lines of authority and communication
between the representatives of those organizations at the
country level and their own executive heads;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the designation of resident co-ordinators, with the consent of the Governments concerned, taking fully into
account the provisions of paragraphs 3 to 7 above, and
in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations, and to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1980 on the implementation of paragraph 34 of
the annex to resolution 32/ 197;
9. Decides, in the context of progress made in the
implementation of section V of the annex to resolution
32/ 197, to give consideration to the establishment of a
single governing body responsible for the management
and control, at the intergovernmental level, of United
Nations operational activities for development, which
would replace the existing governing bodies as envisaged
in paragraph 35 of the annex to resolution 32/197, and
requests the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1980 to formulate recommendations
to this end and submit them to the General Assembly at
its thirty-fifth session.
I 09th plenary meeting
19 December I 979
