United Nations

S/PV.6300

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6300th meeting
Thursday, 22 April 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Puente
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507)
Letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/165)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-32351 (E)

*1032351*

S/PV.6300

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/507)
Letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/165)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Czech
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Jordan, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Malta, Namibia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine, Uruguay
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/165, containing a letter dated
1 April 2010 from the Permanent Representative of
Japan addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper for this debate.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all

2

speakers, Council and non-Council members, to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously and to allow the many delegations to
speak within the allocated time. Delegations with
lengthy statements are requested to deliver a condensed
version and to circulate the full text.
I shall now give the floor to the Council
members.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the Security Council’s working methods. This is an
issue of great importance to the entire United Nations
membership, and regular exchanges in such settings are
extremely helpful in understanding and addressing
mutual concerns and expectations.
Indeed, the Security Council is the principal
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security and, as such, not only what it does,
but also how it does it are matters of legitimate interest
to the entire international community. In that regard,
although there is broad recognition of the seriousness
and productivity of the Council, criticism of its
working methods and, in particular, of the way in
which it interacts with the outside world is abundant.
The debate on the matter revolves mainly around
a number of shortcomings that are seen to undermine
the work of the Council. Indeed, there have been
repeated arguments about the deficit of democracy,
legitimacy,
legality,
accountability
and
representativeness in the Council. I am not arguing
about whether these are right or wrong, but I believe
that we need to be aware of these perceptions if we are
to address them properly. After all, legitimacy and
credibility are products of performance and develop in
line with the fulfilment of expectations.
Of course, given the special nature of the
Security Council, one has to be aware of the inherent
limitations of what can be achieved through an
exercise focused only on working methods in the
absence of a wider reform initiative. In fact, all
principal organs of the United Nations, including the
General Assembly, must go through a reform process to
ensure the coherence and integrity of the Organization.
However, this does not mean that improvements
in working methods are either impossible or ineffective
without reforming the Council. On the contrary, many

10-32351

S/PV.6300

of these negative perceptions have been somewhat
alleviated by small but effective measures taken over
the years regarding the Council’s working methods.
The presidential note in document S/2006/507,
prepared under Japan’s presidency in 2006, is an
excellent example of what could be done through such
initiatives. Furthermore, it would be artificial and
distorting to see the Council through the lens of
permanent-versus-elected members, as they all bear
collective responsibility for international peace and
security. The Council belongs to us all — not only to
the 15 but to the entire United Nations membership.
Hence, there is a collective responsibility to make it
work better.
Therefore, it would be wiser for us today to
approach this issue in a practical rather than a
philosophical manner. We need to be realistic and to
focus on what is feasible as opposed to what is ideal.
We must act with common sense and with a view to
finding the right balance between effectiveness,
transparency and credibility. In this regard, the full and
effective implementation of the agreed measures in
S/2006/507 and subsequent notes is certainly what is
needed most. Of course, we should also continue trying
to further improve and expand on document
S/2006/507 in light of the evolving practices of the
Council and the specific needs of international
relations, and taking into account the views of
non-members. The ongoing process in the Working
Group on Procedures presents an important opportunity
in this direction, and we very much welcome Japan’s
leadership in this regard. Given the excellent working
relationship currently prevailing in the Council, I have
full confidence that a satisfactory outcome will be
achieved to that process.
The Council’s working methods, I believe, can be
taken up in two distinct but related categories. One is
related to the Council’s internal working culture and
the other pertains to its relationship with interlocutors
outside the Council. Today, in view of the time
constraints and public nature of this debate, I will
focus on the latter aspect and try to offer some
practical ideas and suggestions, many of which are in
fact already cited in document S/2006/507.
The primary aim in addressing the Council’s
relations with non-members should be to increase the
transparency of its work, to make it more interactive
with partners, and to ensure that it is better informed
on issues it is dealing with. Any success in this

10-32351

direction will make the Council more effective and its
decisions more implementable. To that end, we should
fist continue trying to have more open formal meetings
as opposed to closed consultations. The statistics show
that this is indeed possible without having any negative
effect on the work of the Council. On the contrary, it
makes the Council more accessible and credible.
We should also try to have a closer working
relationship with the troop- and police-contributing
countries, especially with respect to the missions in
which they participate. There are many ways of doing
this, but more frequent and substantive meetings with
them come at the top of the list. We are already making
some strides in this direction in the context of the
peacekeeping reform we embarked upon last year, but
there is room for more progress. In this regard, we can
also consider sharing the reports and draft resolutions
concerning their missions with the troop-contributing
countries, simultaneously with the Council members,
and seek their views and inputs in a timely manner.
Likewise, organizing informal, interactive
dialogue meetings with countries that the Council deals
with as part of its agenda can also be a step in the right
direction. Those “15+n” meetings will give us the
opportunity to listen to their side of the story and
receive first-hand information as to the situation on the
ground. Such exchanges need not always be at the
ambassadorial level, and we can consider also holding
them among the experts or coordinators.
Another valuable idea that I understand is
repeated almost every time we have this discussion is
the utility of having regular meetings with the
Presidents of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. In
addition to the Presidents of the Council meeting with
them every month, which has been partly implemented,
we might also consider inviting them to our working
luncheons with the Secretary-General.
Of course, I would be remiss if I did not mention
the need for and benefit of regular consultations with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, which can complement the work of the
Council and create a synergy of efforts. Given the
overlapping agendas and common objectives, that point
needs no further explanation but full implementation.
The same is valid for the Arria Formula meetings,
whereby we have the opportunity to listen to
non-member stakeholders and representatives of

3

S/PV.6300

non-governmental organizations, who often provide
clear, uncensored and eye-opening assessments of the
questions we grapple with in the Council. The informal
character of these meetings is in itself an advantage
that needs to be tapped more often.
In the same vein, the Security Council’s missions
could and should be used more effectively in
communicating our messages, contacting our
interlocutors on the ground and getting a better firsthand assessment of the situation. The terms of
reference and objectives of these missions should thus
be prepared very carefully so as to better serve our
larger purposes.
Finally, the Presidents of the Council should be
given a more systematic role in conveying the gist of
our closed consultations to non-members and the
media. The practice of issuing oral remarks after
consultations is thus very useful, but we should avoid
micromanaging the exercise and allow more leeway to
the Presidents in informing the interested parties about
the Council’s deliberations.
Before concluding, I would like to touch very
briefly upon another issue that is somewhat pertinent to
our internal working culture, but is also of critical
importance to the legitimacy and credibility of the
Council’s decisions. It concerns how we prepare and
negotiate the Council’s documents, be they resolutions
or press and presidential statements. Indeed, the
tendency in the Council is to hold advance
consultations on many of those documents among a
limited number of countries, such as groups of friends,
before sharing them with the rest of the Council
members.
One might argue in favour of the practical utility
of having directly interested countries agree on the
basic parameters of documents in a way that facilitates
consensus-building. However, that should by no means
limit the full involvement of all Council members in
the work of the Council. Otherwise, the ownership and
thus the implementability of the Council’s decisions
would be weakened. Moreover, the fact that the
Council often acts as a quasi-judicial body whose
decisions, such as sanctions, affect international law as
well, involving every member fully in decision-shaping
and decision-making processes, is of even further
significance in that respect.
I have spoken at length. I know that there are
many more speakers on the list, so let me stop here and

4

congratulate you once again, Sir, not only for this
particular meeting, but for Japan’s continued leadership
in improving the working methods of the Council. I am
confident that today’s meeting and our efforts within
the Council will empower the Council and make it a
more effective, transparent and coherent body — a goal
commonly shared by the United Nations membership.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The drafting by Security Council members in
2006 of recommendations on the Council’s working
methods, which were incorporated into the relevant
note of the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/507), was very significant for strengthening
the principles of transparency and effectiveness in the
work of the Security Council.
In recent years, Security Council members have
made significant progress in these areas through
constructive dialogue with interested Member States
that are non-members of the Council. The number of
open meetings of the Council has increased. The
Council President has adopted the systematic practice
of holding briefings for Member States, including on
the Council’s programme of work.
The subsidiary bodies of the Council present
regular reports on their work. The quality of the
Council’s annual reports has improved. Comprehensive
and regularly updated information on the work of the
Council is posted on its website. Items on the Security
Council’s agenda are added and removed in an orderly
manner. Opportunities for contact between the Security
Council and interested States have increased, including
as part of the Arria Formula meetings and the so-called
informal interactive dialogues.
The Security Council is actively cooperating with
countries contributing troops and police to United
Nations peacekeeping operations through the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
its
country
configurations. An additional impulse was given to
dialogue with regional organizations with a view to
fully harnessing the potential of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. This is by no means a full list
of the real achievements in improving the working
methods of the Security Council.
We believe that Member States will take
reciprocal steps and demonstrate even greater interest
in cooperating with the Security Council. In practice,
despite the increased number of open meetings of the
Council and briefings by the President of the Security

10-32351

S/PV.6300

Council, low Member attendance persists. It is
important for countries that contribute troops to United
Nations peacekeeping operations to participate more
actively in the discussions at their regular meetings
with the Council and to offer specific assessments and
opinions for Council members could use in their work.
In other words, we must note that, to date,
opportunities that are currently available have not been
fully exploited by non-members.
Article 30 of the Charter defines the prerogative
of the Security Council to establish its own rules of
procedure. In implementation of that role, it is striving
methodically in its Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions to
improve its working methods. Russia notes the
professional leadership of the Group by its current
Chair, the Permanent Representative of Japan,
Mr. Takasu.
Academic and unrealistic approaches in this area
could have a negative impact on the productivity of the
Security Council’s work. It is important to maintain a
balance between openness in the work of the Security
Council, on the one hand, and ensuring the
effectiveness,
functionality
and
appropriate
confidentiality of its work, on the other. Security
Council members are prepared to further heed the good
advice on improving its working methods. We trust that
today’s meeting will facilitate the gathering of more
information on the opinions and preferences of
non-members of the Council. However, decisions in
this area will be taken only by members of the Council
in
the
context
of
their
Charter-mandated
responsibilities.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate
on the implementation of the measures set out in the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507 on
the working methods of the Security Council. My
delegation recognizes the efforts made by Japan as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions to
continue to improve the transparency and efficiency of
the Council’s work and its interaction with the wider
United Nations membership.
We feel that the Security Council’s reflections on
its working methods are part of a more wide-ranging
exercise of interest to United Nations Members
regarding comprehensive reform of the Council. As an

10-32351

urgent matter, such reform must be adapted to the new
global balances and challenges. As an elected member
of the Security Council, Mexico shares these
objectives. Our actions in the Security Council have
been and will continue to be guided by the principles
of transparency, democratization and accountability.
Today’s debate is particularly important in
pursuing the discussion that began in 2006 with the
adoption of presidential note S/2006/507, which has
led to significant improvements in the Council’s
working methods. Nonetheless, although much remains
to be done, it is essential that the Informal Working
Group on Documentation continue to discuss and
analyse in-depth the implementation of the
recommendations in document S/2006/507, and define
the updating necessary to continuing to improve the
Council’s working methods. Mexico hopes that this
will lead to the adoption in the coming months of a
comprehensive presidential note. To achieve that goal
and to continue to strengthen the Council’s
transparency, the participation of all States Members of
the Organization in this discussion is necessary.
Since the adoption of presidential note
S/2006/507, the Council has held a greater number of
open meetings and open debates, not only on matters
relating to the Council’s agenda, but also on crosscutting themes that impact on peacekeeping and
international security. Similarly, since 2008 it has
improved the content of its annual report to the General
Assembly in response to a long-standing demand by
the membership. There is also greater interaction
between police- and troop-contributing countries and
the Council.
Despite these improvements, not all of the
recommendations in document S/2006/507 have been
implemented and new concerns have arisen that must
be taken into account by the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
On transparency, my delegation considers it
necessary to continue to increase the number of open
meetings of the Council and to ensure that informal
consultations are convened only when strictly
necessary, thus promoting greater interaction among
Council members. It is important to question the
relevance of holding informal consultations to hear
statements and briefings that could be given in open
meetings, although they provide additional information
for the Council’s internal work. It is also necessary to

5

S/PV.6300

continue to enhance the internal transparency of the
Council. At present, most decisions are taken by
consensus, which ensures greater political impact for
Security Council decisions. Such unity will be
preserved only if we maintain internal transparency.
Regarding effectiveness, the Council must
continue to explore and, if possible, codify the various
meeting formats that allow it to address all threats to
international peace and security and to interact with all
States and actors involved in a conflict, including civil
society. Recent informal interactive dialogues on Chad
and Sri Lanka, as well as the increased number of Arria
Formula meetings, are successful demonstrations of the
Council’s
new
flexibility
in
executing
its
responsibilities.
On the issue of inclusiveness, the practice
whereby new Presidents of the Security Council submit
the monthly agenda to Member States and the media
must be perpetuated. However, this practice should be
expanded and systematized in order to strengthen the
consistency of discussions with the Organization’s
wider membership. An additional resource that has
proved useful in that area is the regular informational
briefings of Security Council members by the
respective regional groups. As an elected member of
the Security Council, my delegation has participated
actively in these informational meetings with the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
I conclude by referring to a matter of great
importance. As stated in Article 24 of the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council acts on behalf of
Member States in maintaining international peace and
security. To protect this essential principle, the Security
Council must continue to fine-tune its working
methods in order to ensure that its decisions are
effectively implemented by all Member States, as
provided by Article 25 of the Charter, and ultimately to
enhance its credibility.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. I also take this opportunity
to thank the Member States for their care and support
for the work of the Security Council.
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the solemn responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. In today’s
complex state of international affairs, fraught with
security challenges of all kinds and with expectations

6

high on the part of the Member States, the Security
Council finds itself facing colossal tasks.
In recent years, the Council has striven to meet its
responsibilities and made active efforts to improve its
working methods and enhance the transparency of its
work. The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions has carried out fruitful
work, and the President’s note contained in document
S/2006/507 marks an important step towards further
improvement of the rules and procedures of the
Security Council. Efforts in this regard have also
benefited from constructive views and proposals put
forward by Member States. We should build on the
results achieved so far, base our actions on reality, and
continue to tap potentials for the improvement of the
Council’s working methods so as to make its work
more equitable, efficient and transparent.
I believe that we should focus our efforts on the
following aspects. First, we should widely seek the
views of non-members of the Council and strengthen
communication and interaction with them. Useful
practices in this regard include monthly briefings by
the presidency of the Security Council to non-members
of the Council and dialogues with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs). We hope that the Council fully hears
the views and proposals of the Member States. We also
hope that the latter will make the best use of such
occasions as open meetings and meetings with TCCs to
air their views so that the Council can be informed of
their valuable opinions.
Secondly, we should seek practical results in the
enhancement of transparency. Efforts to enhance
transparency should stress the participation of Member
States and the practical results achieved, instead of
becoming a matter of formality. Open meetings are
more transparent and enjoy the broader participation of
Member States. As such, they offer an important
platform for non-members of the Council to participate
in the work of the Council. We hope that open
meetings will be more results-oriented so that
non-members of the Council are given an opportunity
to present their views and proposals. The themes of
open meetings should have a more narrow focus and
should not be too general.
Thirdly, we should focus our energy on
addressing major and urgent threats to international
peace and security. We support the annual review by
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and

10-32351

S/PV.6300

Other Procedural Questions of items on the Security
Council’s agenda in order to keep the agenda current,
save resources and increase efficiency. Recent years
have seen an excessive increase in thematic items,
some of which are beyond the Council’s sphere of
competence. This trend should be a matter of concern
to Member States.
Fourthly, we should further improve the
timeliness and quality of Council documents. The
surge in quantity of documents adopted by the Security
Council in recent years demonstrates the increase in
the Council’s workload, but also serves as a reminder
that greater attention should be paid to the quality of
documents and their practical implementation. Reports
of the Secretary-General should strive to be more
targeted and timely so as to become living documents
that genuinely reflect problems and present
recommendations. Due attention should be given to
making relevant documents available in all six official
languages in a timely manner, which is an important
step in enhancing the transparency and openness of the
Security Council.
Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is a long-term task that cannot be
accomplished all at once. We are willing to work with
others in making unremitting efforts in this regard. We
are convinced that, with the continuous improvement
of its working methods and incessant innovation of its
practice, the Security Council will be better able to
fulfil the mission entrusted to it by the States Members
of the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank the Japanese presidency for convening today’s
open debate. We are grateful to Japan for its
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group of the
Council on this topic. We also wish to say a special
word of thanks to the group of five small States for
their important contributions to the subject we are
discussing today.
We believe that any effort to improve the working
methods of the Council must focus on two goals:
enhancing transparency and strengthening interaction
between the Council and the United Nations
membership at large. The Council must also aim at
maximum transparency vis-à-vis the broader public, in
particular through its cooperation with the media.

increased the number of its open debates and briefings.
The consultation process which the Council has
established with the troop- and police-contributing
countries before deciding on the mandate of a mission
or its renewal is another step in the right direction. In
some instances, so-called informal interactive
dialogues have provided the Security Council and
interested countries with a useful framework for a
direct informal exchange on issues of concern to the
Council. This is a path that we should explore further.
I should also like to commend the initiative of
Uganda to organize an informal meeting with Member
States on the occasion of the presentation of the most
recent annual report of the Council to the General
Assembly. We hope that this practice will be continued.
At the same time, there are other areas in which
we still see substantial potential for improving the
Council’s working methods. One example is the
cooperation between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). It has been our experience that
chairpersons of country-specific configurations of the
PBC contribute in a very useful manner to the public
meetings of the Council on the country situations they
deal with. At the same time, it has also been very
helpful to listen to their additional comments during
subsequent Council consultations, but so far, that has
of course been possible only when the chairperson in
question also happens to represent a Council member.
We believe that it would be beneficial for the Council
to have the chairs of all country-specific configurations
of the PBC — I repeat, all country-specific
configurations of the PBC — participate in the relevant
consultations of the Council independently of whether
they represent Council members or not.
One important way to improve interaction
between the Council and whole groups of the
membership is an intensified cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. The Security Council
debated this subject under the presidency of China (see
S/PV.6257) and agreed that an increasing interaction of
this kind contributes to the coherent and effective
implementation of the Council’s resolutions. That is
certainly true for cooperation between the Council and
the European Union, which has a strong interest in
contributing to the work of the Council in many areas
of mutual concern, and even more so since the entry
into force of the Lisbon Treaty.

In recent years, we have seen some improvement
in the realization of these aims. The Council has

10-32351

7

S/PV.6300

Austria has made a special effort to contribute
towards increased transparency and interaction in the
subsidiary Council bodies that it has honour to chair. In
the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, Austria is maintaining close dialogue with
the specially affected countries and the host countries
of the Tribunals. We also organized an Arria Formula
meeting on residual issues of the Tribunals, open to all
United Nations Member States. We introduced regular
biannual briefings, we issued an annual summary of
the activities of the Group and, for the first time ever, a
chapter on the Working Group was included in the
latest annual report of the Security Council (A/64/2).
Furthermore, I would like to highlight some
developments in the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, which Austria also chairs.
Resolution 1904 (2009) of December 2009
substantially improves the procedures under the 1267
sanctions regime in terms of due process. For the first
time ever, individuals and entities seeking de-listing
will have the chance to present their cases to an
independent and impartial ombudsperson to be
appointed by the Secretary-General. It also directs the
ombudsperson to forward to petitioners all information
about the negative decision provided by the
Committee, including explanatory comments. Security
Council resolution 1904 (2009) represents a significant
step forward in improving the fairness and
transparency of the 1267 sanctions regime, thus
enhancing both its effectiveness and its legitimacy.
This is an area which has been discussed quite often in
recent debates on today’s subject. Still, much depends
on the practical implementation of that resolution,
especially on the appointment of an eminent
ombudsperson in the near future.
Adding to something my Turkish colleague said,
let me say that transparency and interaction are
constant challenges in the relations not only between
the Council and the wider membership but at times
also within the Council itself. With regard to some
issues on the agenda of the Council, its decisions are
prepared within various special formats. We are well
aware of the political and practical reasons for which
these formats have developed, but experience also
shows how important inclusiveness and transparency
can be for achieving and preserving the unity of the
Council.

8

The Council’s working methods have developed
over the years, yet they will remain a work in progress.
As the work of the Security Council adapts to changed
circumstances, so should the Council’s working
methods. Involvement of the wider membership will
remain key in order to serve the interests of the entire
world Organization.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate today.
Japan has made an important contribution over recent
years to the development of Security Council working
methods, including through your leadership on the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507,
which has helpfully codified and clarified our working
practices. Our guiding principle should be
effectiveness, and I would like to highlight seven
points, picking up the themes of your concept paper for
this debate (S/2010/165).
First, we welcome the positive trends identified
in your paper towards greater transparency of Council
working methods. A particular responsibility falls on
the presidency each month to keep other Member
States informed of the Council’s work. We have made
such briefings a priority during our recent presidencies
and encourage others to make this a consistent practice.
Second, we need to make sure that the current
arrangements for meetings of the Council in these new
temporary premises do not impede interaction between
Council members and other Member States.
Third, we need to balance transparency with
effectiveness. The Security Council needs to be able to
discuss some sensitive matters out of the public eye.
But when we do meet in private the onus is on us as
Council members to make sure that we have a
genuinely interactive discussion. On occasion, our
private consultations differ little from formal meetings
in the Chamber. I hope that we can make a collective
effort to make the informal consultations a forum for
real debate. The Secretariat should help by keeping its
briefings short and operationally focused.
Fourth, broadening the range of views available
to the Security Council can often help its effectiveness.
The United Kingdom and France have led efforts to
improve the Council’s dialogue with troop- and policecontributing countries. Under our presidency in August
last year, the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/24) which reaffirmed the Council’s
intention to further strengthen its cooperation with

10-32351

S/PV.6300

those countries and the need to build on this progress.
We commend the current presidency for providing
summaries of troop-contributing country meetings at
the start of Council discussions. But it is not just the
troop-contributing countries. As the Permanent
Representative of Austria has said, we should also seek
more focused advice from the Peacebuilding
Commission as we discuss peacekeeping mandates.
Fifth, we welcome the recent innovation of
informal interactive dialogues, which has widened the
scope for interaction with non-members. This has
enabled the Council to discuss sensitive issues in a
flexible format, and we encourage further use of such
informal formats for Council meetings.
Sixth, Security Council missions can be an
effective tool for the Council to understand and
influence high-priority issues. We now need to
consider how to maximize their operational
effectiveness. The Council must be clear from the
outset on its objectives and must design the format of
the mission accordingly, including, where appropriate,
by sending missions composed of a limited number of
Council members.
Seventh, the Council should pay greater attention
to conflict prevention. There should be a greater
openness to discussions in the Council on situations of
emerging conflict, so that we can determine an
effective preventive response. We would like to see
more frequent briefings by the Secretariat, on an ad
hoc basis, on situations of emerging concern. The
Secretary-General and his senior officials should be
invited to brief the Security Council as a matter of
routine when they return from visits to countries on the
Council’s agenda or other countries of concern. We
would also support regular briefings from the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.
In conclusion, note S/2006/507 covers a lot of
ground, and today the Council will hear many
proposals for how it might be improved. It is right that
the Council’s procedures as a whole should be
reviewed, but we would encourage you, Mr. President,
to identify for agreement by the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions a short list of priority areas for
implementation, which it would be the responsibility of
future presidencies to take forward. We look forward to
participating actively in that ongoing debate.

10-32351

Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
earnest efforts and your initiative to discuss and assess
the implementation of the measures set out in the note
by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507)
on the Council’s working methods, with a view to
enhancing transparency and interaction between the
Security Council and non-member States, to enhance
the effectiveness of the Council’s work and to broaden
the legitimacy of its resolutions.
Developing the Council’s working methods is an
integral part of the Security Council reform for which
we have all been calling. Yet the international realities
have changed and the Security Council’s tasks have
evolved, especially with the increase in peacekeeping
forces and political missions and the establishment of
sanctions committees. Still, the Council, through its
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, has taken a number of positive
steps in this respect, and we are confident,
Mr. President, that your chairmanship of the Working
Group will enable us to achieve further progress in the
full implementation of the measures set out in
presidential note S/2006/507.
Lebanon welcomes the steps taken by the
Security Council and its presidency to enhance
transparency, as that is the window through which
non-member States can be informed about the work of
the Council and its subsidiary bodies. With a view to
further enhancing the transparency to which we aspire,
Lebanon proposes an increase in the number of open
meetings as opposed to closed meetings, in line with
rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure, and, as
appropriate, an increase in the number of Arria
Formula meetings and informal interactive sessions, so
as to enhance open-door diplomacy and allow
non-member States to have their say as well. Such
practices help increase interaction between the Security
Council and the States that entrust it to act on their
behalf to maintain international peace and security
under Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Nonetheless, if open meetings are to proceed in a more
effective manner, we believe that it would be useful for
statements to be shorter and repetitive formalities less
frequent so as to focus more on the concrete results
that must be reached.
Furthermore, Lebanon welcomes the current
approach to involving regional organizations and other
groups in open meetings so as to benefit from their

9

S/PV.6300

experiences and to listen to their presentations, as was
the case during the presidency of China early this year
when we discussed the theme of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security (see S/PV.6257).
Lebanon also calls for increased interaction
between the Security Council and the heads of other
United Nations bodies, such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and Peacebuilding
Commission. In addition, Lebanon believes that States
involved in conflicts under consideration by the
Council should attend closed consultations, because it
is essential to hear their views by virtue of their direct
involvement with said conflicts.
On the other hand, Lebanon welcomes the
coordinating meetings that take place between the
Council and troop-contributing countries and calls for
their expansion to include host States as well. Lebanon
also supports the idea of hearing briefings by the
Secretary-General’s representatives in open plenary
meeting and not in closed, except in exceptional
circumstances.
As for the Security Council’s subsidiary organs,
notwithstanding the steps proposed in the President’s
Note contained in document S/2006/507, they remain
insufficient. Lebanon therefore proposes that the
agendas of the Security Council’s subsidiary organs be
published and circulated prior to their meetings,
including on the website of each body, in order to
inform States of their work. We also call for increasing
the number of meetings between the heads of the
subsidiary
organs,
especially
the
Sanctions
Committees, and non-members of the Security Council
to inform them on a regular basis of the details of the
meetings held and resolutions adopted, as this would
increase transparency and dialogue.
Lebanon joins in the numerous appeals for the
definitive adoption of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council after more than 60
years of considering them to be provisional. We also
stress the need to involve all Council members in
preparing draft resolutions and presidential statements.
When we speak of effectiveness, we have to
consider the Security Council resolutions that have not
yet been implemented and to find a mechanism to
secure their implementation. I will offer the ArabIsraeli conflict as an example because it is the oldest

10

item on the agenda of the Security Council. Dozens of
resolutions have been adopted in this respect, but the
occupation continues and the settlements are
unchanged. That is why we must stop the rhetoric and
move towards implementation.
In conclusion, Lebanon calls for convening an
open meeting at least once a year to consider the
working methods of the Security Council, which are
not a goal in themselves but a means towards further
transparency, effectiveness and interaction. Lebanon is
aware that agreeing the most suitable rules for the
working methods of the Council is related not only to
the proposed ideas, but also to the political will of
States.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this very important meeting and for
providing a valuable concept paper to facilitate our
discussions this morning.
The working methods of any organization
constitute a very critical ingredient of its performance
and overall success. We therefore welcome this debate
as a practical step to reinforce not only the efficiency
and transparency of the Council, but also its interaction
and dialogue with non-members of the Council.
I would like to elaborate on three elements that
are crucial to the improvement of the Security
Council’s working methods. The first element is
transparency. We believe that transparency in the work
of the Council will not only promote accountability,
but will also earn the Council the confidence of the
broader United Nations membership and the global
public. In accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter, more formal meetings, such as today’s debate,
and access to information will allow for the proper
evaluation of the effectiveness and inadequacies of the
Council.
The monthly briefing to non-members of the
Council on the programme of work, the monthly
assessment of the Council’s presidency, and greater
coverage of the activities of the various subsidiary
bodies of the Council are very commendable. Through
consultations and enhanced content, more useful
information is now being provided to non-members of
the Council in the annual reports. We believe that both
the analytical and the narrative quality of the work can
be further enhanced with information provided in the
monthly assessment of the presidency. The traditional

10-32351

S/PV.6300

practice of subjecting the reports to an assessment by
members of the Council is also encouraged.
Presidential statements constitute valuable means
of providing information to non-members of the
Council on the decisions of the Council. To improve
their usefulness, they need to be more concrete and
specific in terms of content. We also believe that the
presidents of the Council should return to flexibility in
addressing the media, while lead countries should be
encouraged to provide more statements as appropriate.
The value of informal consultations should be
enhanced through the provision of information to nonmembers of the Council on the outcomes of
discussions as appropriate. The Council may also use
other variants of this method, such as informal
interactive discussions, in promoting inclusiveness in
its work.
On interaction and dialogue with non-members of
the Council, we welcome efforts made to increase
interaction with the broader United Nations
membership, troop- and police-contributing countries
and regional organizations. We support the practice of
holding informal consultations with General Assembly
members, as introduced by Viet Nam in 2008 and
sustained by Uganda in 2009, before the adoption of
the annual report. Mindful of the value of local
perspectives and specialized knowledge in guiding the
decisions of the Council, we feel that it is necessary to
maintain and improve the practice of inviting
concerned countries and parties to deliberations on
missions, mandates and other issues on the Council’s
agenda.
In terms of efficiency, Security Council field
missions are valuable in enhancing the efficiency of
the Council and in providing the right perspectives on
local realities. Through dialogue with various actors at
the national and regional levels, Council members
become aware of the impact of their decisions. Our
view is that the work of the Council would be greatly
improved and enhanced by more visits and longer
engagements with actors in Africa, considering the
heavy presence of African issues on the agenda of the
Security Council.
The timely circulation of the reports of the
Secretary-General to Council members and to troopcontributing countries is crucial to the efficient work of
the Council. The implementation of this requirement
has been hindered by the cumbersome process of

10-32351

producing reports. The Council may need to consider
reviewing the time frames required for the production
of these reports on a case-by-case basis, and allocating
more time for the submission of the reports.
At the World Summit in 2005, our leaders
envisaged a reformed Council that would be broadly
representative, democratic, efficient and indeed
transparent — a Council would enjoy enhanced
effectiveness and legitimacy in the implementation of
its own decisions. Fortunately, the Council’s working
methods and procedures contain the essential tools for
achieving these ideals. What is needed now, and
urgently, is to overcome the challenges of inflexibility
and the lack of will to implement note S/2006/507 and
the subsequent notes of 2007 and 2008.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States appreciates the commitment of Japan to
improving the working methods of the Security
Council and your initiative, Mr. President, in
convening this open debate. We should like to
recognize your outstanding work, Sir, as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and the excellent management of
these issues by your Mission.
The Council has the solemn responsibility to take
the primary role in preserving international peace and
security on behalf of the entire membership of the
United Nations. It is important that, in carrying out this
role, our work be as effective, efficient and transparent
as possible. Article 30 of the Charter of the United
Nations mandates the Council to adopt its own rules of
procedure. In doing so, the Council understands the
importance of making sure that other Member States
who are our partners in the maintenance of
international peace and security are informed of and
appropriately involved in the work of the Council.
The present debate focuses on the implementation
of the annex to the presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507. That note was the result of
intensive work in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues and was a
significant step forward. The Security Council
undertook a number of measures to improve the
transparency of its work. All Council members have
made significant contributions to this effort.
With respect to transparency, for example, the
Council established a new practice whereby the new
Council Presidents brief non-members of the Council

11

S/PV.6300

shortly after the adoption of the programme of work
each month. The annual report of the Security Council
includes a high level of detail that expands the
information available to the general membership and
provides a snapshot of the problems faced by the
Council in its work and how these problems have been
addressed.
The Council has also increased its interaction and
dialogue with non-Council members in a variety of
ways, including through informal discussions with
interested parties to seek their views. Open Security
Council meetings, such as the one we are in today,
provide the opportunity for general Members to
participate, and we are pleased that about 20 per cent
of the membership is doing so today.
Another example was the open debate the
Security Council organized on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) last fall (see S/PV.6191). The
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) purposely developed an open and transparent
three-day event for all United Nations Member States,
relevant non-governmental organizations and civil
society to present findings on the implementation of
the resolution. The event was well attended and
included a civil society plenary session side event
organized by the Stanley Foundation. We again
encourage as many Members as possible to attend open
meetings, which are the Council’s preferred method of
meeting whenever possible.
The subsidiary bodies of the Council have also
increased their number of open meetings. The Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Permanent
Representative of Turkey, Ambassador Apakan, in
conjunction with Counter-Terrorism Executive Director
Mike Smith, has already held two open meetings this
year, the first on the challenge of effective judicial
cooperation and the second on maritime security and
terrorist acts committed at sea.
United Nations peacekeeping is one of the most
important tools the Security Council has at its disposal,
and we recognize the importance of close cooperation
with troop- and police-contributing countries in this
effort. In line with the New Horizon initiative of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Security
Council has made a concerted effort to engage troopand police-contributors in earlier and more meaningful
consultation at least a week in advance of Security
Council consultations on mandates. The Security

12

Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
has also sought to improve the mechanisms for
cooperation with troop- and police-contributing
countries and to engage in regular dialogue about how
to fine tune that cooperation.
Over the course of the past year, the Council has
engaged Member States and other interested
stakeholders in a series of open debates covering a
range of issues on its peacekeeping agenda, including
cooperation with troop- and police-contributing
countries, peacekeeping reform, the relationship
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping, mediation,
and cooperation with regional organizations so that we
can together ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
continues to be an effective means to save lives, end
conflict and rebuild shattered societies.
Making the work of the Council more efficient
requires constant effort. In this regard, we all face the
challenge of balancing the substance with the length of
each of our statements so that we can convey our
message as succinctly and clearly as possible. All of
us, whether we are Council members or not, should
strive to do better on this score so that meetings can be
conducted in a manner that allows as many Member
States to speak as possible, with as many other States
present to hear them.
Today’s debate offers an opportunity for the
Council to hear first hand whether the practical
applications of the innovations listed in presidential
note S/2006/507 have helped Member States to follow
the work of the Council. We intend to listen carefully
to constructive comments in order to assess the
effectiveness of practices and measures taken by the
Council to enhance transparency, dialogue and
efficiency. This information will inform the future
efforts of the Council’s Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Japan for having organized this open
debate on the implementation of the presidential note
of July 2006, contained in document S/2006/507. This
debate provides the opportunity to assess the status of
our ongoing efforts to improve the working methods of
the Council and to allow non-members to share their
observations and proposals.
We view the working methods as a tool to enable
the Council to act with greater effectiveness. They
must provide for the maintenance of a relationship of

10-32351

S/PV.6300

transparency and interaction with the entire
membership of the United Nations at the various stages
of the decision-making process. The credibility and
effective authority of Council decisions are linked to
that process.
Expanding the openness of the Council and
strengthening its transparency and its interaction with
the rest of the United Nations are also means of
pursuing the goal of effectiveness. Effectiveness is by
no means opposed to openness; quite the contrary. The
Council acts in the name of all Members of our
Organization. It therefore cannot act effectively unless
it respects two conditions. It must both take into
account the concerns of Member States and give an
account of its work to them. That is possible only
through openness and transparency.
Since our most recent open debate on working
methods in August 2008 (see S/PV.5968), we have
made tangible progress that has contributed to the
transparency of Council decisions in a number of areas
that are important to all the Members of the United
Nations. First of all, cooperation in the crucial area of
peacekeeping has been improved. In particular, it has
been possible to establish more substantial dialogue
between troop-contributing countries and the Council
in the context of the Franco-British initiative on
improving the planning and monitoring of
peacekeeping operations, launched in January 2009. I
underscore the interest that has been shown in
organizing working meetings with troop- and policecontributing countries prior to Council consultations.
That interstice allows for the effective participation of
military advisors and specialists in police-related and
political issues from the States providing contingents,
and it improves background discussions. We must
continue in this direction.
Secondly, dialogue with regional organizations
has evolved, as evidenced by the Council’s debate
organized on this topic under the Chinese presidency in
January 2010 (see S/PV.6257).
Finally, the Council is organizing an increasing
number of open debates on a broad range of subjects in
order to benefit from the opinions of experts,
practitioners and the entire United Nations system.
This allows it ultimately to better address the new
challenges of peacekeeping and international security,
improve its consideration of these issues, and take new
measures as a result. The excellent quality of the texts

10-32351

recently adopted by the Council on threats related to
terrorism, drug-trafficking, organized crime and
corruption are proof of that.
In conclusion, I commend Japan’s excellent work
in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
My delegation contributes with interest to the current
evaluation of document S/2006/507 and is prepared to
learn new things from it on the basis of experience and
practice.
We believe that the following principles must
continue to guide our thinking. First, the Security
Council’s work must be appropriately distributed
between public meetings and private consultations in
order to facilitate the resolution of issues under
consideration. In this regard, the members of the
Council must bear in mind that they have considerable
leeway in terms of organizing their meetings.
Secondly, the Council must continue to use that
flexibility to innovate by establishing new meeting
formats that are better adapted to the issues addressed
and more regular and flexible. My delegation is thus in
favour of establishing new formats that are more
flexible at each phase of the Council’s decision-making
and negotiation process, without believing it necessary
to codify them. The members of the Council must
make the most of the flexibility that they have in their
working methods and thus continue to engage in their
considerations in a dynamic manner.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the efforts of
the Security Council to improve its working methods,
which have been particularly intensified in recent
years. The first open debate in 1994 had historical
significance and launched a true evolution, resulting in
the adoption of the presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507. The measures contained in the
note and their implementation reaffirm the principles
of efficiency, transparency, interaction and dialogue
with non-members, which are recognized not only by
States members of the Security Council itself, but also
by the broader United Nations membership. In today’s
debate, together with non-member States, we have the
opportunity to exchange views and assess the
implementation of the measures set out in the annex of

13

S/PV.6300

note S/2006/507, with the aim of improving their
implementation.

important to strengthen the interactive nature of public
meetings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches high importance
to the implementation of the measures identified in
document S/2006/507, for we are confident that it
could help to promote the Security Council’s
transparency, interaction with the United Nations
membership and efficiency.

Secondly, with respect to strengthening
interactions with troop- and police-contributing
countries, regional organizations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, parties that have direct interests in an
issue, and the broader United Nations membership, we
welcome the progress and development of new
practices, including informal interactive dialogues. We
believe such interaction has the potential to enhance
the quality of the Security Council’s decisions and to
generate a sense of common ownership, strengthening
in that way the prospects for effective implementation.
Of particular significance is the interaction between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries, both
in drawing up and in implementing mandates. We also
urge the Secretariat to ensure the timely circulation of
the reports prepared by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council members, as well as to troopcontributing countries, thus contributing to the
efficiency of their work.

We are grateful to the presidency for the concept
paper (S/2010/165) on the implementation of document
S/2006/507. We would also agree with the analysis
provided in it. Indeed, the Security Council has made
progress in implementing the measures set out in
document S/2006/507 and, by doing so, has achieved
better efficiency and transparency, as well as
interaction and dialogue with non-members.
Furthermore, we share the same views when it
comes to the challenges in implementing the measures.
Some of these challenges could be addressed through
additional efforts by the Security Council, including in
the field of information-sharing, where there is room
for improvement.
The general approach of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to issues related to working methods is based on the
need to find a proper and adequate balance among
generally accepted principles or guidelines on
efficiency, transparency and interaction and dialogue
with non-members. These principles are compatible,
but in practice they very often contradict each other.
Bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security, we would like to express the position of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the following issues
related to the working methods.
First, on consultations, the Security Council
needs enough flexibility to allow it to choose the best
format for a meeting depending on the issue being
considered. While recognizing the importance of
informal consultations to the decision-making process,
we underline the need to balance informal
consultations with public meetings. It is indicative that
rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council states that “Unless it decides
otherwise, the Security Council shall meet in public”.
Therefore, in the spirit of this rule, the Security
Council should hold public meetings as often as
possible. We also believe that it is particularly

14

We welcome increased interaction with regional
and subregional organizations as important partners of
the Security Council. The Security Council should also
increase exchanges and the sharing of information with
other United Nations bodies, especially the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
Thirdly, on the way forward, the presidential note
was designed to improve the efficiency of the work of
the Security Council. We believe that, through its
practical implementation, this goal will be largely
achieved. We also believe that the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions should continue to work in order to agree on
new measures in a reasonable time frame. Furthermore,
we prefer the option of creating a new, consolidated
text that could include the measures contained in notes
S/2006/507, S/2007/784 and S/2008/847.
Finally, we are convinced that this open debate
will significantly contribute to the future work of the
Informal Working Group.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely open debate on the
implementation of the presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507. Let me join other delegations in
expressing our appreciation for Japan’s contributions to
improving the Council’s working methods. Under your
able chairmanship, the Informal Working Group on

10-32351

S/PV.6300

Documentation and Other Procedural Questions has
been looking into ways to enhance the Council’s
transparency, accountability and efficiency. Such
efforts, which my delegation actively supports, will
benefit from further interaction and dialogue with the
wider membership today.
Under Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter, Member
States confer on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and agree to carry out the decisions
of the Council in accordance with the Charter. These
two aspects — that the Council’s authority is delegated
and that its decisions bind sovereign States — explain
and justify the interest of all delegations in the working
methods of the Council.
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter also provide
indispensable parameters for the interaction between
the Security Council and Member States at large. They
establish the right of concerned parties to participate
without a vote in the deliberations of the Council on
matters affecting their interests.
The Council’s constant dialogue with the wider
membership on method and substance is therefore a
political imperative. It is also beneficial to this organ,
as it helps to make its decisions more inclusive and
potentially more effective. Efforts must continue to be
made to increase meaningful access for non-members
in accordance with the Charter. This must apply to
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council as well. They
should seek the views of Member States with a
legitimate interest in their areas of work or directly
affected by their decisions, including by inviting
representatives of such members to participate in
meetings as appropriate.
Security Council consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries are another aspect of the
organ’s working methods that are especially important
to the wider membership. Significant progress has been
made in that area, but more can be done. For example,
consultations should be held as early as possible in the
negotiation of mandate renewals for peacekeeping
missions so that the views of troop- and policecontributing countries can be considered by the
Council fully and in a timely manner. Such interaction
would be made easier and more effective if
contributing countries had access to reports of the
Secretary-General and draft resolutions as early as
possible in the process.

10-32351

Closer interaction between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission should be pursued. Let me
express our support for the proposals made in that
regard by the Permanent Representative of Austria.
Credible and systematic information sharing is
key to consistent dialogue between Council members,
non-members, interested parties and regional and
subregional organizations. I would like to echo the
words of the Permanent Representative of Nigeria in
stressing the importance of more frequent dialogue
with the African Union, taking into account the
importance of such interaction to deliberations on
many issues on the Council’s agenda.
Private meetings may be needed, and often are, to
help to effectively address an issue being considered
by the Council. However, the Council should continue
to strive to hold as many public meetings as possible,
in line with the letter and the spirit of rule 48 of its
provisional rules of procedure.
Those and other relevant issues are being
currently discussed in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions as we
assess the implementation of presidential note
S/2006/507. We hope that the Council will be able to
agree on the text of a revised comprehensive
presidential note. By doing so, we would provide
Member States and the general public with a single
user-friendly updated text comprising relevant
practices relating to the working methods of the
Council.
As Brazil has said in the past, improving the
working methods of the Security Council is not
sufficient to ensure its long-term transparency,
accountability and legitimacy. For that to happen, its
composition must reflect cotemporary political
realities. The overwhelming support expressed in
December 2009 for moving the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform to a text-based
phase shows that the United Nations membership fully
understands that political need.
Brazil continues to hold the view that the Council
should be expanded in the permanent and nonpermanent categories of membership, with the
inclusion of developing countries in both. We also
believe that there is ample support for that position. We
will continue to work with like-minded delegations, in
constant dialogue with all Member States, in favour of

15

S/PV.6300

a solution that can garner the widest possible political
acceptance.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Brazil for her kind words addressed
to my country.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation duly appreciates the initiative to hold this
debate, at a time when improving the working methods
of the Security Council is increasingly necessary owing
to the challenges facing international peace and security.
Gabon welcomes the ongoing crucial role played by
your country Japan, Mr. President, to promote greater
transparency and efficiency in the Council’s work. The
concept paper that you have prepared for our
consideration (see S/2010/165) sheds light on the issue
that is on the agenda of today’s debate.
We believe it timely, based on the
recommendations contained in the annex to the note
contained in document S/2006/507, approved by the
Council in July 2006, to look into the functioning of
this principal organ of the United Nations. My
statement will focus on the two aspects of the issue at
the centre of today’s debate: the working methods that
structure the Council’s meetings and its relations with
the Secretariat; and relations between the Council, nonmember States and other United Nations bodies. While
we ought to welcome the progress that the Council has
already made in improving its working methods, it is
nevertheless the case that many practices continue to
have an impact on transparency and the Council’s
effectiveness in carrying out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
With regard to my first point, my delegation
would like to speak of certain practices that to a great
degree have an impact on the Council’s productivity.
First of all, there is sometimes a delay in the
publication of Council documents in the six official
languages of the United Nations. Unfortunately, in
spite of some progress made in this area, we continue
to see that many documents are published just a few
days before the holding of Council meetings. This
situation does not give Council members the time they
need to consider the documents or to consult their
capitals for instructions.
We also regret the failure to implement
paragraphs 8 and 9 of the annex to the note contained
in document S/2006/507, which called on the
Secretariat to circulate briefing texts and to provide

16

members with printed fact sheets on issues considered
by the Council prior to the holding of informal
consultations.
In addition to those necessary improvements, it
also seems crucial to strengthen the equitable
distribution of information between the Secretariat and
members of the Council, so as to strengthen collective
responsibility in the face of threats to international
peace and security. It would also be advisable if, before
they brief the Council, Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General could, to the extent possible, hold
consultations not only with the President of the
Council but also with the other members of the
Council, including the non-permanent members.
With regard to newly elected members, I
welcome the opportunity provided to them to join
private consultations several months prior to the actual
commencement of their membership on the Council.
Nevertheless, it would be desirable for countries
presiding over the Council during the transition period
to take the initiative, with the support of the
Secretariat, of holding informational meetings for
incoming members in order to consider practical
examples relating to substantive issues and working
methods of the Council.
With regard to the management of crises and
conflicts, my delegation thinks it would be useful for
the Council to strengthen the tools at its disposal to
effectively follow the development of crisis situations
at the regional and subregional levels. The excellent
work done by the United Nations Office for West
Africa made it possible for the Organization to quickly
and effectively respond to the crisis in Guinea. We are
certain that the future establishment of a United
Nations office in Central Africa will strengthen the
capacity of the Council to prevent and manage
conflicts in that subregion, which continues to face
numerous challenges in the areas of peace and security.
We continue to believe that the effective
operationalization of regional offices will help to
strengthen the Council’s preventive capacities. The
Council would of course benefit from further relying
on such offices, not merely to increase the number of
meetings it holds on emerging conflicts — as the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom aptly
pointed out — but also to make those meetings more
useful and effective.

10-32351

S/PV.6300

Adopting resolutions is a major Council activity.
In that regard, my delegation urges the authors of
resolutions to undertake a greater number of inclusive
consultations within the Council, so as to confer
greater legitimacy on the resolutions that are adopted.
I should now like to turn to the second point of
my statement, namely, relations between the Council
and non-members. My delegation is pleased to note
that, over the years, the Council has endeavoured to
improve its interaction and dialogue with non-member
States. For instance, we welcome the regular
consultations between the Council and troopcontributing countries, including those that are not
members of the Security Council. The same goes for
the President’s ongoing consultations with the President
of the General Assembly and with non-members of the
Council on issues having an impact on international
peace and security.
We also welcome the efforts made to make the
report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
more substantive and analytical.
These exchanges are all the more important in
that they illustrate the need for the United Nations to
deliver as one.
Regarding the participation of non-member States
in Council meetings, we welcome the increasing
frequency of open meetings. That enables non-member
States to be involved and in that way to contribute to
the search for solutions to collective security issues.
The goal would be to make it possible to exchange upto-date information and gather the views of those
States, while respecting the principle of the
confidentiality of information as set out in the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure. This practice
can also ensure greater transparency and improved
interaction between the Council and non-member
States.
Improving the Council’s working methods is a
long-term endeavour that calls for tireless effort on our
part. We must proceed in stages, with a firm
determination to achieve concrete results. We continue
to believe that a more open, more transparent and more
inclusive Security Council would respond to modernday demands. It is certainly the surest way to enhance
the Council’s legitimacy and effectiveness.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate to assess the

10-32351

implementation of the measures set out in the annex to
the note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/507) and recent Security Council practice.
At the outset, Uganda commends the Council’s
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, chaired by Japan, for the good
work it has done related to the working methods of the
Council.
This debate provides an opportunity for a
constructive exchange of views by Members of the
United Nations on how the working methods of the
Security Council can be further improved. The Security
Council’s agenda and workload are increasing in
tandem with the fact that the international community
is faced with challenging, complex situations and
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is therefore essential that the Council
conduct its work in an efficient and effective manner,
while at the same time enhancing transparency.
Although more needs to be done to that end, the
Security Council has made some significant
improvements in this regard.
We welcome the holding of more public
meetings, as evidenced by the fact that 205 out of 228
formal meetings held from August 2008 to July 2009
were public. Some of the other notable improvements
in transparency include the following: giving States
figuring on the Council’s agenda an opportunity to
express their views and their concerns; holding
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries at least a week before the Council considers
the reports of the Secretary-General on the respective
missions; strengthening the working relationship
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, through monthly meetings between their
respective
Presidents;
and
holding
informal
consultations with Member States on a wide range of
issues, including on how the annual report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly can be
continuously improved. The proposals and suggestions
of Member States need to be taken into account.
We welcome the provision of timely, substantive
and detailed briefings to Member States on the
Council’s programme of work. It is important to afford
interested Member States the opportunity to hear
briefings on matters of concern to them.
On the question of efficiency, given the workload
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies, it is important

17

S/PV.6300

to build on the increasing spirit of constructive
discussion and consensus-seeking. That will reduce
instances of lengthy deliberation.
The Security Council continues to emphasize the
important role that regional and subregional
organizations play in conflict prevention, mediation
and resolution and in peacebuilding. We welcome the
strengthening of strategic partnerships with the African
Union
and
other
regional
and
subregional
organizations, and we emphasize the need to further
support building their respective capacities.
In
conclusion,
Uganda
underscores
the
importance of the ongoing deliberations on the urgent
need to reform the Security Council to better reflect
present realities. The ongoing intergovernmental
negotiations need to be calm and more effective, and
they need to make definite progress.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.
The issue of the working methods of the Security
Council is crucial to the effective functioning of the
Council. Enhancing transparency, efficiency and
interaction with non-Council members benefits Council
members and non-members alike. Such efforts are
essential for the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibility to act promptly and effectively for
international peace and security.
In all these areas, the Security Council has made
good progress in recent years. The note by the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) was a
useful compilation of the working methods of the
Council, setting forth clearly the Council’s working
practices.
But it is also important for the Council to review
the progress periodically and make necessary
adjustments, in the light of current situation and taking
into account comments from non-members of the
Council. Some measures may need to be revisited;
some others may need further effort for full
implementation. We should take a pragmatic approach
in order to meet sometimes conflicting requirements:
first, to ensure prompt and effective action for
international peace and security and, secondly, to gain
the support of the wider United Nations membership
for full implementation.
The Security Council has been making efforts to
enhance the transparency of its work. More open

18

meetings are now organized. The presidency provides a
briefing to non-members of the Council on the
programme of work at the beginning of month — and
this month’s was very well attended — and the
programme is readily available on the Security Council
website; the Journal sets out issues to be discussed not
only in the Council but also in its subsidiary bodies. As
President of the Security Council, I made it a practice
this month to do a press stakeout after every
consultations session. It is frequently not possible to
share much of the content of the informal consultations
because of their informal and ongoing nature. But I
believe it is important for the Council to make an effort
constantly to enhance transparency and share the thrust
of the consultations to the extent that it will be
conducive to effective implementation of its eventual
decisions.
The Security Council’s interaction and dialogue
with non-members of the Council is essential to ensure
that the Council makes informed decisions, taking into
account the views of interested parties. Since a
decision by the Council binds all Member States, close
interaction with the broader United Nations
membership, in particular countries directly involved
or specially affected and countries and regional
organizations with special contributions to make, will
serve to enhance the effectiveness of the
implementation of a decision by the Council.
Above all, the recent decision for an enhanced
and timely dialogue with the troop-contributing and
police-contributing
countries
is
a
welcome
development. The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations is a useful forum for such
interaction.
The format of informal interactive dialogue
allows the Security Council to have discussions with
non-members of the Council that have a direct interest
in the issues being discussed. Such dialogue has come
to be utilized more frequently in recent years. The
Security Council should continue to adopt the most
appropriate modality of meeting flexibly to enhance its
dialogue with interested parties.
Japan is pleased with the many positive
comments on the usefulness of the 2006 note by the
President in enhancing the efficiency of the work of the
Council. A comprehensive compilation of the working
methods — the so-called blue book, published by the
Japanese Mission — is a useful handbook on how the

10-32351

S/PV.6300

Council carries out its work, particularly for newly
elected members. As the representative of Brazil stated,
we believe that a periodic update of such a
comprehensive note on working methods benefits
members and non-members of the Council alike.
The increased participation of non-member States
of the Council in its open meetings, such as the recent
one on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6299) and
today’s on working methods, is a welcome
development. At the same time, we believe it important
that the statements made in the meetings be focused
and concise. We encourage all participants, members
and non-members of the Council alike, to follow the
guidelines established by the Council and to limit their
statements in open meetings to five minutes or less in
order to allow more delegations to take the floor and to
make the meetings efficient and productive.
Regarding the way forward, the matter of
working methods is important in the context of
Security Council reform as one of the five key issues
identified through the intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform. Genuine reform of the
Council must consist of meaningful change in its
composition, as well as improvements in its working
methods. Japan looks forward to negotiations on
Security Council reform on the basis of a text at the
earliest possible date.
We welcome the participation of many nonmembers of the Council in today’s debate, which
reflects the strong interest of Member States in this
issue. As the Chairman of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
Japan will follow up the specific points raised in
today’s debate.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming that
members of the Council are making efforts to ensure
access by non-members of the Council and members of
the press to the temporary conference area, within the
physical constraints, as far as possible in line with
previous arrangements.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the
Liechtenstein.

floor

to

the representative

of

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the
honour to speak today, during the first part of my
intervention, on behalf of the group of five small

10-32351

countries (S-5). The other members of the group —
Costa Rica, Jordan, Singapore and Switzerland — will
also participate in this debate in their national
capacities.
We very much appreciate this opportunity to
engage in a dialogue with the Council on its working
methods. The S-5 is of the view that the decisions of
the Security Council are particularly effective when
they are made genuinely on behalf of the membership
of the United Nations, as stipulated by the Charter. We
have therefore consistently worked to encourage
improvements in the working methods of the Council,
in particular in the areas of transparency, access and
inclusion. We continue to believe that the working
methods are an indispensable part both of
comprehensive reform of the Security Council and of
an ongoing discussion within the Council itself.
Holding periodic open debates on this topic is certainly
a good approach, and again today we see that the
membership has indeed a strong interest in this topic.
We therefore commend you, Mr. President, on this
initiative and thank you for capably steering the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
The S-5 group has been active for more than four
years, and in 2006 tabled a draft resolution in the
General Assembly (A/60/L.49). That text was never
acted upon by the Assembly, in particular because, at
around the same time, the Council adopted its
presidential note, contained in document S/2006/507.
We welcomed the adoption of the note, while
expressing the view that additional and more farreaching measures would be needed to achieve the
goals of legitimacy, transparency and accountability
that our leaders had agreed upon in the framework of
the 2005 World Summit. Thus, while we welcome this
opportunity to talk about the implementation of note
S/2006/507, we will also address issues that go beyond
the contents of that note, as the Council has itself
actually done in its own practice.
The last open debate on this topic in August 2008
(see S/PV. 5968) resulted in no formal outcome, but
certainly generated some recommendations on the
implementation of document S/2006/507. Most of them
have not been followed in the 18 months since.
Generally speaking, the implementation of note
S/2006/507 has been slow, partial and inconsistent. We
appreciate the efforts carried out in the framework of
the Informal Working Group, headed by Japan, to make

19

S/PV.6300

implementation more consistent and effective, and look
forward to tangible results and concrete steps on
implementation within the current calendar year. The
S-5 will continue to reach out to the Council to make
constructive and positive contributions to the
improvements of working methods, both formally and
informally.
I will now offer a few remarks, more in my
national capacity, on a number of areas where we have
been particularly active.
It is generally recognized that the annual report of
the Security Council is a central channel of
communication between the Council and the rest of the
membership. It offers an opportunity for constructive
dialogue and accountability. The annual report
therefore figures prominently in note S/2006/507, even
though the relevant parts are mostly repetitions of
previous agreements. We have engaged with the
Council members, as well as with the President of the
General Assembly, to discuss possible improvements in
the preparation and consideration of the report. We are
very grateful for the open and positive conversations
that we have had in that regard as, generally speaking,
the opportunities that we have had to exchange views
with the Security Council have always been very
positive and constructive meetings.
The following are some of the main
recommendations that came out of the discussions on
the annual report.
On process, we believe that holding informal
consultations during the preparation and before the
adoption of the annual report could be very useful.
Such consultations have been organized in the past two
years by the delegations of Viet Nam and, last year,
Uganda, and we are grateful to them. Such
consultations offer a good opportunity to discuss, in
particular, the introductory part of the annual report,
which is the only part that includes political analysis.
We also believe that holding a public meeting, or
even an open debate of the Council, when the report is
adopted would be a useful measure. That would allow
for more transparency, and the verbatim record could
be taken into account when the report is discussed in
the General Assembly. Our records indicate that the
last such meeting was held in 2002 (see S/PV.4616).
On the format and contents of the report, we
believe that making more constructive use of the

20

monthly evaluations prepared by the respective
presidencies could enhance the quality of the report.
We are also missing an illustration of linkages between
issues dealt with in the report, in particular between
country situations and thematic issues. We also believe
that the report does not cover any cross-cutting issues.
We believe that including a chapter in the report
on the improvement of the working methods of the
Council is necessary. It is often argued that the Council
is the master of its own procedures and therefore of all
matters related to working methods. There is therefore
no better place than the annual report to inform
Member States of relevant developments. In the past,
we have seen no substantive language on working
methods in the annual report.
Finally, we believe that more information on the
work of the Informal Working Group could be useful.
Of course, the Group is informal in nature, but is also
the Council’s only subsidiary body not to produce its
own annual report. There are different ways of making
more information available, including through the
Council’s website. As the S-5, we will continue to
proactively engage with Council members and the
President of the General Assembly on such ideas, and
we hope that concrete improvements can be achieved
in the framework of the next report.
The work of the subsidiary bodies is becoming
ever more intense, complex and important. At the same
time, access to their proceedings and information
thereon continues to be difficult. We therefore attach
particular importance to the implementation of the
measure set out in paragraph 46 of the annex to note
S/2006/507, which asks subsidiary bodies to seek the
views of Member States that have a particular interest
in a topic under discussion. In that spirit, we strongly
welcomed the opportunity to meet as part of the S-5,
with the Informal Working Group headed by Japan in
July 2009 and were again very encouraged by the open
exchange of views at that meeting.
In connection with the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we again welcome the
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) in December 2009
and thank the Austrian presidency for its efforts in that
respect. We believe that the resolution has brought
about significant changes that were long overdue in the
de-listing regime of the Council, including the

10-32351

S/PV.6300

establishment of an ombudsperson. We therefore hope
that the appointment process can be finalized soon and
that the ombudsperson can start working as soon as
possible.

the credibility, transparency and accountability of the
work of the Security Council, particularly in terms of
meeting the expectations of States that are not
members of the Council.

In conclusion, the format of Council meetings is a
key element of access and therefore highly relevant to
our agenda in the S-5. The Council has been quite
creative in developing new formats, as is illustrated by
the very useful report that the organization Security
Council Report prepared in advance of this debate.
New formats that allow non-Council members access
or enable concerned parties or organizations to
participate include informal interactive discussions,
informal interactive dialogues and what is usually
called the Kosovo model. Taking these together with
older formats such as Arria Formula meetings, there is
now a wide range of mechanisms available to enhance
access and transparency. We continue to believe that
briefings by senior United Nations officials should
always be made accessible to all Member States,
without prejudice to the format of subsequent
consultations. We also see potential in the format of
specific meeting configurations, similar to those used
by the Peacebuilding Commission with some success
over the past years. This could facilitate the inclusion
of non-members in the Council’s deliberations.

The Non-Aligned Movement attaches great
importance to the issue of improving the working
methods of the Security Council. That is reflected in
the comprehensive, clear and specific position
stipulated in the relevant paragraphs of the Final
Document adopted at the fifteenth Summit Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries held in Sharm el-Sheik (S/2009/514, annex),
as well as in several initiatives presented by the
Movement throughout the years since the launching of
the Security Council reform process. Those initiatives
include, but are not limited to, the comprehensive
negotiating paper submitted by the Movement in 1996,
as contained in the report of the Open-ended Working
Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and Other Matters Related to the Security
Council (A/51/47).

Finally, allow me a word on the new
arrangements for the Security Council. This is my first
opportunity to participate in the new Security Council
Chamber, which is surprisingly similar to the old
Security Council Chamber. We are of the view that the
temporary conference room arrangements should not
lead to a new wall of secrecy, but should rather be
taken as an opportunity for members to seek innovative
ways to interact with interested parties and with the
media.
The President: I
representative of Egypt.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I
would like at the outset to convey the Movement’s
appreciation to the Japanese presidency of the Security
Council for convening this open debate to discuss the
progress achieved in the implementation of the
measures set out in the note by President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2006/507,
and for the concept paper dated 5 April 2010 (see
S/2010/165) to direct the discussion towards enhancing

10-32351

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
Security Council should stop encroaching on the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council by addressing issues
which traditionally fall within the competence of those
organs. Moreover, the Security Council should avoid
resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella
for addressing issues that do not necessarily pose a
threat to international peace and security and should
fully utilize the provisions of other relevant chapters,
where appropriate, including Chapters VI and VIII,
before invoking Chapter VII, which should be a
measure of last resort.
Furthermore, it is vital to continue to have regular
interaction between the presidency of the Security
Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations, which can help to enhance the quality of the
annual report of the Security Council. In the same
context, the Security Council should submit, pursuant
to Article 15, paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3,
of the United Nations Charter, special reports for the
consideration of the General Assembly and should
fully take into account the recommendations of the
Assembly on matters relating to international peace
and security, consistent with Article 11, paragraph 2, of
the Charter.

21

S/PV.6300

In order to increase transparency, openness and
consistency in exercising its mandated activities, the
Security Council should increase the number of its
public meetings, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32
of the Charter, to take into account the views and
contributions of the wider membership of the United
Nations, particularly non-members of the Council
whose issues are under discussion in the Council.
Moreover, and unless there are exceptional
circumstances, briefings by Special Envoys or
Representatives of the Secretary-General and by
members of the Secretariat should take place in public
meetings.
The Non-Aligned Movement appreciates the steps
taken to date through the Security Council’s Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under your chairmanship, Mr. President,
including those set out in the concept paper under
consideration, to increase the transparency and the
efficiency of the Security Council, as well as its
interaction and dialogue with non-members of the
Council. The Non-Aligned Movement further believes
that more steps are needed to improve the working
methods of the Council through the General Assembly
and the Security Council.
The Movement is of the view that improving
working methods requires strong political will,
particularly that of the permanent members of the
Council, and the adoption and implementation of many
of the comprehensive proposals submitted by Member
States over the years, including by the Non-Aligned
Movement, to improve the working methods of the
Council. Consequently, we look forward to intensified
consideration of those proposals by the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions in order to consider in
depth the proposals of Member States, including the
well known positions and papers of the Non-Aligned
Movement concerning improving the working methods
of the Security Council, and we call on the Security
Council to adopt further measures in that regard.
That concludes my statement on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Allow me to add a few thoughts in my national
capacity. I begin by fully associating my country with
the statement I just made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and with the statement to be delivered by

22

the representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of the
African Group.
I stress the need to achieve tangible results on the
issue of improving the working methods of the
Security Council as an important part of the interlinked
negotiables specified in General Assembly decision
62/557, through intergovernmental negotiations on the
reform of the Security Council and the process of
enlargement of the Council.
The Council, and particularly its permanent
members, should work with the General Assembly to
achieve the desired and long-anticipated results as soon
as possible. Egypt believes that the main step that must
be taken to improve the working methods of the
Security Council is to achieve a balance in the power
structure between the permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council. The time has come for an
agreement on a permanent set of rules of procedure to
replace the current provisional rules, which have been
in force for more than 60 years.
Moreover, the Informal Working Group dealing
with this important subject in the Council should adopt
official, bold measures that would consolidate the
concept of equality between countries, promote justice
in the way their issues are dealt with, enhance
transparency, increase interaction and encourage
efficiency.
Furthermore, it is imperative to revisit the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Organization’s other principal organs in order to
restore the missing institutional balance set forth in the
Charter. The International Court of Justice has a major
role to play in settling any dispute that may arise
between these organs with respect to their mandates in
accordance with the Charter. It should be utilized
whenever necessary.
It is vital to give Member States whose issues are
under consideration the opportunity to attend the
informal consultations of the Council on an equal
footing with the representatives of the SecretaryGeneral. It is also vital to improve the quality of the
annual report submitted by the Council to the General
Assembly by making it more analytical and
explanatory.
The working methods of the Council will not be
improved unless we effectively address the misuse of
the veto right, or the threat of use of the veto, in a

10-32351

S/PV.6300

manner that would rationalize and restrict its use to
cases where severe violations of human rights are
being committed, including cases of genocide, ethnic
cleansing, crimes against humanity and grave
violations of international humanitarian law, as well as
to the cessation of hostilities between belligerent
parties and the election of the Secretary-General.
Pending the achievement of this intermediate step
towards the complete elimination of the veto, the right
of the veto should be granted to all new permanent
members joining the Security Council within the
enlargement process.
In conclusion, what is missing is not additional
proposals, but the additional political will to achieve
real reform of the working methods of the Security
Council, as well as all other negotiable terms in the
Security Council reform process as outlined in General
Assembly decision 62/557. The credibility and validity
of the Security Council and its members will be
seriously damaged unless we achieve those reforms as
soon as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg): I have the honour
to address the Council on behalf of the Benelux
countries — Belgium, the Netherlands and
Luxembourg. First of all, I would like to thank the
President of the Security Council for convening this
debate and for his enduring commitment to enhance the
working methods and procedures of the Council.
As emphasized in the concept paper for today’s
debate (see S/2010/165, annex), Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations mandates the Security
Council to take prompt and effective action to maintain
international peace and security on behalf of all
Member States. In order to fulfil this responsibility, the
Security Council has adopted, and should continue to
adopt, a pragmatic and incremental approach when it
comes to improving its working methods.
In August 2008, Belgium organized the last open
debate on Security Council working methods and
procedures during its presidency of the Council. At that
time, it was decided to focus the debate on three
closely interrelated issues, namely, transparency,
interaction and efficiency. Concerning transparency,
the Benelux countries welcome the fact that many
efforts have been made to increase the transparency of
the Security Council’s work. For example, last year’s

10-32351

resolution 1904 (2009), which reviewed the mandate of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Monitoring Team,
considerably increased the transparency of the process
for listing and delisting. The creation of an Office of
the Ombudsperson further increases transparency,
efficiency and interaction. We therefore hope that an
ombudsperson will be appointed shortly.
With respect to the issue of access and interaction
with non-members of the Council, we would like to
make a number of remarks. First, as a general rule, we
believe that the deliberations of Council members
would be enriched if there were even more interaction
with States and non-State actors associated with a
conflict, which is especially important in the early
stages of the consultations and should include private
meetings. We welcome new formats like informal
interactive discussions and informal interactive
dialogues.
In the case of non-State actors, it is the Council’s
prerogative to decide which requests it is to grant and
in which specific situation. However, we believe that
the parties to a conflict should be able to submit their
views to the Council in writing, which may decide to
distribute them as Security Council documents. We
further believe that interaction with non-State actors
under the Arria formula is commendable and deserves
further encouragement.
Secondly, given the increasing importance and
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
in dealing with challenges to peace and security, we
believe that the Security Council benefits from
enhanced cooperation with such organizations, both in
public as in private deliberations. Furthermore, the fact
that a regional organization represents the views of a
larger group of Member States can contribute to shorter
and more efficient debates, at least when those
organizations are allowed to intervene early on in the
debate.
Finally, the Benelux countries are strong
proponents of further strengthening the relationship
between the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the
Security Council. We welcome the fact that the PBC
Chairperson or the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations of the PBC are regularly invited to brief
the Council. We are convinced that the PBC and its
country-specific configurations could also bring added
value to the work of the Council in thematic areas,

23

S/PV.6300

such as women and peacebuilding, children and armed
conflict, and the future of peacekeeping.

it acts on behalf of all States Members of the United
Nations.

On efficiency, the Benelux countries agree with
several of the ideas presented by the group of five
small countries, in particular that key provisions of
thematic resolutions could be incorporated into
country-specific resolutions. That would also be a
matter of coherence. The Council could also reflect on
how best to assess whether its decisions are being
implemented, analyze obstacles to implementation and
suggest mechanisms to enhance implementation.

Transparency plays a key role. We think it is
crucial that all Member States receive enough
information about the Council’s work. This is
especially vital for small States, which rarely have the
opportunity to serve as members of the Council. That is
why we underscore the regularity and quality of
briefings to non-members of the Council. It has been
agreed previously by the members of the Council that
interactive wrap-up sessions at the end of each
presidency would be a useful tool for increasing
openness and the availability of information. Such
sessions provide an opportunity for assessing the
Council’s work and discussing lessons learned. This
practice has unfortunately been discontinued, and the
Nordic countries wish to encourage Council members
to take it up again.

The proposals I have just mentioned could be
enacted by the Security Council without delay.
However, the responsibility for improving the
relationship with the wider membership depends not
only upon the Security Council. It is up to each of us to
optimally use all means of interaction at hand. Today’
debate provides an opportunity for feedback from the
wider membership to the Security Council, and vice
versa, in order to improve mutual understanding.
We thank Japan for its readiness to ensure followup to this debate in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
it chairs. We would indeed welcome an update of the
note contained in document (S/2006/507). Belgium, the
Netherlands
and
Luxembourg
will
remain
constructively engaged in the process of improving the
working methods of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
First, allow me to thank Japan for its long-term
commitment to improving the working methods of the
Security Council. This debate on the implementation of
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507 is welcome and timely. We also appreciate
the tireless and constructive efforts of the group of five
small countries on this issue.
The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. In fulfilling that task, maximum transparency
and interaction with the wider membership of the
United Nations is of paramount importance. Improving
working methods enhances the Council’s legitimacy as

24

Regular open debates have increased the
openness of the Council. The Nordic countries attach
great importance to these discussions and commend
Council members for upholding this practice. We
believe, however, that there is scope for improving the
quality of these debates. First, we would like to
welcome consultation with non-member States in the
process of drafting the concept papers for these
debates. We also welcome an increased focus on how
the thematic debates can become more action-oriented
and can feed into future Council decisions on the topic,
making sure that key provisions of the thematic
resolutions are incorporated into country-specific
resolutions.
In that context, I would like to commend the
work of the independent not-for-profit organization
Security Council Report, which has significantly
increased transparency with its reporting. The
improvements to the Council website and webcasts of
the Council’s meetings provided by the Secretariat also
warrant mention.
The Nordic countries welcome the significant
progress achieved in enhancing the transparency and
fairness of the listing and de-listing procedures of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). Resolution 1904 (2009) and previous
resolutions on the issue have added transparency and
clarity to the procedures of the Committee by
introducing a number of important innovations, such as
periodic review of all the names on the 1267 list and

10-32351

S/PV.6300

the obligation to add narrative summaries of reasons
for their listing. The establishment of the office of the
ombudsperson, as called for in resolution 1904 (2009),
will mark an important milestone in further enhancing
the transparency of the procedures of the Committee
and in strengthening the due process rights of listed
individuals and entities.
We are pleased to see that the ombudsman
institution — an idea originally introduced by one of
the Nordic countries — is now becoming a reality.
Given the importance of the mandate, the Nordic
countries now look forward to the swift appointment of
the ombudsperson. Once fully implemented, resolution
1904 (2009) will represent an important step forward.
The Nordic countries, however, believe that the
procedures for listing and de-listing need to be kept
under constant review and that the Council needs to
remain open to further procedural improvements in the
regime.
We welcome the past years’ initiatives aiming to
improve the interaction between the Council and troopand police-contributing countries. Troop- and policecontributing countries should be better engaged in all
stages of decision-making regarding peacekeeping
operations, starting with the planning of the mandates.
This would also be crucial for potential troopcontributors. Furthermore, the existing practice of
informal consultations between the Council and troopcontributing countries could be used more extensively
and efficiently. In this regard, I want to mention the
New Horizon initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, which aims to develop
United Nations peacekeeping activities. A number of
the recommendations aim to improve the interaction
among the Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries. We warmly welcome
those proposals.
I would like to express my appreciation to Japan
for organizing five meetings with troop-contributing
countries last year during its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. The
meetings provided a good opportunity for the Council
to get input from those countries on various aspects of
peacekeeping. We hope that this practice will continue.
I would also like to highlight the importance of
promoting the relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
guarantee smooth transition from peacekeeping to

10-32351

peacebuilding. We wish to emphasize our continued
support for the practice of inviting Commission Chairs
to brief the Council on a regular basis. There is still
scope for increased cooperation and we see the current
review of the Peacebuilding Commission as an
opportunity to promote this important relationship.
The concept paper in document S/2010/165
highlights the challenges associated with the short time
period between the election of non-permanent members
and the beginning of their term. The annual workshop
organized in Doral Arrowwood, sponsored by Finland,
aims at addressing this problem, which is particularly
relevant for smaller delegations. Its purpose is to give
the new members an in-depth orientation and
familiarization with the practices, procedures and
working methods of the Council in order to help them
to be ready from day one of their term. Reports of the
workshops have been distributed as official documents
of the Security Council in the hope that they will
contribute to a better understanding of the complexity
of the work of the Council.
The first time the Security Council’s working
methods were the topic of an open debate was in 1994
(see S/PV.3483). The second was in 2008, during the
Belgian presidency (see S/PV.5968). As today’s debate
has illustrated, the topic is too important for an ad hoc
approach. The Nordic countries would therefore like to
suggest that the Council consider holding open debates
on Security Council working methods on an annual
basis.
Finally, the Nordic countries continue to
emphasize the ongoing reform of the Council’s
working methods and procedures, so that it can fulfil
its task in a more transparent, inclusive and
participatory manner. At the same time, the yardstick
of success cannot be openness and transparency per se,
but the extent to which they improve the Council’s
ability to fulfil its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security.
The President: I thank the representative of
Finland for organizing the orientation workshop every
year. It is beneficial for all of us.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): I have the honour to speak today on
behalf of the 14 States members of the Caribbean

25

S/PV.6300

Community (CARICOM), and to align CARICOM
with the statement made by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. CARICOM
welcomes the initiative of Japan, in its capacity as
President of the Security Council, for convening this
open debate and for its concept paper of 1 April (see
S/2010/165), which is invaluable in shaping today’s
debate on working methods. CARICOM would also
like to thank the members of the Council for their
insights today and their own inputs on this issue.
CARICOM, more than most, takes particular
interest in the areas of transparency, efficiency and
interaction with non-members. Our interest is born of
our historical absence from this Chamber, and, indeed
the appalling dearth of small island developing States
(SIDS) in general among the membership of the
Security Council. The last CARICOM State to serve on
the Security Council began its term one decade ago.
One year later, in 2001, Singapore became the last of
the SIDS to hold Council membership. Seventy-three
of the 192 United Nations Member States have never
served on the Council. Of those 73 Member States, 29
are SIDS. Therefore, although SIDS comprise only 20
per cent of the United Nations membership, they
represent a full 40 per cent of the States that have
never served on the Council. Over 78 per cent of SIDS
have never held a non-permanent seat on the Security
Council — a percentage that is replicated within our
own CARICOM region. As such, our historical
position as Council outsiders has made CARICOM
acutely sensitive to the practical effects of working
methods on transparency and interaction with nonmembers. From our unenviable position of largely
being on the outside looking in, CARICOM recognizes
that recent measures and adjustments by the Council
have resulted in some improvements. However, a great
deal more can and must be done.
In that regard, and within the context and
constraints of this open debate, CARICOM stresses the
following four points. First, it is critical for the
Security Council to accept that reform of its working
methods, however far-reaching or effective, must
necessarily take place within the context of wider
Security Council reform, including an increase in
permanent
and
non-permanent
membership.
Non-members will have little interest in interacting
with a body whose legitimacy is compromised by its
stodgy refusal to reflect changing global dynamics.
Working methods therefore represent a single

26

component of a comprehensive reform exercise, and
must proceed in tandem with these complementary
reforms.
I note parenthetically that many Members today
bemoan the workload of the Council, but efficiency
demands that most organizations, bodies and
businesses, when faced with an increased workload,
expand to deal with and handle the increased workload.
Secondly, as a general rule, the Security Council
should refrain from encroaching upon the functions and
powers that the Charter or tradition has placed within
the purview of the General Assembly. It is far better for
the Council to construe its mandate strictly, and do a
small number of things well, than it is for it to be more
expansive and do a host of tasks poorly. The seemingly
inexorable mission creep of the Security Council is
troubling, particularly to Member States like ours,
which have been primarily creatures of the General
Assembly alone. Any unnecessary encroachment by the
15 members of the Council into the functions and
powers of the other 177 non-members will serve to
undercut the compelling logic and unique goals under
which the United Nations was established.
Thirdly, further adjustments to working methods
are required to enhance the transparency, openness and
interaction of the Council with the wider membership.
CARICOM recognizes the Council’s need for
efficiency and, indeed, supports greatly enhancing this
efficiency and effectiveness. However, optimizing
transparency, interaction and efficiency is not a zerosum exercise. In this regard, we view as particularly
useful the suggestions that have been made and refined
by the group of five small countries regarding, inter
alia, reports, consultations and the implementation of
decisions.
Fourthly, CARICOM is curious as to the broad and
expansive reading that some States give to Article 30 of
the Charter. The argument that only the Council —
operating in a vacuum and advising itself — can adjust
its working methods unfortunately raises more thorny
questions than it answers. For example, CARICOM
questions how, as a practical matter, working methods
can be determined solely within a body in which two
thirds of its members are replaced every few years. If
we are to accept the concept paper’s assertion that “[f]or
many elected members, learning the procedural aspects
of the Security Council is a challenge” (S/2010/165,
para. 12) how can those elected members, in a limited

10-32351

S/PV.6300

period of time, both learn and reform the working
methods, only to be replaced by a host of new elected
members that will have to repeat the process again? And
why would incoming members that would not have
contributed to the Council’s working methods in any
way feel any fealty to them? Only the permanent
members of the Council would have any degree of
influence or allegiance to such an arrangement.
It is impossible to read Article 30 in such a way
as to make it immune from the General Assembly’s
explicit
authority
to
discuss
and
make
recommendations on any matters within the scope of
the Charter relating to the functions of any organ of the
United Nations — including the Council — and to
make recommendations to the Council on these
matters. Articles 10 through 12 of the Charter establish
the scope of the General Assembly’s powers and its
limits with absolute clarity. The Council may have the
responsibility of formally adopting its rules of
procedure, but the General Assembly is clearly
empowered not only to discuss the Council’s working
methods but to make recommendations to the Council,
whether or not those recommendations touch on and
concern the rules of procedure. Given the
acknowledged role of the General Assembly in
conferring legitimacy on bodies, decisions and norms,
the Council would be well advised to adopt rather than
to resist the relevant recommendations that may yet
arise from the wider membership.
In conclusion, the welcome changes to the
Council’s methods thus far, as outlined in the concept
paper, have served to highlight the promise and
possibility of further beneficial changes. It is
universally accepted, we believe, that the Council is
not operating at its optimum efficiency, transparency,
accessibility or effectiveness. Adjustments in working
methods, as part and parcel of a wider range of
reforms, can assist in remedying these acknowledged
deficiencies. The continued evolution of the Council
and its working methods is therefore necessary and
desirable.
The Security Council is not a cocoon, a vacuum
or an impregnable and fossilized bunker. It is of this
world and of this membership. It must therefore reflect
this world and respond to this membership. CARICOM
hopes that one or more of our members will soon grace
the inner sanctum of the Council again. That hope
notwithstanding, we desire a Council whose working
methods establish it as a nimble, efficient, transparent

10-32351

and accessible body that is open to the views of the
wider membership and reflective of changing global
realities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the African Group at this open
debate on the implementation of the note by the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) and to
express our continued support for Japan’s presidency in
the month of April, and particularly for convening a
session on this all important subject to assess the
implementation of the measures set out in the annex to
document S/2006/507, following the debate of August
2008 (see S/PV.5968).
At the outset, the African Group aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and further
wishes to reiterate its correspondence of 23 December
2009 addressed to the facilitator of the ongoing reform
process.
The fact that the rules of procedure of this very
important organ of the Organization remain provisional
clearly points to a lacuna in the working methods of
the Council. Clearly, there is a missing link in the
working methods of the Council, which makes it
extremely expedient for the organ to undergo a reality
check. This explains why the African Group has
consistently called for a thorough reform that would
make the Council responsive to the urgent needs of the
increasingly turbulent world of the twenty-first
century.
In addressing the theme of today’s open debate on
working methods, I must hasten to reaffirm that we
support an expeditious and comprehensive reform
process, embracing all the negotiable clusters, that will
make the Security Council more representative,
transparent, inclusive, accountable, effective and
efficient in executing its responsibilities in order to
ensure that its decisions are legitimate and
representative of the views and positions of the wider
membership.
We acknowledge that the Security Council has
made significant progress in taking measures to
promote some degree of efficiency and transparency in
the manner in which it conducts its business, thanks to
the efforts of its Informal Working Group on

27

S/PV.6300

Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
especially with the adoption of the note by the
President of the Security Council contained in
document S/2006/507 and subsequent notes related to
the working methods of the Council. We encourage
further efforts in this direction through the practice of
incoming Presidents to brief non-members on the
programme of work at the beginning of each month.
The introduction of written annual reports covering the
operations of the subsidiary bodies, including the latest
measure requiring each Council’s presidency to prepare
a published assessment of its operations, among other
things, are all steps in the right direction of making the
Council more responsive to the general membership.
Despite the aforementioned noteworthy attempts
of the Council to live up to the expectations of its
members and non-members, it is the considered view
of the African Group that the measures are not farreaching enough to endow the Council with sufficient
capacity to deliver on its moral obligations as a
representative, transparent, democratic and accountable
decision-making body charged with the principal
responsibility of the United Nations, and some of
whose decisions are binding on the entire membership.
Africa favours a more accessible, democratic,
representative, accountable and effective Security
Council that responds to the exigencies of our time. In
this connection, I should like to state the African
common position on the Council’s working methods,
as adopted at the fourteenth ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union in Addis Ababa on
31 January 2010, which complements the African
common position on Security Council reform, as
contained in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration.
The Security Council should increase the number
of public meetings, in accordance with Articles 31 and
32 of the Charter of the United Nations; allow for
briefings by special envoys or special representatives
of the Secretary-General and representatives of the
Secretariat to take place in public meetings, unless
there are exceptional circumstances; enhance its
relationship with the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries, including through sustained, regular and
timely interaction to allow for the effective planning
and implementation of mission objectives; uphold the
primacy of and respect for the Charter in connection
with its functions and powers and in accordance with
the provisions of Article 24 of the Charter; provide

28

adequate and timely information on its activities to the
general membership of the United Nations; avoid any
attempt to use it to pursue national political agendas
and ensure non-selectivity and impartiality in its work;
refrain from resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter as
an umbrella for addressing issues that do not
necessarily pose a threat to international peace and
security, but fully utilize the provisions of Chapters VI
and VIII before invoking Chapter VII, which should be
a measure of last resort, if necessary; avoid any
recourse to the imposition, prolongation or extension
of sanctions against any State under the pretext or with
the aim of achieving the political objectives of one or a
few States, rather than in the general interest of the
international community; and formalize its provisional
rules of procedure in order to improve its transparency
and accountability.
Given that the Security Council and the General
Assembly must work closely together within their
respective spheres in seeking solutions to the plethora
of challenges confronting the international community,
we have emphasized the need for regular consultations
and the effective and timely exchange and flow of
information between the Assembly and the Council,
and for the submission of more comprehensive and
analytical reports to the General Assembly, including
special subject-oriented reports and informative press
releases on current issues of international concern.
Africa is strongly of the view that efforts aimed
at restructuring the Security Council should not be
subjected to a predetermined timetable. Even though
we recognize the need to deal with the issue as a matter
of urgency, we are of the view that all five clusters
should be accorded the same sense of expediency.
The Sirte Declaration and the Ezulwini
Consensus, which are our guiding instruments in the
matter of the reform of the Security Council, further
underscore the need to improve the balance of
competence between the General Assembly and the
Security Council. The proverbial delicate umbilical
cord essentially interlinks all the clusters. Thus, no
attempt should be made to exclude or even render any
one of them less important in the reform process.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Slovakia.
Mr. Koterec (Slovakia): I wish to start by
commending you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Japan for having taken the important initiative to

10-32351

S/PV.6300

convene this open debate on the implementation of the
note by the President of the Security Council of 19 July
2006 (S/2006/507), and by stating our appreciation of
the inspiring and succinct concept paper prepared for
this occasion, contained in document S/2010/165. I
also appreciate this timely opportunity to discuss
matters of profound interest to all of the Members of
the United Nations. It is our duty not only to take stock
of the progress made on the working methods of the
Security Council, but above all to take a step towards
fostering better dynamics within the Security Council
in this area.
We strongly believe that by increasing
transparency, efficiency and interaction with nonmembers, the Council and the whole Organization can
build in Member States the necessary trust and sense of
ownership of the Council’s decisions and actions,
which we are all bound to implement under the Charter
of the United Nations. In this regard, the efficiency and
transparency of the Council’s work, on the one hand,
and its authority stemming from the Charter, on the
other, are closely linked. Therefore, the efforts aimed
at the full and timely implementation of Security
Council decisions should take due account of the
nature of the Council’s decision-making mechanisms
and its systematic interactions with non-members,
especially those directly affected, concerned and
interested by the topics on its agenda.
Slovakia proudly sees itself as part of the process
of adjusting the Security Council’s working methods to
the current and future needs of the international
community. In the year 2007, when Slovakia had the
honour to chair the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, we worked diligently
to further the excellent work so ably commenced and
carried out by the delegation of Japan in 2006.
Today, we are pleased to observe the progress
that has been made, particularly in terms of
transparency, the involvement of non-members in the
work of the Council, and the speed of its decisionmaking process. It is evident that a more analytical and
forward-looking approach benefits the Security
Council and ultimately the United Nations membership
as a whole. This progress enhances the credibility of
the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
as it contributes to building the confidence of the wider
international community in the Organization.

10-32351

We believe that working methods are one area of
the reform process in which there have been
considerable and commendable improvements. Of
course, the time is not yet ripe for complacency, and
we need to bear in mind that the full implementation of
the note is a work in progress. Slovakia believes that
further improvements are both desirable and possible
in several areas, including strengthening the
transparency and openness of the work of the Council,
including and in particular regarding the work of its
subsidiary bodies.
Further progress can be made in enhancing
interaction between the Council and other Member
States, in particular those directly affected, concerned
and interested. This could be achieved through better
use of private Council meetings and more regular use
of Arria Formula meetings, and by the holding of
regular consultations between the Council and
non-members on relevant issues. We are very pleased
to see that it has indeed recently become much more
common for countries directly concerned to take the
floor before Council members. We believe that this
should be a standard practice in accordance with
Article 32 of the Charter. We also appreciate the fact
that representatives of regional and subregional
organizations are now more often invited to take part in
various forms of the work of the Council.
The mechanism of Security Council private
meetings with troop-contributing countries should be
prompt, flexible and substantive, in particular in cases
of important or unexpected developments while
implementing mission mandates.
The maximum relevance of the annual report of
the Security Council to the General Assembly should
be ensured, including by making it more substantive
and analytical and by holding an interactive discussion
with the General Assembly on it.
There should be provision for stronger interaction
between bodies dealing with issues connected with
peace and security, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission or the Economic and Social Council, and
the Security Council.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Slovakia
remains fully committed to the cause of increasing the
transparency, effectiveness and efficiency of the
Security Council, a process initiated by the decision of
heads of State and Government at the 2005 World
Summit and put in motion by the note S/2006/507 and

29

S/PV.6300

subsequent notes. We believe that adjusting the
working methods of the Council is an important part of
the overall endeavour to create and maintain effective
multilateralism, and the best way to generate the
broadest possible support for sustainable solutions in
the area of peace and security.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank the
Japanese presidency for having organized this open
debate. We are pleased to see this topic return, the last
such debate having been held in August 2008 (see
S/PV.5968).
There are at least two merits to this type of
discussion. It places all Member States in a position to
know the main issues related to the Security Council’s
working methods, and it helps us to identify concrete
solutions for improving them.
We have heard, also over the last weeks and
months, some interesting ideas on improving working
methods, beginning with the proposals of the group of
small five countries, to which we pay tribute for the
excellent work they have long promoted on this
question. Italy is moving along the same lines and has
put on the table a series of suggestions aimed at
impacting the Security Council’s working methods for
the sake of greater transparency and greater access to
and participation in the Council.
There are many aspects of the working methods
that still need improvement: old concerns, such as the
demand to increase and give renewed impetus to open
meetings, for example; and more recent ones, like the
issues of sanctions regimes and relationships with
troop-contributing countries, where significant changes
have been introduced but much remains to be done.
The presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507 is a significant point of reference in this
process. We fully endorse an update of its contents,
which could serve as a guide to all Member States in
this endeavour.
It is not my intention today to make a list of what
we have achieved and what we have not. I will focus
my remarks instead on a matter of procedure and, if I
may say so, of good will.
As we all know, some innovations to working
methods would require amendments to the Charter.
What I am proposing today, however, is a renewed

30

commitment and effort by all Council Members to
implement at least some of the measures we are
discussing that do not require these amendments. In
other words, we can use this debate to identify
measures that can be enacted immediately. Let us
consider, for example, the following three proposals on
interaction with non-Council members.
There is a widely supported request to improve
such interaction, especially with troop- and policecontributing countries. They should be more engaged
in the Council’s proceedings through open meetings
and informal consultations, and by creating standard
procedures for hearing their views. This is also true for
the regional organizations most involved in questions
being debated. If our goal is to interact with today’s
world, we certainly cannot exclude regional
organizations.
There is also significant support for greater use of
the Arria Formula, which allows civil society and
non-governmental organizations to enter into dialogue
with the Council.
Lastly, there are demands to increase recourse to
open meetings and reduce to a minimum the number of
closed meetings and informal consultations. At the
very least, there should be post-meeting briefings by
the President to non-member States or at least to
interested States.
In another room of this building, we are engaged
in a process of reform of the Security Council, in
which a comprehensive package that entails
amendments to the United Nations Charter, also on
working
methods,
is
being
discussed.
But
implementing the proposals that I have just mentioned
would not require a Charter amendment. We should
therefore decide that these demands shall enter into the
Council’s practices effectively as soon as possible. In
this way, we would provide an immediate answer to
primary needs that are easy to fulfil.
I wish to say A final word on one prerequisite for
a substantial and lasting reform of working methods.
As we all know, the search for major innovations in
working methods has been promoted most
enthusiastically by countries that are not permanent
members of the Council and are seeking access to a
body on which they cannot be seated for perpetuity. Of
these, a key role is played by the small States. This is
understandable since, as we know, the current

10-32351

S/PV.6300

exclusionary practices make Council membership
virtually off-limits to them.
In our view, this is a clear demonstration of the
fact that only a Council in which the principles of
accountability, elections and rotation are enhanced
would assure a genuine and ongoing effort towards
reform of its working methods. Those who know that
they will spend limited periods of time in the Council
will do everything possible, once they get there, to
ensure that in the future the room will be more open,
accessible and transparent.
I conclude here in deference to the five-minute
rule, another innovation in working methods that we
can put into practice immediately.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Khair (Jordan): I wish to extend the sincere
appreciation of my delegation, Mr. President, for your
initiative to hold this very useful and timely open
debate on the implementation of the note contained in
document S/2006/507. We are also very grateful for the
very important concept paper that you have circulated.
Jordan associates itself with the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein on
behalf of the group of five small countries and by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Since Jordan is a major troop- and policecontributing country, I shall focus my comments on the
working methods of the Security Council in the area of
United Nations peacekeeping.
Progress was achieved last year in enhancing the
working methods of the Security Council when dealing
with peacekeeping-related issues. The Council has
made noteworthy commitments and begun to put them
into action. This can be seen in the holding of various
open and inclusive thematic debates on peacekeeping
issues, and also in the valuable work of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by Japan,
which offers a forum for in-depth and interactive
discussions.
Another significant positive development was the
evolution of the French and British initiative on
managing peacekeeping operations, which emphasized
the importance of engaging with troop- and policecontributing countries. Another was the high-level
meeting on peacekeeping held by the President of the
United States, which reaffirmed the importance of

10-32351

renewing and strengthening cooperation among all the
stakeholders, including the members of the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries, as the only
way to respond to the ever-growing challenges of
United Nations peacekeeping.
By all accounts, these positive developments
have allowed for a high-quality interactive dialogue
among the relevant actors, and resulted in a great deal
of goodwill and tangible change in the working
methods. Yet, if this positive momentum is to be
maintained and further fostered, the Council should
ensure the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1353 (2001) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2009/24, which provide a framework for
cooperation between the Security Council, the troopand police-contributing countries, and the Secretariat.
The consultation mechanisms and the detailed
procedures laid out in these important reference
documents should be optimally utilized so as to forge a
stronger relationship between the Security Council and
the troop- and police-contributing countries.
The sorely needed commitment of the wider
membership to United Nations peacekeeping can be
further strengthened by holding open, public meetings.
In this regard, we encourage the Security Council to
continue, deepen and expand the practice of holding
thematic debates and open meetings related to
peacekeeping, which allows the wider membership to
contribute with their perspectives and ideas. These
meetings should include input from the field, for
example by the special representatives of the
Secretary-General.
This practice has proven to be greatly beneficial,
as we witnessed in the Council’s debate on transition
and exit strategies, held under the French presidency
(see S/PV.6270). These meetings should also result in
concrete advice or guidance by the Council based on
the proposals of the participants and without prejudice
to the role of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34).
We also encourage the President of the Security
Council to brief the members of the C-34 during its
sessions and, when appropriate, on the major
developments and initiatives regarding peacekeeping in
the Council. This will help to achieve more
coordinated joint action. In the same vein, the
President of the Security Council can arrange regular
meetings with regional groups such as the Non-Aligned

31

S/PV.6300

Movement, the European Union and any other
interested groups that contribute to peacekeeping, as
well as regional organizations.
Strengthening
consultation
with
troopcontributing countries should remain a priority for the
Council’s members. The experience and expertise of
the troop- and police-contributing countries can
substantially assist the Council in making appropriate,
effective and timely decisions on United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Therefore,
meaningful
and
substantial
consultation should continue to be held between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troopcontributing countries, including at the request of
troop-contributing countries and during the entire life
cycle of the peacekeeping missions. I need not reiterate
the importance of these consultations to the troop- and
police-contributing countries, in particular when it
comes to the safety and security of their troops.
United Nations peacekeeping remains one of the
international community’s most effective tools for
maintaining international peace and security. The
demand for personnel, equipment and enabling assets
for United Nations peacekeeping is thus likely to
continue, and even grow. One should note that
enhancing the working methods of the Security
Council and its efficiency, transparency, openness,
consistency and inclusiveness in the decision-making
process is essential to sustaining the confidence and
contribution of the current troop- and policecontributing countries in the Council. Furthermore, it
can also contribute to broadening the base of
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping in order
to enhance the collective burden-sharing and to meet
the future requirements of United Nations
peacekeeping. Therefore, we encourage Council
members to induce real and systematic change in its
working methods. This change is absolutely necessary
and certainly achievable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I want to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this open
meeting. We commend Japan’s strong and constant
commitment to this crucial issue.
I shall deliver a condensed version of my
statement so that I can abide by the five-minute

32

recommendation. The full version will be distributed. I
will focus my remarks on the three areas identified in
the concept paper (S/2010/165): transparency,
interaction with non-members of the Council and
efficiency. But I will add what, in our view, is another
important aspect, that is, accountability, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
The note contained in document S/2006/507 was
not the end of the journey. Surely, we must build on
that important undertaking and acknowledge the fruits
that its implementation has generated so far, which are
rightly identified in the concept note. But we should
not lose our ambition. We should never give up efforts
to find further appropriate and effective ways to
improve the Security Council’s working methods. In
that vein, I wish to recognize the important proposals
made by the delegations of the five small countries, as
well as to commend their continuous efforts and those
of other delegations in advancing this agenda at the
United Nations.
Elected members have historically been the ones
to push for change in the working methods of the
Council. We believe that they must build on available
experience, in particular that of other elected members,
to further this discussion and strengthen this agenda
when they serve in the Council.
Enhancing the transparency, efficiency and
accountability of the Council is the principal goal of
this exercise. It is a substantive concern, not a formal
one. The question is not just to open up the meetings of
the Security Council when the real decision-making
continues to be done behind closed doors. Nor is this a
matter of debating openly or interacting with the
general membership when decisions on matters
discussed have already been shaped. It is not a matter
of simply improving the image of the Security Council
before the general membership.
The real question is how to make the Council
more operational and efficient, with better use of time
and resources and the full engagement and
participation of all its members. How can we
strengthen its global influence as a body that acts on
behalf of all United Nations Members by bringing it
closer to them? The real question is, ultimately, how to
strengthen its authority through a more open and
participatory decision-making process, through a better
understanding of its decisions and through enhanced

10-32351

S/PV.6300

accountability. In that regard, allow me to put forward
seven concrete proposals.
First and foremost, the Council and its members
must continuously strive to preserve the adequate
involvement of all Council members, improve
information exchange and promote participation and
initiative in its internal decision-making process.
Secondly, we should strive to revive fully rule 48.
The trend of meeting more and more often in public
should be continued and strengthened, while reducing
the number of informal consultations, which still today
represent half the number of meetings of the Security
Council.
Thirdly, direct dialogue with concerned States
and parties, including troop contributors, should be
increased.
Enabling
efficient
interaction
and
consultation to take place with those States and parties
in a formal setting of the Security Council or through
private consultations, Arria Formula meetings or other
creative formats, as appropriate, would immensely
assist the Council in the process leading to its
deliberations.
Fourthly, we must make sure that briefings by the
Secretariat on situations under its consideration are, as
a rule, delivered at Security Council meetings with the
participation of non-members of the Council, thus
avoiding, as much as possible, consultations of the
whole for that purpose.
Fifthly, we should value the participation of the
wider membership. That goal would be best served if,
in open thematic debates, Member States outside the
Security Council would speak first, and Security
Council members at the end, while allowing some time
between the meeting and the adoption of the possible
outcome, thus demonstrating that the Council is
listening and willing to incorporate valuable views
from the wider membership — which is precisely the
purpose of these open debates.
Sixthly, with regard to enhancing the role of
Council presidencies, the Council should encourage a
more active and substantive role in briefing delegations
outside the Council, in presenting personal assessments
on the work of the Council and in speaking to the press
as means of enhancing public visibility of Council’s
work.
Finally, we believe it essential to give
accountability a fuller meaning. In that sense, we have

10-32351

to identify practical ways of increasing the influence of
the general membership in determining the agenda of
the Security Council, just as we need to ensure better
and more transparent annual Council reporting to the
General Assembly. Reviving the former practice of
including monthly assessments by the Presidents that
reflect their perspectives on the substantive work of the
Security Council would contribute to that goal. In that
context, it is crucial to ensure that the Security Council
continues to hold open debates like this one to assess
regularly how its practice matches those aims and to
collect valuable inputs from the wider membership on
ways to improve it further.
My delegation is ready to cooperate with you,
Mr. President, with the Council and with all other
interested delegations to develop those and other
concrete ideas to further this agenda as our common
endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Tladi (South Africa): My delegation wishes
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
participate in this very important debate on the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2006/507. We also wish to thank you not only for
your work as President of the Council, but also in
connection with your work on the working methods of
the Council.
South Africa strongly supports the continued
evaluation of the Security Council’s working methods,
in cooperation with the broader membership, as an
essential element of the broader reform of the Security
Council in order to make it more transparent and
accountable, and thus to enhance the legitimacy of its
mandate. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
modest improvements made in the working methods of
the Council since the last open debate on the
implementation of note S/2006/507, in 2008. We
particularly welcome the improvements aimed at
enhancing the Council’s engagement with the broader
membership of the United Nations.
As the presidency’s concept paper (S/2010/165)
reminds us, the Security Council is mandated by the
Charter to act on behalf of the United Nations
membership to ensure prompt and effective action on
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. That means that the
Council represents the broader membership of the

33

S/PV.6300

United Nations in the execution of its mandate, which
places particular responsibility on the Council to
ensure that its work is transparent, predictable and
consistent. In essence, it requires the Council to act in
an accountable manner. It is therefore obligated to
regularly engage with the broader membership in the
execution of its mandate.
It is becoming increasingly self-evident that the
Security Council cannot act alone in implementing its
mandate. It needs credible partners, as envisaged in
Chapter VII of the Charter. South Africa is proud to
have been given the opportunity to contribute to
building and enhancing cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union during its most
recent tenure in the Council. Annual meetings between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council are now a regular feature of the
Security Council’s programme of work. We will
continue to advocate for a strong and deeper
relationship and cooperation between those two
important organs in the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa. It is our hope that those
engagements will allow the Security Council to address
more effectively the various conflicts on the African
continent, which form such a large part of its agenda.
South Africa is of the firm view that both Councils can
benefit from that interaction and collectively improve
the response of the international community to conflict
situations, or even potential conflict situations.
It is critical that the Security Council quickly
redeem itself vis-à-vis the view held by some that its
mandate is only to approve peacekeeping operations.
Peacemaking is not always merely equal to the
deployment of troops to conflict situations. It is a
continuum from mediation to conflict prevention to
peacekeeping, where required, and to peacebuilding,
peace consolidation and sustainable development. The
United Nations must avail itself of different tools to
deal with different situations. For example, there is
growing
consensus
that
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding must not be seen as sequential, but
rather should be seen and implemented in an integrated
way. To what extent, therefore, is the Security Council
prepared to allow sufficient space for the
Peacebuilding Commission to participate in the
development of Security Council mandates?
Further improvements are needed in the Council’s
engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries. It is our view that the Security Council’s

34

early engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries is a step in the right direction and should
become entrenched. These engagements should be
structured in a manner that will afford those countries
the opportunity to directly contribute to the discussion
in the Council relating to the renewal of mandates of
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping is after all a
partnership between the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
In addition to the aforementioned improvements,
my delegation has also taken note with interest of the
recent innovations in the Council on increasing its
interactions with parties concerned with a conflict,
such as engagements in 2009 with Sri Lanka, Chad, the
African Union and the League of Arab States. South
Africa reiterates its view that all parties involved in
conflicts should be engaged in the process of the
Council’s deliberations and decision-making on issues
on its agenda and when responding to crises. The
Council can only benefit from such interactions. In our
view, they will allow the Council to respond
appropriately in the execution of its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.
Having acknowledged the improvements, I now
turn to remaining questions relating to the working
methods of the Council. The question my delegation
wants to ask is whether the Council has significantly
improved its transparency. Even though some
improvements have been recorded, it is our opinion
that these are not sufficient. It is true that today more
Council meetings are held in pubic than a few years
ago. It is also true that recent innovations have
increased engagement with relevant parties, including
with troop- and police-contributing countries. We also
acknowledge that the Council has improved the flow
of information on its programme of work through
regular monthly meeting to the membership by the
presidency — a convention my delegation actively
promoted during its tenure in the Council.
However, when we reflect on this body’s
decision-making process we have to conclude that
there is need for improvement. The Council’s
deliberations on draft resolutions, for example, should
be open for genuine deliberations amongst all of its
members, including the elected 10, and should not be
the exclusive domain of a few.
Like many other delegations, South Africa
acknowledges the value of consultations of the whole

10-32351

S/PV.6300

for the efficiency of the Council. However, it is
incumbent on the members of the Security Council to
be accountable in this process. South Africa wishes to
encourage Council members to continue the practice of
providing information to non-members on the outcome
of consultations. I remind the Council that the Charter
states that it acts on behalf of the United Nations
membership. This necessarily implies that that
membership has the right to remain informed of
developments in the Council. Transparency in its work
contributes to the credibility of the Council.
When the United Nations was established in
1945, South Africa fulfilled a central role in drafting
the Charter and designing its institutions. We believe
that the international community needs a Security
Council. This body was established to maintain
international peace and to provide the international
community with an effective mechanism to prevent the
outbreak of war. It has often failed but, fortunately, its
successes outweigh its failures.
It is our view that for it to be more effective, the
Council, first and foremost, needs to become more
representative and requires expansion in both
categories of its membership. Equally, it needs to
address the problems in its working methods, of which
we have named but a few, in an honest, transparent and
effective manner. Maintaining the status quo will only
contribute to the further erosion of its credibility and
legitimacy as the premier organ mandated to ensure
there is peace, security and stability in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): Let me express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
and convening today’s open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council and for preparing an
excellent concept paper (S/2010/165, annex) to guide
our discussion, focusing on the implementation of
measures annexed to presidential note S/2006/507 of
19 July 2006. We believe it is both timely and
appropriate for the Council and the wider United
Nations membership to have this opportunity, since this
is only the third time in 16 years that the Council has
had a debate in an open format on this important issue.
We wish to express our appreciation for Japan’s
continued leadership and for the efforts of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions that you, Mr. President, currently

10-32351

chair. We also welcome and support the initiatives of
the group of five small countries in this regard.
The increasingly numerous activities undertaken
by the Security Council have brought with them an
enhanced impact on the membership at large.
Non-members of the Council should therefore be better
informed about the Council’s work and should have an
opportunity to contribute to that work.
Further adapting the Security Council’s working
methods is one of the most important areas of reform
of the Council, and one on which there is a broad sense
of agreement. Slovenia welcomes the progress that has
been made in recent years, in particular with regard to
increasing the Council’s transparency and efficiency, as
well as its inclusiveness and interaction with nonmember States. We welcome the progress achieved
thus far with regard to regular briefings by the
presidency to non-members at the beginning of each
month, which provide a useful forecast of and
information on the monthly programme of work of the
Council. We also appreciate the consultations with
non-members that have been organized by Uganda and
Viet Nam during the past two years, before the
adoption of the annual report of the Security Council.
However there is a need for increased and
widened interaction and dialogue between the Security
Council and other United Nations Members,
particularly directly affected, concerned and interested
States, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter, and with relevant regional organizations.
Arria Formula meetings should be used more
frequently. We welcome recent innovative approaches,
such as informal interactive discussions and dialogue.
In debates on situation-specific issues, parties directly
affected or particularly interested should be allowed to
speak prior to Council members to present their views.
The timing and quality of interaction with troop- and
police-contributing countries could be further
improved.
We would welcome a further increase in the
number of public meetings, in particular briefings by
United Nations officials, as well as regular and timely
briefings by Council members to non-members on the
work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies. We
welcome the holding of outcome-oriented thematic
debates and we support the inclusion of key provisions
of thematic resolutions in country-specific resolutions,
as appropriate.

35

S/PV.6300

Non-members of the Council would also benefit
if the President of the Security Council made draft
resolutions and draft presidential statements available
to non-member States as soon as they are introduced
within informal consultations of the whole.
The Security Council should emphasize the
importance of the rule of law in dealing with matters
on its agenda. This embraces references to upholding
and promoting international law and ensuring that its
own decisions are firmly rooted in that body of law,
including the Charter, general principles of law,
international
human
rights
law,
international
humanitarian law and international criminal law.
We welcome further consideration of ways to
improve the transparency and the work of the sanctions
committees, such as establishing the listing and
de-listing procedures for individuals and entities and
establishing an independent office of an ombudsman.
We urge the permanent members to consider not
casting a non-concurring vote within the meaning of
Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter in the event of
genocide, crimes against humanity or serious violations
of international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, we support initiatives to improve
the efficiency of the Council’s work and to improve its
daily conduct of business — for example, allowing full
participation of all members of the Council in the
preparation of decisions, et cetera, and enhancing the
capacity of newly elected members to fully discharge
their duties. Security Council working methods have
developed over the years. However they still remain a
work in progress and require regular review and
implementation to further increase the Council’s
transparency,
accountability
and
efficiency.
Involvement of the wider membership in the work of
the Security Council will remain key to better serving
the whole Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend and congratulate you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to include on the Council’s programme of
work this open debate, which offers us a further
opportunity to exchange views and submit proposals on
a matter of particular importance and of great interest
to all Members of the Organization. After a gap of 18
months, the Security Council is holding another debate

36

on its working methods. We see that as a positive sign
of the commitment of Council members, in particular
permanent members, to continually assess and seek to
improve the Council’s work. However, it is also
important to remember that this topic is an integral part
of the overall reform process of the Security Council,
which involves the discussion of other issues that seek
comprehensively to render the Council more
transparent, efficient and legitimate.
From reading the paper annexed to your letter of
1 April, Sir, it is clear that the Security Council has
implemented actions to make its work more transparent
and to promote greater participation by non-member
States and civil society actors. On 19 July 2006, the
President of the Security Council issued a note
(S/2006/507), whose annex contained a series of
provisions seeking to update and modernize some areas
of the working methods. It was drafted by a working
group to which Peru, then a non-permanent member of
the Council, contributed.
Document S/2006/507 set out a series of
guidelines summarizing the practice of the Council that
included additional adjustments to its procedures. That
document is an important step forward in improving
the working methods of the Security Council, which
was furthered by the open debate held in August 2008
(see S/PV.5968) and the subsequent — I must say
partial — implementation of some measures aimed at
promoting greater openness in the Council’s work.
However, in the view of my delegation, there
remains ample room for increasing the transparency,
effectiveness and accountability of the Council’s work.
It is essential to conduct a fair and comprehensive selfassessment that enables us to identify what new steps
should be taken to enhance transparency, efficiency
and interaction with non-members of the Council. I
must underline that such ideas should be considered
and developed in a balanced way in such a way that no
one concept takes precedence over another. The need to
seek greater efficiency in the Council’s work should
not be at the expense of reducing transparency or
increasing openness, participation or access to
information by non-members of the Council.
If the aforementioned principles are fully adopted
as pillars of the working methods, it will be more
feasible to implement the measures and suggestions
raised by a great majority of delegations, which
ultimately seek, as I have said, to make the Security

10-32351

S/PV.6300

Council’s work more legitimate and render it strong
and efficient.
It is essential to strengthen the institutional
mechanisms for interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly that are already
reflected in the Organization’s Charter, such as in its
Article 15, which provides that the General Assembly
should receive and consider annual and special reports
from the Security Council, and Article 24, which
specifically provides that the Security Council will
submit annual and, when necessary, special reports to
the General Assembly for its consideration. In that
regard, it is unquestionable that States not members of
the Council have a right to greater access to
information that should be substantive, not merely
descriptive, as is the case in the annual reports.
Clearly, this is directly linked to the question of
working methods. The need to improve and strengthen
the systems of interaction is extremely urgent, all the
more as all of can see how the various cross-cutting
issues, such as security, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, are becoming interconnected with
development.
Undeniable, there is overwhelming agreement
among Members on the need to make substantive and
steady progress in improving the Council’s working
methods so that they heed and reflect the realities of
the twenty-first century. This would help ensure that
the Council is seen as an organ projecting legitimacy in
the eyes not only of the membership but also of
international public opinion. It is in that light that Peru
hopes to see concrete progress by the Security Council
in achieving that objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland, who is the last speaker
this morning.
Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the initiative
to convene this open debate. I also congratulate you on
your active role as Chair of the Council’s Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. The debate two years ago raised
many useful ideas. That is why we look forward to
having such discussions annually. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Liechtenstein on behalf of the group of five small
countries. Allow me to add some comments.

10-32351

You have provided us, Sir, with an excellent
concept paper (S/2010/165, annex). It shows that
working methods have been substantially improved. It
states that an increasing number of decisions taken by
the Council need to be implemented by all States
Members of the United Nations. It is thus essential that
States not members of the Council be informed of its
deliberations as soon as possible and be able to
contribute to the Council’s decision-making process.
Measures to improve the working methods can be
divided into three categories: first, technical
improvements that can be implemented quickly;
secondly, existing practices that should be applied in a
more systematic way; and, lastly, the politically more
sensitive issues that we believe best resolved case by
case.
From a purely technical perspective, effectiveness
and transparency could be increased by using the latest
information technology. For example, the briefing
notes submitted by the Secretariat in informal
consultations or the draft outcomes discussed by
experts could be posted on the Council website.
We welcome the fact that in recent months
non-member States have been regularly briefed on the
monthly programme of work. However, we regret that
briefings after informal consultations are still largely
ad hoc and continue to depend on the goodwill and
availability of certain members of the Council
President’s delegation. Given the growing tendency to
organize meetings of experts, we strongly encourage
the Council to promote transparency in that regard by
announcing such meetings in the Journal of the United
Nations and by organizing briefings on them. We
welcome the greater written coverage of meetings of
subsidiary bodies. Other measures should be
considered to make the work of the subsidiary bodies
more accessible.
With regard to politically sensitive matters, we
have often seen the Council reluctant to address
situations that are not on its formal agenda, but that
nevertheless require its attention. Recently, the Council
considered informal formats to address such situations.
That is an interesting and innovative approach.
Interaction between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission has been improved. We
support a regular dialogue between the Council and the
President of that Commission. We would welcome the
Council further involving the countries concerned and

37

S/PV.6300

inviting the Chairs of their respective configurations to
participate in the relevant informal consultations.
Lastly, thematic issues, such as human rights, the
protection of civilians and women and peace and
security, should be further integrated in the discussions
of country-specific situations and systematically
included in the terms of reference of Security Council
missions.

We hope that this open debate will lead to an indepth review of presidential note S/2006/507 and will
promote the adoption of an updated version of that note
by the end of this year. An action plan for its
implementation with a clear timeline could be prepared.
We are ready to work with the Council in that process.
The President: I shall now suspend the meeting.
It will resume at 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

38

10-32351
