S/2011/510

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 August 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 5 August 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the enclosed Agreement on the Border Monitoring
Support Mission between the Government of the Sudan and the Government of
South Sudan, signed on 30 July 2011 (see annex).
In order to evaluate how the United Nations could support implementation of
this Agreement, and with a view to providing the Security Council with
recommendations in this regard, I would like to inform you of my intention to
request the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) to undertake
a reconnaissance mission along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan as
soon as possible.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-44886 (E) 160811

*1144886*

S/2011/510

Annex
Agreement on the Border Monitoring Support Mission
between the Government of the Sudan and the Government
of South Sudan
Addis Ababa, 30 July 2011
1.
The Government of the Sudan and Government of South Sudan, hereinafter
referred to as the Parties, reaffirm their commitment to the agreement signed in
Addis Ababa on 29 June 2011, as supplemented by the agreements of 7 December
2010, Annex 2, which relates to the Joint Political and Security Mechanism (JPSM),
and the Joint Position Paper signed between the National Congress Party/Sudan
Armed Forces and Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army on 30 May 2011,
with the following additions and amendments:
(i) Amendments to the 7 December 2010 JPSM document: JPSM
membership would be expanded to include the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
and Ministers of Interior of both countries; reference to the Joint Field
Committee would become the Joint Border Verification Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM), the Joint Sector Teams (JSTs) would become Joint
Border Verification Monitoring Sectors, the Joint Team Sites (JTS) would
become Joint Border Verification Monitoring Teams (JBVMTs), and reference
to the Common Border Zone would become the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone (SDBZ).
(ii) Prior to first meeting of the JPSM, a joint legal committee of the Parties
assisted by the AUHIP legal advisors will prepare a consolidated document for
the reference of the JPSM.
2.
The Parties agree with the Force Commander to 300 force protection as an
adequate basis, pending the recommendations of the Force Commander as per
Paragraph 5 of the 29 June 2011 agreement.
3.
The Parties agree that the area of responsibility (AOR) for the JBVMM shall
correspond to the SDBZ. The centre line for the SDBZ shall be the 1/1/56 borderline
except for the agreed disputed areas. Pending the final resolution of the disputed
areas, the administrative common borderline, as reflected in the map produced and
signed by the Technical Boundary Demarcation Committee before the first meeting
of the JPSM and shall be used as the sole reference. This map shall be attached to
the consolidated document referred to in Paragraph 1 (ii) for their operation.
4.
The Parties agree that they and the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) shall, in accordance with the provisions of the 29 June 2011
Agreement, undertake a joint assessment mission to establish: the location of the
mission headquarters; location and number of sector headquarters; the location and
number of teams; and the personnel to be assigned to these tasks. The outcome of
the assessment mission shall be submitted to the JPSM for consideration and
approval.
5.
The Force Commander shall also undertake a reconnaissance mission, in
consultation with the Parties, to assess the operational requirements of the mission.
6.

2

The Parties agree to the tasks stipulated in Annex A of this Agreement.

11-44886

S/2011/510

7.
Both Parties shall submit their proposals on the corridors of movement to the
JPSM.
8.
The Parties hereby request the UN to endorse the agreement on the Border
Monitoring Support Mission with the following additional tasks to the UNISFA
mandate:
(i)

Provide force protection

(ii)

Provide observers

(iii) Provide logistic and air support
(iv) Provide accommodation for national observers
(v)

The Senior Observer reports to the UNISFA Force Commander

9.
The Parties agree to prepare for the JPSM in accordance with previously
agreed rules of procedure as in Annex C.
10. The Parties agree that the first meeting of the JPSM will be held on 17 August
2011. The meetings of the JPSM shall rotate between Sudan and South Sudan. The
first meeting will be held in Khartoum.
11. The SDBZ and associated border management mechanisms are measures
necessary until normal relationships prevail between the two sovereign States. Thus
the JPSM shall review the necessity of these measures every six months with a view
to making recommendations to the Presidents on the need for continuation.
12.

The suggested draft agenda for the first meeting of the JPSM is as follows:
(i)

Consideration of the structure, rules and budget of the JPSM.

(ii)

Consideration and adoption of the recommendations of the Joint
Committee and UNISFA.

(iii) Report by UNISFA FC on the outcome of his assessment mission.
(iv) Consideration of corridors of movement in the SDBZ.
(v)

Appointment of the JBVMM for endorsement by the Parties.

(vi) Agreement of the date of launching of the SDBZ and related security
mechanisms.
(vii) Discussion on corridors within the SDBZ.
(viii) Date, time, location and agenda of the next JPSM.
(ix) Any Other Business.
Annexes:

11-44886

A.

Tasks of the Support Border Monitoring Mission

B.

Tasks of Joint Border Verification Sectors (JBVMS) and Joint Border
Verification Teams (JBVMTs)

C.

Rules of procedures for the JPSM

3

S/2011/510

Signed on 30 July 2011 at Addis Ababa
(Signed)
Gen. Ismat Abdelrahman Zain Elabdeen
Government of the Sudan

(Signed)
H.E. Lt. Gen. Paul Mayom Akec
Government of South Sudan

(Signed) Witnessed by Pierre Buyoya
African Union High Level Implementation Panel

4

11-44886

S/2011/510

Annex A
Tasks of Border Monitoring Support Mission
1.
Assist in ensuring the observance of the Security Commitments agreed
by the Parties;
2.
Support activities (verifications, investigations, monitoring, arbitrations,
training, liaison coordinating reporting, information exchange and patrols as
required between the Parties along SDBZ;
3.
Support control of Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) circulation
within and across the SDBZ, with the JBVMM, JBVMMS, JBVMTs.
4.
Conduct institutional training for border police and border security
mechanisms as requested by the Parties;
5.

Chair JBVMM meetings and sign JBVMM decisions with the Parties;

6.
Oversee complaints of the Parties to the obligations under the Joint
Position Paper on Border Security of 30 May 2011;
7.
Coordinate planning, monitoring and verification of the implementation
of the Joint Position Paper on Border Security of 30.05.2011;
8.

Receive, verify and resolve violations, disputes and complaints;

9.

Facilitate liaison between the Parties;

10. The JBVMM shall maintain necessary chart geographical and mapping
references, which once agreed to the border between the two states, shall be used for
the purpose of monitoring of the implementation in accordance with Paragraph 2 of
the Agreement on Border Security and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism of
29 June 2011;
11. Assist, facilitate and help to protect the demarcation teams within the
SDBZ as requested by the JPSM;
12.

Create capacity for effective bilateral management mechanisms;

13. Assist building mutual trust, confidence and an environment which
encourages long-term stability and economic development.

11-44886

5

S/2011/510

Annex B
Tasks of Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Sectors
(JBVMS) and Joint Border Verification Teams (JBVMTs)
1.

2.

3.

6

JBVMS Tasks:
1.1

Coordinate planning, monitoring and verification of the implementation
of the agreement within its jurisdiction.

1.2

Upon complaint of a security nature submitted to the JBVMS leader by
representative of either party, task JBVMT to monitor, verify and report
on security within SDBZ.

1.3

Submit a report to JBVMM signed by the JBVMS leader and senior
representative of each party, with a copy of the report to each party.

1.4

Report unlawfully held weapons to the JBVMM and appropriate police
authorities for confiscation. Observe and record their destruction and
report on local disputes. Any disputes beyond their competence are to be
raised to the JBVMM.

1.5

Liaise and conduct meetings every two weeks and when necessary.

1.6

Maintain necessary charts, graphical and mapping references in its area
of jurisdiction, which once agreed to be the border between the two
states, shall be used for the purpose of the monitoring of the
implementation of this agreement.

1.7

Facilitate liaison between their mother units in the two states within its
jurisdiction and to discuss the relevant issues which shall better inform
the JBVMM agenda.

JBVMS HQ Composition:
2.1

Two officers from each, SAF and SPLA with the ranks of not less than
Lt. Colonel.

2.2

Two police officers from each side with the ranks of not less than
Lt. Colonel or equivalent.

2.3

Two NISS officers from each side with ranks of not less than Lt. Colonel.

2.4

One Legal Advisor from each side.

2.5

One command post composed of two military officers from each side
plus one external observer/monitor.

2.6

Two JBVMS shall reach its decisions by consensus of the Parties and
shall establish its internal regulations.

JBVMTs (Teams): There will be a minimum of six teams; however, given the
size of all sectors is not the same, the Parties agree that the number of teams
and their locations will be determined by the sector commander in consultation
with the JBVMM and the Force Commander and with the approval of the
JPSM. Additionally teams if required, may be created this way or disbanded
where they are no longer required.

11-44886

S/2011/510

3.1

Team Composition: Each team will be composed of an equal number of
representatives from each party; the team leader (external observer), one
representative from each of SAF and SPLA, plus one representative from
the police, one from national security and one Legal Advisor from each
Party. If necessary for a specific mission, a representative from the local
authorities or community will be attached to the JBVMT. Teams will be
deployable by vehicle or air, with freedom to move throughout the SDBZ
on both sides of the border and appropriate equipment for their function,
including cameras.
3.1.1

Team tasks: Teams will act jointly to:
3.1.1.1 Monitor and report on security within the SDBZ by
conducting patrols and visits as required throughout
their respective sectors in order to prevent any violations
and enhance confidence-building.
3.1.1.2 Report unlawfully held weapons to the Joint Border
Verification Monitoring Sectors (JBVMS) for more
verification in justifying the unlawful weapons and
awaiting destruction directives from JPSM.
3.1.1.3 Arbitrate on local disputes. Any disputes beyond their
competence are to be raised to sector level and to the
JBVMM if necessary who may then raise it to JSPM if
necessary.
3.1.1.4 Upon complaint of a security nature submitted to the
JBVMT leader from the representative of either party,
the JBVMT leader will task the JBVMT to monitor,
verify and report on security situation within the SDBZ
to JBVMS.
3.1.1.5 Submit a report to the JBVMM signed by the JBVMS
leader and a senior representative of each party, with a
copy of the report to each party.
3.1.1.6 Liaise and conduct meetings every week and when
necessary.

4.

11-44886

Police:
4.1

Official border crossings and movement corridors will be decided by the
first (preliminary) JPSM meeting, based on the proposals of the 2 Parties
which will be provided to the JPSM secretariat before the first
(preliminary) JPSM meeting;

4.2

The crossing of the SDBZ shall be through identified crossing points and
corridors.

4.3

Border crossing procedures will be conducted consistent with the normal
customs and immigration rules and procedures of the two sovereign
states.

7

S/2011/510

Annex C
Rules of Procedure for the JPSM
1.
Timings. The JPSM shall meet quarterly but can call extraordinary meetings
when any problem occurs. The JBVMM shall meet on a monthly regular basis in the
mission headquarters, or in any other location as decided by the JBVMM. The
JBVMM may also meet on an emergency basis when the situation requires.
2.
Locations. The location of the JPSM will rotate with its chair and will
normally alternate between Khartoum and Juba; however, both chairs may agree to
hold a JPSM:

3.

2.1

In an area closer to or inside the SDBZ, if they agree that this would
provide JPSM members with greater awareness of an agenda item; or

2.2

In a neutral location with the agreement of a host country.

JPSM Secretariat. The JPSM Secretariat will:
3.1

Comprise 8 persons drawn 50/50 from the sending States.

3.2

Be fully established and appropriately equipped and housed in two
offices (Khartoum and Juba) in time to support the first (preliminary)
JPSM meeting. Each office shall be routinely manned by the 4 staff
members and funded by each sovereign state. However all eight staff
shall concentrate on the office where a JSPM meeting is to be held for a
period of up to 15 days (the exact duration to be decided by the hosting
chair) either side of the date of the JPSM meeting in order to provide
support for that meeting times of JPSM meetings all the 8 staff shall
converge for a JPSM meeting that is to be held for agreed period. And in
case of a meeting in a neutral location the JPSM will coordinate and
liaise with the host country.

3.3

The funding of the SBDZ National Border Security Mechanisms and the
JPSM secretariats is the sole responsibility of each sovereign state with
the support of the third 3rd Party for the international elements.

3.4

Be funded on a 50/50 basis by both states.

3.5

Tasks. The JPSM Secretariat will:
3.5.1 Coordinate all aspects of JPSM work, including the day to day
administrative activities and regular reports of JPSM meetings.

3.6

8

3.5.2

Circulate the agenda at least 7 days in advance of JPSM meetings.

3.5.3

Draft minutes of JPSM meetings for ratification by signature of
both chairs within 7 days following a JPSM meeting.

3.5.4

Publish the agreed minutes of the JPSM within 14 days of the
date of respective meetings.

3.5.5

Prepare budget
accountability.

submissions

for

JPSM

ratification

and

Public Information/Media. All contact with the media will be conducted
on a joint basis and only by the JPSM chairs or their designated

11-44886

S/2011/510

spokespersons. JBVMM and JBVMS and JBVMTs will refer all
media/public information issues to the JPSM.
3.7

Exchange of Information and Liaison. In the spirit of Kuriftu General
Objective 7 and of cooperation and in order to build confidence and
de-escalate potential cross-border tension, the Parties will establish:
3.7.1

Direct communications between the respective members of the
JPSM from each sovereign state and with the JPSM secretariat;

3.7.2

The exchange of information shall be through the SDBZ
coordinating security mechanisms JPSM, JBVMM, JBVMS and
JBVMTs secretariats and the two Embassies.

3.8

Logistics and Funding. The cost of JPSM meetings, less for travel to the
meeting which shall remain the responsibility of the sending States, will
be met by the hosting government. In the event that a JPSM Meeting is
held in a neutral location, it will be for the joint chairs to agree a funding
mechanism with the host country before confirmation of the meeting
location.

3.9

All other costs of the JPSM, JBVMM, JBVMS and JBVMTs, less for the
costs of external monitoring which will be met by the appropriate
authority, will be the sole responsibility of the two states in equal
proportion. The JPSM budget for the coming accounting (calendar) year
will be agreed as a JPSM agenda item no later than 6 months before the
beginning of the accounting year and ratified by the two sending
governments no later than 3 months before the start of the accounting
year.

3.10 The budget for the remainder of the first accounting year will be
estimated at by the preliminary JPSM; 50% of this sum will be deposited
into each of two escrow accounts (to be administered by the 2 States) no
later than 14 August. Any external donations and support will be held in
an AU escrow account.
3.11 The JPSM Secretariat will publish the actual expenditure against budget
for the JPSM during the previous accounting year no later than one
month after the end of the accounting year. The JPSM Secretariat will
publish its annual budget forecast for the coming accounting year no later
than 6 months before the beginning of the accounting year.
4.

11-44886

Coordinating Instructions:
4.1

Numbers, Composition and Locations. The Parties shall inform the JPSM
secretariat before 14 August 2011 in advance of the first (preliminary)
JPSM meeting of the number, composition and location of, and
boundaries between the security elements to be deployed in the SDBZ.
These details shall be ratified by the first meeting of the JPSM. Any
subsequent changes to the numbers, composition, deployments and
boundaries of the security elements to be deployed in the SDBZ are to be
ratified by the JPSM.

4.2

Small Arms/Light Weapons: The maximum calibre of weapons
permissible within the SDBZ is 12.7 mm (0.5 inch). No other weapons,

9

S/2011/510

including mines and grenades, shall be deployed within the SDBZ.
Weapons verified as unlawful by the JBVMM, JBVMS, JBVMTs shall be
recorded, secured and handed over to the appropriate police authority
pending JPSM directives on destruction.
4.3

10

Border Demarcation: The JPSM will facilitate the work of the
commission for demarcation of the border between the two sovereign
states.

11-44886
