ll2

General AMembly-Thirtieth Session

attainment of the goals set forth in the Declaration with
respect to the Territories;
5. Calls upan the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economies of the Territories listed above and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for
those Territories;
6. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Governments of the Territories concerned, to safeguard the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to the enjoyment of their natural
resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
7. W elcomes the positive attit11de of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under its administration and requests the Chairman of the Special
Committee to continue bis consultations with a view to
the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
organizations within the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life of
those Territories;
9. Requests tbe Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands and Turks and Caicos
Islands, including the possible dispatch of visiting missions in consultation with the administering Power, and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3428 (XXX). Question of the Tokelau Islands

The General Assembly,
Havíng considered the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,41
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its decisions of 14 December 1973 42 and
13 December 197443 on the question of the Tokelau
Islands,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,44
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to help the people of the Tokelau Islands to realize
their aspirations in accordance with the objectives set
forth in the Declaration,
41 Ibid., chaps. IV and XIX.

42 Ibid., Twenty-eiglzth Session, Supplement No. 30 (Al
9030), p. 111, ítem 23.
43 Ibi4,, Twenty-nintlz Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631),
p. 116, 1tem 23.
44 lbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2168th meeting.

A ware of the special problems facing the Territory
by virtue of its isolation, small size and meagre resources,
1. Approves tbe chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Tokelau Islands and endorses the consensus contained therein;45
2. Reaf]irms tbe inalienable right of the people of
the Tokelau Islands to self-determination in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Welcomes the invitation extended by the Govemment of New Zealand to the Special Committee to dispatch a visiting mission to the Tokelau Islands in 1976,
in order to obtain first-hand information on conditions
in the Territory and on the wisbes and aspirations of
its people;
·
4. Requests the administering Power and the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance and
facilities to the visiting mission in the discharge of its
task;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report furtber thereon to
the General Assembly at its tbirty-first session.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3429 (XXX). Question of American Samoa,
Guam and United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Guam and United States Virgin lslands,
Having e~amined t~e relevant c~apte~ of the report
of tbe Spec1al Comm1ttee on the S1tuation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 46
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaraiion on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories listed above, in particular
General Assembly resolutions 3289 (XXIX) and 3290
(XXIX) of 13 December 1974,
Taking into account the statements of the administering Power relating to developments in those Territories,47
Conscious of tbe need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration witb respect
to the Territories listed above,
Deploring the policy of the administering Power in
continuing to maintain military installations on Guam
in contravention of the relevant resolutions of the Gen~
eral Assembly,
Bearing in mind the constructive results acbieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such ~issions i~ ess.ential for securing adequate
and first-hand mformation m regard to the conditions
prevailing in those Territories and to the views, wishes
45 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev. l), chap. XIX.
46 /bid., chaps. IV, XXIII and XXVI.
47 See A/ AC.109/SC.3/SR.229, 234, 235 and 240.

113

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

and aspirations of the peoples therein with respect to
their future status,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories
concemed and stressing the necessity of diversifying
their economies as a matter of priority in order to reduce their dependence on :tluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American Samoa, Guam and United States Virgin
Islands;48
2. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Gtanting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that the question of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concemed;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, to
continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set fo$ in the
Declaration with respect to the Territories;
5. Strongly deprecates the establishment of military
installations on Guam as being incompatible with the
purposes and principies of the Charter of the United
Nations and of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
6. Cal/s upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economies of the Territories listed above and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for
those Territories;
7. Ca/ls upon the administering Power to reconsider
its attitude towards receiving United Nations visiting
missions and to permit access by such missions to the
Territories;
8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Govemments of the Territories concemed, to safeguard the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to the enjoyment of their natural
resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
· 9. Requests tbe administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
organizations within the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life
of those Territories;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa,
48 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.l ), chaps. XXITI and
XXVI.

Guam and United States Virgin Islands, including the
possible dispatch of visiting missions in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3430 (XXX). Question of the Seychelles

Thc General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 49
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 50
Recalling íts resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Noting with satisfaction that, as a result of the constitutional conference held in London in March 1975,
in which the Territory's political parties-the Seychelles
Democratic Party and the Seychelles People's United
Party-fully participated, a coalition Government was
established in the Territory,
Noting the expressed desire of the Govemment of the
Seychelles that the Territory should attain independence
not later than June 1976 and the continued readiness
of the administering Power to grant independence to
the people of the Seychelles in accordance with their
wishes,
Further noting that an electoral review commission
has been established with a view to agreeing on the
system of elections and the size and composition of the
~egislature and that a renewed conference is envisaged
m early 1976 to work out the provisions of an independence constitution,
Mindful of the stated position of the Govemment of
the Seychelles with regard to the territorial integrity of
the Seychelles and bearing in mind, in particular, the
statements made by the representatives of the Govemment of the Seychelles in that regard at the 1019th
meeting of the Special Committee on 20 August 1975,111

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Comm~ttee on the Situati~n with regard to the Implementatlon of the Declaratlon on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Seychelles ;52
2. Takes note of ~e u_nited wish of the people of
the Seychelles to ach1eve mdependence in accordance
with the peclaratio~ on the Granting of Independence
to Colorual Countnes and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
49 Ibid., chaps. IV and XIV.
50 /bid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
5 1 See Al AC.109/PV.1019.
52 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1), chap. XIV.
