United Nations

A/RES/57/192

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 106

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/553)]

57/192. International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/140 of 19 December 2001 and previous resolutions
on the International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People,
Recalling also its resolution 40/131 of 13 December 1985, by which it
established the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations,
Recalling further that the goal of the Decade is to strengthen international
cooperation for the solution of problems faced by indigenous people in such areas as
human rights, the environment, development, education and health, and that the
theme of the Decade is “Indigenous people: partnership in action”,
Welcoming, in this respect, the contributions made through the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, to
the realization of the goals of the Decade,
Welcoming also, in this respect, the concluding documents of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from
26 August to 4 September 2002, 1
Saluting the successful holding of the historic first annual session of the
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues at United Nations Headquarters in New
York from 13 to 24 May 2002,
Welcoming the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous
people, 2 submitted to the Commission at its fifty-eighth session, pursuant to
Commission resolution 2001/57 of 24 April 2001, 3

_______________
1

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolutions 1 and 2.
2
E/CN.4/2002/97 and Add.1.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

02 55094

A/RES/57/192

Recognizing the importance of consultation and cooperation with indigenous
people in planning and implementing the programme of activities for the International
Decade of the World’s Indigenous People,4 the need for adequate financial support
from the international community, including support from within the United Nations
system, and the need for adequate coordination and communication channels,
Urging all parties to continue to use their best efforts to achieve the goals of
the Decade,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the programme of activities for the International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People; 5
Affirms its conviction of the value and diversity of the cultures and forms
2.
of social organization of indigenous people and its conviction that the development
of indigenous people within their countries will contribute to the socio-economic,
cultural and environmental advancement of all the countries of the world;
3.
Emphasizes the importance of strengthening the human and institutional
capacity of indigenous people to develop their own solutions to their problems;
4.
Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as
coordinator for the Decade:
(a) To continue to promote the objectives of the Decade, taking into account,
in the fulfilment of his functions, the special concerns of indigenous people;
(b) To give due regard to the dissemination, from within existing resources
and voluntary contributions, of information on the situation, cultures, languages,
rights and aspirations of indigenous people and, in that context, to consider the
possibility of organizing projects, special events, exhibitions and other activities
addressed to the public, in particular to young people;
(c) To submit, through the Secretary-General, an annual report to the
General Assembly on the implementation of the programme of activities for the
Decade;
Reaffirms the adoption of a declaration on the rights of indigenous people
5.
as a major objective of the Decade, and underlines the importance of effective
participation by indigenous representatives in the open-ended intersessional working
group of the Commission on Human Rights charged with developing a draft
declaration on the rights of indigenous people, established pursuant to Commission
resolution 1995/32 of 3 March 1995; 6
6.
Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/28 of 25 July
2002 concerning the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues;
7.

Encourages Governments to support the Decade by:

(a) Preparing relevant programmes, plans and reports in relation to the
Decade, in consultation with indigenous people;

_______________
4

Resolution 50/157, annex.
A/57/395.
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
5

2

A/RES/57/192

(b) Seeking means, in consultation with indigenous people, of giving
indigenous people greater responsibility for their own affairs and an effective voice
in decisions on matters that affect them;
(c) Establishing national committees or other mechanisms involving
indigenous people to ensure that the objectives and activities of the Decade are
planned and implemented on the basis of full partnership with indigenous people;
(d) Contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International
Decade of the World’s Indigenous People;
(e) Contributing, together with other donors, to the United Nations Voluntary
Fund for Indigenous Populations in order to assist indigenous representatives in
participating in the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, the Working Group on
Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of
Human Rights and the open-ended intersessional working group of the Commission
on Human Rights charged with elaborating a draft declaration on the rights of
indigenous people;
(f) Considering contributing, as appropriate, to the Fund for the Development of
Indigenous Peoples in Latin America and the Caribbean, in support of the goals of the
Decade;
(g) Identifying resources for activities designed to implement the goals of
the Decade, in cooperation with indigenous people and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations;
8.
Invites United Nations financial and development institutions,
operational programmes and the specialized agencies and secretariats, as well as
other regional and international organizations, in accordance with the existing
procedures of their governing bodies:
(a) To give increased priority and resources to improving the conditions of
indigenous people, with particular emphasis on the needs of those people in
developing countries, inter alia, through the preparation of specific programmes of
action for the implementation of the goals of the Decade, within their areas of
competence;
(b) To launch special projects, through appropriate channels and in
cooperation with indigenous people, to strengthen their community-level initiatives
and to facilitate the exchange of information and expertise among indigenous people
and other relevant experts;
(c) To designate focal points for the coordination of activities related to the
Decade with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
and commends those institutions, programmes, agencies and regional and international
organizations that have already done so;
9.
Appeals to all Governments and organizations to consider contributing to
the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations, if possible with a
substantial increase in the level of contributions;
10. Recommends that the Secretary-General ensure coordinated follow-up to
the recommendations concerning indigenous people of all relevant United Nations
conferences;
11. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
submit, through the Secretary-General, a report on the implementation of the
programme of activities for the Decade to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session;

3

A/RES/57/192

12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the item entitled “Programme of activities of the International Decade of the
World’s Indigenous People”.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

4
