S/PV.7728

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7728th meeting

Wednesday, 29 June 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. De la Calle García
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 8 June 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/510)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-20013 (E)
*1620013*

S/PV.7728

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 8 June 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/510)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security will now begin its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/580, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/510, which contains a letter dated
8 June 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2296 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 2296 (2016) on
the renewal and extension of the African Union-United
2/7

29/06/2016

Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
because we believe that it is very important for the
Security Council to give its full support to the Mission
so it can discharge its mandate, as set out in resolution
1769 (2007).
My delegation stresses that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan are inviolable and
protected. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for our brothers in the Sudan in their efforts
to restore peace and security throughout Darfur.
We also note that the situation has improved in most
areas in Darfur. We also pay tribute to all the positive
efforts of the Government of the Sudan to reach a
settlement in Darfur and honour its commitments
under the Darfur peace agreement, in particular the
holding of a referendum on the administrative status
of Darfur within the Sudan, as well as for its positive
achievements, including the signing of the road map
agreement in April.
The situation in Darfur today is very different from
that which prevailed before the Mission was established
in 2007. The fact that the Mission shall remain in the
region without a time frame to determine its future is
therefore not realistic. We need a clearly formulated exit
strategy, with the full participation of the African Union,
including detailed, measurable benchmarks that could
be assessed in real terms. In that regard, I commend
the efforts of the Joint Working Group to formulate
the UNAMID exit strategy, the special report of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2016/510), and
the results and recommendations contained therein,
which seek to implement the benchmarks of the
UNAMID exit strategy. We also stress the importance
of focusing on the development of Darfur and the
reconstruction of its economic, political and judicial
institutions, in accordance with the priorities and the
needs and requirements of the Government of Sudan
and the five states of Darfur.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Bearing in mind the important stabilizing role
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the Russian delegation voted
in favour of resolution 2296 (2016), extending the
mandate of the hybrid mission. As a result of intensive
consultations, members of the Council managed to
make the text sufficiently balanced. In particular, the
resolution reflects the fact that the security situation
16-20013

29/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in Darfur has significantly improved of late and that
relative calm prevails in four of the five states of the
region. Isolated pockets of resistance on the part of
insurgents are found only in the mountainous region of
Jebel Marra in Central Darfur.
Against that backdrop, we must raise the issue of
developing an exit strategy for UNAMID. For us, an
important provision of the resolution is that which tasks
the Secretary-General with providing recommendations
by October about benchmarks for UNAMID. We hope
that future reports of the Secretariat will fully reflect
the conclusions and recommendations of the Joint
Working Group tasked with developing an exit strategy
for UNAMID.
The recently published special report of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2016/510) does
not meet those criteria at all. It is not by chance that the
African Union Peace and Security Council has shown
relatively little enthusiasm for that document. The Joint
Working Group on Darfur adequately incorporates the
views of all parties interested in the situation in Darfur
and various aspects of UNAMID activities, including
that of the host country. If the Secretariat took the
conclusions and proposals of the Working Group into
account, that would be fully in accordance with the
basic principles of peacekeeping.
At the same time, we cannot agree with all the
provisions of the resolution just adopted. For example,
we in now way share the concern expressed about the
referendum in Darfur. Over 70 per cent of voters of the
region took part in that referendum. I believe that the
Security Council should show respect for the expression
of the will of the voters of Darfur, especially against the
backdrop of recent referendums in Africa and Europe.
Year after year, the tone of the resolutions on Darfur
have become increasingly negative. It is our impression
that the only goal of the authors and co-authors of those
resolutions is basically to ramp up pressure on the
Government of the Sudan, using every opportunity at
their disposal. Unfortunately, it is UNAMID that often
finds itself hostage to those political games.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the commitment of the Government of the
Sudan to the promotion of national dialogue, peace
and stability in the Darfur region and its economic
development, and to the successful organization of the

S/PV.7728

referendum in Darfur. China welcomes the mediation
efforts of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel and the signing by the Government of the Sudan
of the road map agreement proposed by the Panel.
The international community should urge the relevant
armed groups and opposition to expeditiously sign the
road map agreement and participate in the national
dialogue and the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur in order to achieve a comprehensive
political settlement of the Darfur question.
China appreciates the work of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to promote the political process in Darfur,
mediate and resolve intercommunal conflicts, and
assist in delivering humanitarian relief. United Nations
peacekeeping operations should effectively respect
the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of host
countries, heed the opinion of host countries and adjust
the scale and mandate of operations in a timely manner,
in keeping with the changes in local circumstances
and needs. China welcomes the work of the Sudanese
Government to assist UNAMID in implementing its
mandate. We hope that the Secretariat, the African
Union and the Sudanese Government will continue
to take advantage of the tripartite mechanism and the
platform of the Joint Working Group to strengthen
communications and consultation, duly address any
problems that emerge during the course of cooperation,
and strive to formulate a practical and reasonable exit
strategy for the Mission as soon as possible.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela reiterates its support for the work of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We acknowledge its valuable
contribution to achieving the strategic priorities of
the mission, especially regarding the protection of
civilians, the facilitation of access to humanitarian
assistance and mediation, including through its conflict
prevention and mitigation strategy and its promotion of
grass-roots dialogue.
We also categorically condemn attacks on
UNAMID, its personnel and its facilities, whose
inviolability must be respected in accordance with
international law. We also like reiterate our call on the
parties to the conflict to give their full support to the
work of UNAMID so that it can fully and effectively
implement the mandate entrusted to it, in the framework
of close cooperation with the Government of the Sudan.

16-200133/7

S/PV.7728

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2296 (2016), which renews the
UNAMID mandate for one year. We are convinced
that it is essential to maintain the unity of the Security
Council in addressing this important issue and our
support for UNAMID. We hope that the same positive
spirit will prevail in promoting a negotiated political
solution to the prolonged conflict that continues to
affect this brotherly African country, in particular in
the region of Darfur.
In that sense, Venezuela reaffirms that a political
rather than military solution is the only way to end
the conflict in Darfur through a direct and inclusive
political dialogue between the parties to the conflict
without preconditions of any kind, which would promote
stability, development and lasting peace in that country
and resolve the very complex humanitarian situation
there. We therefore call on the parties that have not yet
done so, particularly the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid, to subscribe to the road map agreement, which
we believe will serve as the basis for achieving lasting
peace. We also think that the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur establishes a framework that should be used
as a foundation for negotiations between the parties
to the conflict, complemented by initiatives such as
the national dialogue convened by the Government in
Khartoum and the internal dialogue and consultations
in Darfur.
In that regard, and considering the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur to be a
positive step, our delegation welcomes the referendum
on the administrative status of Darfur, held from 11 to
13 April, in which more than 90 per cent of eligible
voters took part, and for which the African Union
and the League of Arab States served as observers.
We also believe that the efforts of the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel, led by former South African
President Thado Mbeki, as the primary mediation
group, are critical to revitalizing the peace process and
putting an end to the conflict, for which we would like
to reiterate our full support.
Lastly, we call on the parties to respect the human
rights and international humanitarian law, in line with
the relevant legal instruments. We also express our firm
support for the work of the African Union, based on the
search for African solutions to African problems.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States supports the Security Council’s adoption
4/7

29/06/2016

of resolution 2296 (2016), renewing the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) for another year. The United
States welcomes the Government of the Sudan’s recent
declaration of a unilateral cessation of hostilities in
Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile. We would like
to see that declaration extended to the Darfur region
as, unfortunately, fighting by the Government and its
proxies continues in Darfur.
An end to military offences and fighting in all of
those areas would bring much-needed relief to thousands
of Sudanese and create an improved environment for
dialogue, leading to a political solution. Lasting peace
will come only from a negotiated solution that addresses
the key political and security drivers of conflict in
all areas of the Sudan. Civilians continue to suffer in
Darfur with, according to the United Nations, at least
80,000 newly displaced in 2016 alone and more than
2 million internally displaced persons who are in need
of aid and cannot return to their homes.
In the absence of a comprehensive political
agreement and in the face of those pressing needs,
UNAMID plays a critical role in protecting civilians
and facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in Darfur. Any calls for the mission to leave the Sudan
are woefully premature. We urge the Government of the
Sudan to allow the mission to carry out the mandate the
Security Council has given it, including by not placing
restrictions on its freedom of movement or its needed
food and supplies. We understand that as of 23 June, all
UNAMID food-ration shipments that had been held at
Port Sudan by the Government of the Sudan had been
cleared for release. We welcome that development and
call on the Government of the Sudan to urgently release
of the nearly 300 remaining containers of much-needed
equipment, in compliance with its obligations under its
status-of-forces agreement with the United Nations.
I would like to briefly address the report of the
Joint Working Group, which has been raised by some
colleagues. The United States certainly welcomes and
encourages cooperation among the Government of the
Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union to
efficiently and effectively implement the UNAMID
mandate. But we must be clear that the Security Council,
in order to conduct its business, will continue to rely
primarily on the analysis and advice of the SecretaryGeneral about the situation in countries on our agenda.
16-20013

29/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We believe that the Joint Working Group’s report
downplays the scale of fighting in Darfur and is
inconsistent with the special report of the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission (S/2016/510). For example, the Joint
Working Group assesses that there were “no more rebel
movements in four states”, but the special report finds
that the Sudanese military claimed victories in South
Darfur earlier this year, conducted bombings in Central
Darfur and pursued rebels in North Darfur in January.
Moreover, we know from the past 10 years that the
rebel movements are constantly mobile, and that any
single snapshot in time is not necessarily indicative of a
larger trend. Also, how do we square the Joint Working
Group’s conclusions that “access is granted for most
patrols” with the conclusion of the special report
that UNAMID continued “to face severe restrictions
on its access and freedom of movement in Darfur”
(S/2016/510, para. 48)?
Lastly, the Joint Working Group emphasizes the
beginning of voluntary returns and early recovery
assistance that has been provided to the people of
Darfur, but ignores the surge of displacements that
occurred earlier this year in Jebel Marra, where tens
of thousands of new internally displaced persons are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance.
Finally, we reiterate that any exit strategy for
UNAMID is pretty clear. It is one linked to the
achievement of the agreed benchmarks on an inclusive
political process, the protection of civilians and the
prevention of violence. We look forward to progress on
achieving those benchmarks.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): As the Security
Council’s penholder for Darfur, the United Kingdom
wholeheartedly welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2296 (2016), which extends the important
work of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for another year. I also
welcome the constructive spirit in which all members
of the Security Council engaged with us during
the negotiations.
The situation in Darfur for many is desperate.
Millions of people have fled their homes. Millions of
people need humanitarian assistance just to survive.
To the United Kingdom, the need for UNAMID is
therefore clear. The resolution is much more than a
simple mandate renewal; it is a vital recommitment
to protecting civilians in Darfur, to improving the

S/PV.7728

delivery of humanitarian assistance, and to supporting
mediation, both between the Government and the
Darfur armed groups, as well as among communities.
The text strikes a balance. It enables UNAMID to
provide the protection and support necessary for the
vulnerable in Darfur, but it also seeks to help deliver
progress on the benchmarks that will ultimately enable
UNAMID to leave Darfur, as my Egyptian colleagues
and others have just set out.
In
adopting
the
resolution
unanimously
today — and I very much agree with the comments
made by my Venezuelan colleague on the importance
of unanimity — we have sent an important message
of support to UNAMID and to the people of Darfur.
For the Government of the Sudan, it is an honest but
fair message. Through this resolution, we have not
shied away from the situation in Darfur. We have
clearly expressed our concern at the fighting in Jebel
Marra and the impact on civilians, especially of aerial
bombardments. We have also called on the Government
of the Sudan to ensure unfettered access for UNAMID
and humanitarian personnel and to release all UNAMID
shipments. It is essential that UNAMID have the food
and equipment that it needs to deliver on its mandate.
We welcome the recent progress on this issue and trust
that it will continue.
We have welcomed positive developments in
other areas, such as the Government of the Sudan’s
adoption of an action plan for the protection of children
from violations in armed conflict, and we have
welcomed the Government’s signing of the road map
agreement proposed by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. We urge non-signatory groups
to join them and sign this important document.
I am confident that this resolution provides the
basis for a strong relationship between the Council, the
African Union, UNAMID and the Government of the
Sudan. I hope that it will enable us all to work together
in a spirit of mutual cooperation to the benefit of those
suffering in Darfur.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to express our thanks and appreciation to all of the
members of the Council, especially those members with
whom we have maintained contact since the draft was
presented for the extension of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I

16-200135/7

S/PV.7728

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

should like also to express our profound appreciation
to all those who have made every effort to study and
consider the viewpoint of my delegation as well as the
undeniably true information that we have submitted on
the situation in Darfur.
I should like also to welcome the general
assessments and statements made by the various
members of the Council in which they explained that
the situation in Darfur has improved. In our assessment
of the security, humanitarian and political situation in
Darfur, we do not rely only on random documents; there
is much information we could invoke and advance, but
the fact is that we rely on the realities on the ground,
not coloured by any prior position or objective that
could distort or in many cases undermine the truth.
When the events that have befallen the five states
of Darfur during the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/510) and by resolution 2296
(2016), which has just been adopted by the Council, the
events in Darfur cannot be denied, ignored or refuted.
Darfur today has no rebellion or armed movements; the
presence of those armed movements and groups was
the reason for the deployment of the African Union
forces in Darfur until 2006. This led to the deployment
of UNAMID since 2007; that is the reason why we
have UNAMID in Darfur. This is its raison d’être.
If the purpose of UNAMID is no longer there, then
its presence is no longer necessary. UNAMID is not
there for any other reason. It has not come to secure its
supplies from Port Sudan on the Red Sea coast; this is
something that we leave to the administrative bodies
responsible for that matter.
The resolution that was adopted today extending
UNAMID’s mandate for another year is replete with
contradictions between its various paragraphs and
contradicts the facts on the ground that we see in Darfur
today. After the conclusion of the military operations
in most parts of Darfur and recently in Jebel Marra,
the humanitarian situation has started to improve,
and Darfur has seen the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons - 800,000 returnees - according to
the May 2016 statement made by the humanitarian aid
commission. The last of those movements came after
the Jebel Marra incidents; 24,000 people returned,
according to the UNAMID sector chief for central
Darfur, who had visited the area of Jebel Marra only
three days prior.
6/7

29/06/2016

Also, there has been some improvement and
progress in connection with the plan to collect weapons
from civilians and in terms of all of the efforts that are
being made to reach a political solution through the
implementation of the various provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which remains the
single internationally agreed forum for the achievement
of peace and security in Darfur.
Today Darfur is free of any organized military
presence of military armed movements, as I said
earlier. Those movements had been wreaking havoc in
Darfur since 2003. The military operations that have
been undertaken by the Sudanese armed forces in
Jebel Marra have put end to the excesses committed
by the Abdul Wahid faction. We have put an end to his
brigandry and to his targeting of civilians, and ensured
the safety of the land roads that connect that area with
other parts of the Sudan. Our efforts have enabled
students, for the first time in 13 years – I repeat, for the
first time in 13 years – to go back to school and take
examinations for various educational certificates in the
Sudan although they had exceeded the normal age for
taking such examinations. That was the fate of children
given the acts carried out by the Abdul Wahid factions,
which threatened their parents and their property if
they did not send their children to his camps to fight
alongside his soldiers.
This is something that cannot be denied. The
Government of the Sudan has been asking since 2014
that UNAMID start to devise its exit strategy. The
Joint Working Group was formed as a result, with
the participation of the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations. The Group has
carried out two assessment visits to the five states of
Darfur, the last of those visits was in the month of May.
The Working Group showed clearly that the
situation in Darfur had developed in a way that would
permit the drawdown of the mission and the withdrawal
of UNAMID units from a number of positions. However,
some in this international Organization unfortunately
refused to accept this recommendation, despite the
fact that it had been accepted by the representatives
of the African Union, a regional organization whose
recommendations constitute a significant dimension in
the decisions taken by the Council. We can therefore
see no justification whatsoever for paragraph 27
of resolution 2296 (2016). We see no justification
for limiting the task of the Joint Working Group in
16-20013

29/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

presenting recommendations; this is something that the
Government of Sudan totally rejects.
Let me convey to the Council our categorical view
that it is extremely important for the Group to continue
its work to implement the exit strategy in the manner
agreed at previous meetings. I must also underline
that our Government believes that in the work of the
Secretariat, especially the work of the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations, we see a lot of procrastination
and delaying tactics, which do not serve the cooperation
and coordination efforts that are being made by the
Government of the Sudan. Therefore it is necessary
for this administration to take into consideration the
need to formulate an exit strategy, view our opinions
with respect, and stop prevaricating and the use of
delaying tactics. The Government of the Sudan has

S/PV.7728

been asking for an exit strategy for nine years, during
which a great deal has been attained. This is the only
way to underline the success achieved by UNAMID
in attaining its purpose and letting it be known to the
members of the Council. The Government of the Sudan
is fully prepared to undertake its own assessment or
to welcome another Security Council visit to assess
the situation in Darfur and to collect the evidence that
some wish to ignore or refute.
Despite all the complications and obstacles, we
reiterate our resolve to achieve peace and justice and
to ensure the return of displaced persons to Darfur, in
full, sincere, impartial and faithful cooperation with the
Council, so that we can rebuild our beloved homeland
and contribute thereby to world peace and security.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

16-200137/7
