UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL
FEB03 1993

THIRTY-NINTH

YEA

2529’”

MEETING:

fJfl/Sk

(j(J&m-.YJ

4 APRIL

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2529). .....................................

Adoption of the agenda. ......................................

1
..........

1

Letter dated 29.March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 6449) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SlPV.2529

I,
:.

*

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally pub&shed in
quarterly Supplements of the OJjkial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2529th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 4 Afiril‘1984,
President: Mr. Vladimir A. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Afghanistan, Costa Rica, Guatemala and Yugoslavia
in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdomof Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2529)

I.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Nicaragua tothe.United
Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16449)

at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan), Mr. Zumbado JimPnez (Costa Rica), Mr. Fajardo-Maldonado
(Guatemala) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
.

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent Repre=
sentative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16449)

4. Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA(Nicaragua)
[interpretation from Spanish]: With reference to the draft resolution in document S/16463, submitted by my delegation,
1 wish to inform the Council that some minor changes
have been handed in to the Secretariat for later distribution to members of the Council. Nicaragua thus hopes
that members will be able to vote on the draft once the
debate has concluded.

The meeting

was called to order at4.40
Adoption

p.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings on this item [2525rh, 2527rh. and
2528th meetings], I invite the representatives
of Alge~ria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico,
the Seychelles, the Syrian ArabcRepublic and Viet Nam
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

5. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): First, I should
like to express to you, Sir, my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. Next, I should like to pay a
tribute to your predecessor for the excellent way in
which he conducted this Council’s affairs during the
month of March. We remember with particular gratitude the skill and impartiality
displayed by Mr. Arias
Stella during the very busy and sometimes difftcult
meetings which marked the end of his tenure.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Kova?ii’%
(Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Al-A& (Democratic
Yemen),
Mr. Romero Sanchez (El Salvador), Mr. Ibrahim
(Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Flores Bermtidez (Honduras), Mr. R&z (Hungary), Mr. Kittikhoun. (Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya),
Mr. Marin Bosch (Mexico), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Repub1ic)und Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council-cham6er.

6. Once again the Security Council is asked to consider the crisis in Central America, a crisis which is
closely related to the processes of change in which the
countries of the region are immersed. The endemic
social inequalities, injustice and economic underdevelopment are at the root of the present crisis, which is no
doubt aggravated by outside interference.
7. The Security Council, in its resolution 530 (1983) of
May 1983, and the General Assembly, in its resolution
38110, unanimously
endorsed the efforts of the four
1

Latin American countries constituting the Contadora
Group, which have taken the lead in the search for
peace in Central America. Indeed, the regional framework of Contadora would seem to be the most appropriate and promising approach to a settlement, of the
disputes in the area, and we are glad to note that since
its establishment the Contadora Group has made considerable progress.

and other violations of international law come to an end
and if the principles formulated by the Contadora
Group are fully respected by ail concerned.
13. As members of the Council we should do all we
can to assist the Contadora countries in their efforts to
work out a peaceful solution to the conflict in Central
America. Least of all should we make life more difftcult
for the members of the Group. Therefore, we appeal to
all States to respect.the stated objectives worked out by
the Contadora Group and to uphold scrupulously the
principles of non-intervention, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The republics of Central America
should be given the opportunity to solve their own not
inconsiderable problems, free from outside intervention and with due respect for their right.of self-determination, so as to enable the peoples of those countries
to develop their societies in peace.

8. When the Group met with the five Central American republics in Panama in September 1983, a Document of Objectives [S/16041, annex] was adopted which
not only clearly established the principles to be
observed in order to reduce the conflicts and create
peaceful conditions in the area, but also set out a number of political and economic objectives for the Central
American States. By accepting that Document, all Central American States agreed that the use.of overt and
covert force or the threat of force must be discontinued
and that the traffic in arms must stop. Furthermore,
various measures to reduce the militarization of the
area were considered, and all the participants in that
meeting committed themselves to respect for the promotion of human rights as well as to the- adoption of
measures conducive to the establishment of fully democratic, representative and pluralistic systemsof government. Finally, the document stressed the intention of
the signatories to take economic and social measures
with the aim of promoting the well-being of the peoples
in the area and arriving at a more equitable distribution
of wealth.

14. The PRESIDENT-(inr~rprerationfronz Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
15. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam): Allow me at
the outset, Mr. President, to join other representatives
in congratulating you on your assumption of the stewardship of the Council for this month, even though you
have said you would prefer fulfilling your duties to
receiving words of praise. We fully believe that you will
give us the benefitsof your senseof responsibility, your
skills and experience, and that you will guide the Council’s work to success.We would also like to thank your
predecessor, Mr. Javier Arias SteIIa of Peru, for the
manner in which he guided the work of the, Council
during the month of March. Finally, we would thank all
the other members of the Council for giving us this
opportunity to take part in the discussion.

9. We have been informed that negotiations are going
on with the objective of working out formal agreements
between the Central American countries based on the
goals contained in the Document of Qbjectives. We
hope that those negotiations will lead to the desired
concrete results as soon as po~ssibie.
10. At the present time, however, acts of violence
against countries of the region continue, in spite of the
efforts of the Contadora Group and the unanimous
support of these efforts by the Security Council and-the
General Assembly. Almost daily we learn from official
Council documents of complaints by Nicaragua and its
neighbours about violations of their sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. We also continue to
receive reports concerning gross violations of human
rights in the area, as well as of attacks on public works,
energy storage facilities and othertargets, which have
resulted occasionally in the loss of human life and a
reduction in economic production.

16. In the last few weeks Central America has-become,
the focal point of world-wide attention. The situation in
that already troubled region has been aggravated by the
continued military activities directed by the United
States against Nicaragua, These acts, reports of which
abound in daily newspapers here in the United States,
have actually taken their heavy toll: properties have
been destroyed, human lives lost and international’
navigation endangered. We have listened attentively
to other speakers and especiahy to the statement of
Mr. Javier Chamorro Mora before the Council last Friday 12525th meeting], in which he unrolled before us,
with full, solid and undeniable facts, all these covert
and overt acts by the United States against his country
--acts that, he stressed, marked a new phase of the
aggression.

11. A new development in this spiral of violence is the
mining of Nicaraguan harbours, which has grave impiications for the right of free navigation. On 1 March a
Dutch dredging vessel, the Geopotes VI, was seriously
damaged by an explosion while in the port of Corinto,
causing injury. to four people aboard.
12. It is our firm conviction that peace and security
can retu,m to the region of Central America only if these

17. Within only a few months Nicaragua has had to
lodge several protests against the United Statesbefore
the Council. Unlike the representativeof the hostcountry with her lengthy preaching-on the,regional situation,
which obviously reflects the conclusions of the Urnted
States bipartisan commission on Central America-, we
2

share the true concern of the Government and people of
Nicaragua, a small people whose only preoccupation is
to rebuild its ravaged country and whose sovereignty
and independence are endangered by the policies of
intervention and aggression of a big Power which happens to be a permanent member of the Security Council-a.people that has every right to come to this forum
forjustice and to ask its friends, as well as other peaceloving peoples, for help,

22. Last week, the Council met to discuss a situation
concerning the threat of aggression by the United
States against Libya, a small non-aligned country, and
now it is discussing a complaint by Nicaragua, another
small non-aligned country. We can easily see who
should be held responsible for all these developments.
Also, we are right to ask whether in fact the United
States is seeking confrontation with the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, just as it has so far challenged
the third world in its legitimate demand for a new international economic order. We do not have to seek far for
the answer.

18. Let us linger for a while to draw an analogy, in the
most pregnant sense of the word, between what is
happening in Nicaragua and what happened in Viet
Nam. The United States directly participated in the
Viet Nam war; it used almost all kinds of weapons
except the nuciear one. It also mined Haiphong, the
most important port in North Viet Nam, thus starting
the blockade against our country. The.mining and the
blockade were followed by the- B-52 bombers’ carpetbombing of Hanoi and Haiphong for seven days and
nights in late December 1972, kiiling mtiny innocent
Vietnamese children and adults-ironically, at a time
when representatives were sitting around. this table
wishing one another Merry Christmas.

23. The people and Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, faithful to their friends, stand
firm behind the Nicaraguan people and the Government
of National Reconstruction, as well as behind the people of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and all other peoples
fighting for their national independence.’ The acts by
the United States against Nicaragua directly threaten
the sovereignty and independence of that country and.
hamper the earnest efforts of the Contadora Group to
ease tension and work out ‘a political solution to the
problems of the region. An immediate end should be put
to the United States acts of aggression against Nicaragua.

19. ‘But the United States ended up with a Dien Bien
Phu in the air, and with, this it had.to admit defeat and
stated that there would be no second Viet Nam. Now it
seemsto have forgotten its bitter experience. The withdrawal’from Lebanon serves as another lesson to the
United States, but what is happening in Nicaragua and
in Central American shows that it is setting out again on
the same old track.

24. We sincerely urge the Council to act firmly and to
adopt the draft resolution before it. It is time, we believe, for this body to take effective measures to show
that it is really living up to its responsibility in conformity with the Charter, that is, to preserve peace and
security in the world and to safeguard peoples from
threats or acts of aggression and intimidation.

20. The mining of Nicaraguan ports, as Mr. Chamorro
Mora put it, is a turning point in the United States
method of waging “covert war” against Nicaragua. It is
obviously a new step taken by the United States imperialist-sin their military escalation, itran attempt to-wage
a large-scale war of aggression against Nicaragua and to
oppose the national liberation movements in El Salvador and els.ewhere in Central America and the Caribbean area, thus seriously jeopardizing peace and stability in the region, But the United States should be
reminded that its dream ofdominating other peoples, of
invading other countries Grenada-style%should not and
never can be realized. The aggressor cannot et away
clean-handed. The people and Government. o%Nicaragua have stated in the clearest terms their determination. to defend their beloved country.

25. In conclusion; we should like to quote part of the
statement issued on 22 March 1984 by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
which reads as follows:
“The people and the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam strongly condemn the new
steps of military escalation and the threat of aggression by the United States imperialists and resolutely
demand that the United States stop at once all plots
and acts of aggression against Nicaragua and other
countries in the region, withdraw immediately. its
troops and war mate’riel from Central America
.and respond seriously to the legitimate demands
expressed in the recent four-point proposal of the
Nicaraguan Government, as well as to the efforts of
the Contadora Group for a political solution to the
conflicts in Central America.

21. Tensionin the world is growingtoday owing to the
policies of war pursued by the United States. The deployment of United States nuclear missiles in. western
Europe, which will turn that part of the world into a
massgraveyard in the event of a nuclear war, is coupled
with the worsening situation in many other parts of the
world-the Middle East, north-east Asia, the Gulf and
Africa--thus threatening the sovereignty and independence of many countries and,endangering peace and
security in the world. I

“The people and the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam once again reaffirm their
unshakeable militant solidarity with the fraternal
Nicaraguan people in their national defence and construction, fully support the 13 March 1984 appeal of,
the Junta of the Government of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua and firmly believe that the heroic
Nicaraguan people, under the leadership of the San3

dinist National Liberation Front and the Government
of National Reconstruction, will foil all hostile acts of
the United States imperialists and their henchmen
and successfully defend their beloved homeland and
their revolutionary gains, thereby actively contributing to the cause of peace and stability in Latin
America and other parts of the world.”

3 1. Thirty-four years later, another masterful leader.
who served as President of the Republic, Jesus Jimtnez, declared the following
to the Congress:
,,
‘*Unfortunately, other nations in Central America
are involved in a struggle which the Government of
Costa Rica has not been able to avoid .through a
peaceful settlement. . . . Costa Rica will maintain its
neutrality, but it will always remain ready to use its
influence for peace in Central America.”

26. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from R&km]:
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

32. A century ago, another President of the Republic,
Bernard0 Soto, said:

27. Mr. ZUMBADO JIMENEZ (Costa Rica) [ii?terfrom Spanish]: I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April. Your experience
and ability will guarantee the successfutoutcome of the
Council’s difficult work.

“To those for whom the lessons of history are not
dead letters, the Government over which I presided
felt that the greatest threat to peace and harmony
among peoples lay in the tendency of some-unfortunately, not uncommon in America-to meddle in
the internal affairs of others. In keeping with this
belief, it always refrained from getting involved in
anything not strictly relevant to its own interests,
except when it came to acting as mediator to reestablish harmony, if it felt that to do so would not
be a waste of time and effort. This approach is
not derived from self-interest, for that is not the
proper designation for respect for the Governments
and institutions of other countries. It flows from the
character of the Costa Rican people, enemy of complications and not given to reckless adventures; it
’ derives from the spirit with which I wished to imbue
the Government, concerning myself largely with
achieving what was good within the proper purview
of my activities and not with gaining sway and
influence abroad; finally, it flows from my conviction
that he who meddles in the affairs of his neighbours
exposes his own country to endless difficulties and
disasters.”

pretation

28. Today as in the past; Costa Rica is an exception
to the continuai crises in the Central American isthmus. Through fratricidal ihrarfare and internal turmoil
-a tragic mark of our region-we learned to exist and
coexist in peace. Hence, in his historic act of 17 November 1983, the President of the Republic, Luis
Albert0 Monge, proclaimed the permanent, active and
unarmed neutrality of Costa Rica. When he spoke of the
history’of our people, he extolled the milestones of our
republican, democratic existence, which have come
gradually to shape and ultimately to affirm the national
identity of Costa Rica. He discussed the ‘guidelines
which throughout my country’s history have governed
its relations with all the peoples of the- world, and particularly with our brothers in Central America.
‘29. It is in nationhood itself that the President finds
the origin and strength of the neutrality he has proclaimed. Recalling stem visionaries, he is forging history and demonstrating to the people his exemplary
decision-making abilities and leadership,
’

33. In recalling our history as an anti-militaristic and
pro-democratic Republic, President Monge said:
“Jose Figueres, a farmer who organized the people
in order to restore democratic institutions, some
forty years ago wrote a glorious p-agein the constant
progress of man down the noble path of civilization.
In an unparalleled,act in history, the victorious general disbanded his army, uttering the following beautiful exhortation: ‘We resolutely maintain the ideal of
an American world. To this homeland of Washington, Lincoln, Bolivar and Marti we wish- to say
today: “0 America! Other peoples and your own
sons too offer you their greatness; Tiny Costa Rica
wishes to offer you now and forever its heart and its
love for anti-militarism, democracy and institutional
@e*v99 9,
”
..“,!

30. A country teacher who became head of State of
Costa Rica, Juan Mora Fernandez, in a messageto the
National Congress in 1829 said:
“While all of the Central American Republic seems
to be divided and in tears, covered with blood and
ashesand-consumed with despair; whileall of Central
America suffers the ravages, ruin and desolation
caused by the consuming fires of passion, discord
and civil war in other States, you will be pleased to
note that Costa Rica is a masterpiece in’ miniature
-an idyllic country illuminated by the gIowirig aura
of peace, for its political horizon, thanks to aGovernment based on Costa Rican virtues, morality and
common. sense, has remained free- and clear of- the
ominous clouds, storms and squalls which have
swept over, other, less fortunate countries, even
though we have sought their salvation in all earnest,
and, despite our small size, made every effort to help
alleviate their agony.”

34. My country offers its contributidn to the quest for
peace and harmony in Central ‘America and peace
throughout the world. The declaration ‘of neutrality
within the regional context must be construed as a
significant sovereign declaration of ,expliclt and final
4

renunciation of military so!utions to the problems
which aredisturbing and destroying Central America; it
is the culmination of the electoral promise made by
President Monge during the successful campaign that
brought him to the presidency. In defining neutrality as
the backbone of his foreign policy, he has met the
tiistoric tradition and aspirations &the. Costa Rican
people.

I

35. In the sorttime-since that declaration, the Government has clearly shown in its actions that it is committed to its purpose. Costa Rica-is- not taking part in
any kind of military manoeuvres in Central America.
Costa Rica is notrepresented in meetings ofthe military
within or outside the-region. It does not send any member of its civilian police force to receivemilitary training
in-centres recently setup-in-CentraI American territory.
The forces responsible for security in Costa Rica have
tfof carried out any attacks-nor will they do so-that
might jeopardize the sovereignty and security of our
country and those of neighbouring countries. The
impact on the international commnnity of the declaration of neutrality and the recognition-of my country’s
efforts for peace are reflected. in the following ways.

respect for human rights and which with courage,
effort and imagination is remaining outside conflictsaffecting the Central American and Caribbean region. In a highly troubled region, Costa Rica is a
shining example as a country which channels military
expenditures towards education, culture, health and
social well-being, towards peace as an integral
development of man: principles the Socialist International holds in high esteem.”
39. Presidents Rati Alfonsin of Argentina, Jaime
Lusinchi of Venezuela, Heman Siles Suazo of Bolivia,
Belisario Betancur of Colombia, Salvador Jorge Blanc0
of the Dominican Republic, Ricardo de Ia Espriella of
Panama and-Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Co-ordinator of
the Governing Junta of Nicaragua, signed in Caracas
the following declaration:
“We express our sympathy for the efforts of the
Government of Costa Rica to institutionalize its
active and effective neutrality, understanding thereby that the Government of that country will continue
its activities to guarantee peace in the Central American region.*’

36. The President of France, Francois Mitterrand,
wrote to President Monge as fohows:

40. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
wrote to President Monge as follows:

“You have solemnly declared Costa Rica’s neutrality. It&oftheutmosti-mportancethat,
despite the
eco-nomic crisis and the unrest in Central;America,
Costa Rica has managed to maintain its democrat.ic
institutions and today wishes public:Iy to proclaim its
independence. and its freedom of ch.oice. This is an
essential contdbution to the causesfdemocracy and
of peace; which France cannot but welcome, since
the chain of violence makes the search for negotiated
solutions- sought by the peoples of the region increasingIy difficult. ”

“In so disturbed a political period as the present,
your personal policy and your country provide a
reassuring example of peace, realism and vision.
Your solemn proclamation of I7 November 1983 of
the permanent, active and unarmed, neutrality of
Costa Rica is a particularly positive act.”

37. ThePresident,of the-Government of Spain, Felipe
Gonzalez, said:
“The Spanish Government-fully supports thedeclaration of neutrality made by the Government of
Costa Rica, convince.das it is that such a decision,
which. is aimed at the maintenance of peace in international relations, will serve to enhance understanding. among peoples and Governments and to
dleviate existing tension- in the Central American
region,”
38. The Socialist I.nternational, meeting- at Brussels,
adopted a resolution which. says:
“The Socialist International supports tlie declaration of neutrality made by the President of Costa
Rica, Comrade Luis Albert0 Monge. The Socialist
International calls for recognition by ail countries of
the world of this declaration of neutrality by a country withoutan army-, acountry which is struggling for
its develop-ment in-peace, freedom, democracy and

41. Here and in other bodies we have said repeatedly
that Costa Rica has placed its faith in the Contadora
process and supports it. Latin America has a long
experience and tradition of diplomacy. The concept of
peaceful settlement of disputes derives in part from
the Congress of Panama of Simon Bolivar; we Latin
Americans took our experience of the inter-American
system to’San Francisco. Our-region is theonly one that
has a treaty banning nuclear weapons. At the recent
Quito, meeting, our identification and our solidarity
were reaffirmed, as was the defence of the basic principles of international law.
42. The efforts of the Contadora Group conform to
this tradition. Itsexis&ence is proof that there.is a proper
political forum where Central Americans can and must
find their own solutions. We confess our doubts and
apprehension that in the broader international sphere
we Central Americans may largely lose control over our
own future.
43. Despite premature announcements in the past of
the demise of Contadora, there was a quantum leap
on 9 September 1983, when the five Central American countries adopted the Document of Objectives
[S/16041, annex] setting forth 21 points, known to this
Council, and on 8 January 1984, when they adopted the

measures to be taken to fulfil the commitments entered
into in the Document of Objectives [S/16262, annex Z,
appendix], thus proving the validity of the process.
44. My Government is convinced that after this new
stage, another important step forward wilI be taken that
will reflect the degree of our Governments’ .political
commitment. We are getting to the heart of the problem, and it is possible that negotiations may thus be
more difficult, because that is when the most effort has
to be made to make the process successful.
45. At this moment the Working Commissions of the
Contadora Group are meeting in Panama-tafind targets
that will lead to the objective of peace inour region.
Nicaragua,.arguing for a qualitative change in the Central American situation, called upon each of the Commissions to give priority consideration to the problem
of that country’s security, putting forward for consideration at that meeting a document setting forth its
position. That paper was taken up at-the meeting and it
will be put before the next meeting of ministers for
consideration. The Commissions are now continuing
discussions on other items within their competence
in the political, economic and security spheres. The
Security Council must be aware--and I am not saying
this to.offend anybody-that its meetings have caused
some consternation at the meeting at Panama and increased tension among the Central American countries
in that forum. This, of course, is not the only factor
causing tension in our region.
46. In the light of the foregoing, my Government’s
position is as follows. Costa Rica isinterested, and Lam
sure this interest is shared by the Council, in seeing that
the mandate and support of the Contadora Group is not
weakened. The spirit that led to the Cteneral Assembly’s adopting resolution 38/10 by consensus at its
thirty-eighth session must be mainlainedJ That resolution repeated the need for strict observance of the principles of international law, endorsed the efforts of the
group of countries constituting the Contadora process
and noted with satisfaction the commitment of those
countries to strengthen democratic, institutions as the
most appropriate way of guaranteeing broad participation and promoting conciliation within Central American societies.
47. Since the Council has to take a decision on the
question under debate, let it ap eal to the countries
concerned to carry out their missi%n in keeping with the
Contadora guidelines. Once again, let an appeal- be
made to the rest of the international community to
refrain from diverting the nine countries from. their
chosen path, and let there be strict respect for the
principles of international law, above all to those referring to freedom of navigation. I&this Council uphold
the principle that attention must be paid not only to
matters. relating to the security of States, however
important they may be, but also to 1henee.dfor progress
in all fields, those dealing with poiitical, economic and
social development so essential. for achieving, lasting
peace in its proper context.

48. President Monge said recently thatcontemporary
exuerience in Central America reaffirms his conviction
that war is the ultimate act of irrationality, the failure of
all policy.
‘ “A policy of peace is the inescapable.requirement
of our time. Any foreign policy and any security
policy must serve this idea. A policy of peace is-the
only genuine policy for our time.”
49. The PRESIDENT [int.&pretationfiom
Russian]:
Th.e next speaker is the representative of the German
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his.statement.
50. Mr. OTT (GermanDemocratic Republic): At the
very outset, the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic would like to thank the members of this body
for giving us the opportunity to explain- the German
Democratic Republic’s p.oint of view on the issue {hat
we have on the agenda.
‘51. Permit me, Mr. Kravets, to congratulate you
warmly on you assumption of the presidency of the
Security Councii for the rn-onth of April. We are convinced that you as the representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, with which my country has
ciose and .fraternal links, will exercise all- your ability
and diplomatic skills for the successful guidance.ofthe
Council in the interest of international peace and se&Xrity. At the same time, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic wishes to congr.atulate the represent_ativeof Peru, Mr. Arias StelIa, for his successful
work, characterized by great diplomatic experience,
whiGh he accomplished as President for the month of
March.
52. The German Democratic Republic is increasingly
concerned that this lofty body has to deal in ever
shorter periods of time with the escaiation of aggressive
acts against the sovereign and independent State of
Nicaragua, a non-aligned country and a member of
the-Security Council. The representative of.Nicaragua,
Mr. Chamorro. Mom, informed the world public, in a
comprehensive manner before this forum, about the
new stageof aggressive acts, about the escalation of the
undeclared war against his country. In particular, the
mining of Nicaraguan ports, is.the expressionof a new
actsfviolence perpetrated by the UnitedStates against
the Iegitimate Government of a State Member ofhthe
United Nations, in obvious violation of the basic norms
of international law.
53. All attempts to deceive world public opinion and
to veil the responsibility for those acts of war
-attempts, that were aiso made here in. the Security
Cpun&-daily prove to be useless in the. light ofthe
facts.
54. The responsibility for the aggravation of th.esituation in Central America has to be borne by,the United
States of America. Even The New York Times wrote a

.

few days ago in connection withthe attack on the Soviet
tanker in the Nicaraguan port of Puerto Sandino:
“The-mines were sown at Puerto Sandino by Contras
who are funded, armed, supported, partly trained.
and largely organized by the Central Intelligence
Agency for the express.purpose of overthrowing the
Nicaraguan Government. The Reagan Administration piously denied any responsibility for the mines,
but that’s like saying Mr. Reagan is not responsible
for the- CZA. Who’s President? Who sanctions the
c.o-n&as?Who periodicaily seeksfunds for them from
Congress?” The newspaper continues, “What does
he imagine the efforts of the CIA-directed Contras..
amount to, if not ‘State terrorism’?”
There is nothing to add to that evaluation.

[S/15556,annex], and the joint statement of the meeting
of leading Party and State figures from Warsaw Treaty
States held in Moscow on 28 June 1983 [see S/15862,
annex] that disputable questions in Central America
should be settled peacefully on the basis of mutual
respect for independence and territorial integrity. That
means that situations of conflict shoufd be solved nolitically.
60. The escalation of the aggressive acts against Nicaragua is directed against the democratic process of
reconstruction in Nicaragua as well as against the
peaceful settlement of the conflict. We agree with the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, which declared in March this year:
“Conscious of the urgent need to reduce tension in
the area in order to facilitate dialogue, the Co-ordinating Bureau commended the constructive efforts of
the Contadora Group towards finding a political solution to the problems of the region and urged them to
continue their peace efforts.” [See S/16422, annex.]

55. We see a close.connectionbetween the mining of
Nicaraguan. ports, the increasing- attacks against Nicaragua-8the use of the: territory of Honduras and the
various military manoeuvres by United States armed
forces-in that region. Millions and millionsof dollarsare
being spent by the present UnitedzStates Administration for the suppression of,the Central American peoples’ will to freedom and.for the undermining of legitimate Governments in that region,

61. The German Democratic Repubhc condemns the
aggressive machinations undertaken by the ruling circles of an imperidist great Power against sovereign,
non-aligned Nicaragua. My country advocates the improvement of international relations and the unhindered development of all-round co-operation between
States. .The German Democratic Republic advocates
the prevalence of reason and logic and rejects methods
of the law of the strongest in international relations. We
appeal to all States to demand the immediate termination of the mining of Nicaraguan ports as welI as of any
kind of covert and overt military action against Nicaragua and to provide all possible assistance to that
country.

56. The rulingcircles ofshis country iibe.topretend.to
be the protector and guardian of free. and unimpeded
navigation and of its internationally recognized principles. Are those circles aware of thefesponsibility which
they assume with the mining of Nicaraguan por&-a
responsibility for the security of those ships; for the
lives oftheir crews, for the whole of international navigation and the related recognized and accepted principles? Shall piracy again-prevail in navigation, trade and
traffic, or even in the whole of international life?
57. The peoples- indeed well remember, and no one
can make them forgni that the United States has
already once dramatically aggravated a conflict by
mining Vietnamese ports in 1972, thus escalating
aggressive acts.against a,sovereign State. I express the
hope that the lessonslearnedfromthe dirty war agxiinstthe Vietnamese people and the,other peoplesof-IndoChina have not been forgotten. The general question
mustbe raised: are those imperialist forces really aware
of the directions in-which thepare-trying to push.international relations? These acts of. war against a sovereign State.disprove~verb.alasserfio.ns by this Administration--also>m.ade here, in th:e 8ecurity Council--that
it, is striving for an improvememin international reiaticms.

62. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
63. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): First I congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the post of President of
the Security Council and express our belief that in the
course of the month of April you will, as always, relentlessly pursue the cause of peace, security and equitable
inte’rnational co-operation. I also congratulate your
predecessor, hir. Arias Stella, representative of Peru,
on the political wisdom, dedication and persistence in
the search for peace and negotiated political solutions
that he showed during the month of March, carrying the
heavy load of Security Councii work duringthat period.
64. The situation in Central America. is continuing to
causeth~iate~afiorralcommunity graveconcern a-& is
repeatedly being considered by the Security Council
and also by the General Assembly. ChaiIenges to peace
in Central America are immense, and their: causes are
well known. While the tensions have been rising and
human and material resources have been wasted on

59. We reaffirm the point of view contained in the
Political Declaration of the States Parties to the
Warsaw Treaty, issued at Prague on 5 January 1983
7

futile attempts to cow independence into submission
and to disrupt sovereignty and the inviolability of borders in a regional war, numerous initiatives have been
launched. These initiatives are aimed at solving the
problems which threaten peace in the region, aggravate
the critical politicai, social and economic situation in
the countries of Central America and jeopardize international peace and security.

Venezuela have our full confidence, and we are giving
them our utmost support.
70. Nicaragua is exposed to political, military and
economic pressures aimed at undermining its.itndep~endence and sovereignty and at undermining the sovereign right of the Nicaraguan people freely to decideon
their economic and social development and their political system.

65. In the search for a peaceful solution the Contadora
Group is making invaluable efforts to establish a joint
basis on which the countries of CentraI America can
build peace. The Contadora Group cannot do this
alone. All directly and indirectly involved parties
should show a full measure of co-operation and resolve
to resort to political means and to build upon the values
and principles evolved by Contadora together with five
Central American countries.

71. The Seventh Conference of Heads of: State..or
Government of Non*Aligned Countries, heldcat.New
Delhi more than a year ago, rejected thethreats and acts
of intimidation and aggression against Nicaragua. None
the less those acts have continued and have-escalated
further.
72. The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries met here in New, York on
I5 March. On that occasion the.nonaligned recalled the
relevant resolution of the General Assembly, resolution: 3800, which reaffirmed respect for the, sovereignty, independence and territoria1. integrity of all
Statesof the region and their right to live in peace,and.to
decide their own- future free- from all outside. interference and intervention. That resolution wasan important achievement and was adopted without a vote,
which gives it added importance. We-fee1that the General Assembly has thus ‘in effect pronounced itself
against the export of‘social and economic models and
their imposition from abroad. All the crises that engirdle the globe are caused by attempts of the more
powerful and most powerful to impose and to dictate.

66. Again, at this juncture the cause of peace may be
helped if all those involved would recall that the international community as a whole and the non-aligned
countries in articular have rendered full support to
Contadora. l! hey have done so because the efforts of
the Contadora Group are motivated by an honest and
selfless desire to identify a peaceful sohttion. in the
region itself, outside bloc and big-power rivalry.
67. The Document of Objectives [S/16?W, annex]
was elaborated by the countries of the region with the
help of Contadora. This Document reflects the realities
facing Central America and constitutes a solid basis for
the solution of the problem. It re.affirms the basic principles of international law and e1aborate.sthe principles
related to the specific features of the region in order to
achieve a political soiution. The self-determination of
peoples, non-intervention, the sovereign equality of
States, the peaceful settlement of disputes, refraining
from the threat or use of force, respect&r-the territorial
integrity of States, pluraiism in its various manifestations and other principles have been accepted by all the
countries of the region as the foundation of a political
sohttion of the problem.

73. The repeated attempts to impose and.dominate
invariably meet with rejection by the international co-mmu&y. The will ofthe peoples to reject and resist these
acts makes.them unacceptable, wherever they occur,
and thisis an encouragement for allof us..It idndispensable again to recognize that Nicaragua, as well as-all
other Central American countries, and for that matter
all the countries of the.world, have the right to independence, sovereignty and, territorial integrity, to Iife- in
peace without pressure, interference and intervention;

68.. Further action by the Contadora Group resuhed in
the adoption of concrete measures concerning security,
political and economic and social issue-swehichaJ! the
countries of the region-have taken the responsibility to
implement [see S/16262, anltex I].

74. The communique adopted by the Co-ordi@Zing
Bureau nearly three weeks ago WZ6422, annexl’cal1.s
for an immediate-end to a11foreign military manoeuvresand.: activities on Central. American territories end:,
coasts and an encffo.al~~~~~alla~ionsof foreign-military
bases, as well as 811threats, attacks and=hostil’e acts.
against Nicaragua, which are contrary COthe spirit of
the peaceefforts of the countriesof the region. The nonaligned expressed their deep concern over the new,
escalation of those acts.and.condemnedthe mining-of
Nicaraguan seaports, which.hascaused lo~ssofhuman
life and heavy material damage and-which endangers
international navigation. At that meeting: the nonaligned further expressed their firm opposition to any.
measure directed$owards the Blockade of-any State in
the region.

69. We.find it very encouraging that Contadora.managed to do all this in the contextofpresent int.ernational
relations, which. are under ever-increasing strain, and
notwithstanding the differences existing among the
Central American countries themselves. Thus Contadora embodiesour hopes for a process to bring peace to
the region on the basis of mutualrespectand-respect for
the rightsof peoples and the principtes of the Charterof
the United.Nations. We call for an end toall activities
of regional and non-regional factors which can impede
the process and increase the danger of the outbreak
of war in the region. Colombia, Mexico, Panama and
8

75. There is no doubt that there exist both thepotential and the interest for a po?iticaI soiutionasenvisaged
by Contadora. Their political basis, methods andprocedures have received. generai support. We would
express:the.wish that they will continue their constructive efforts to meet our hope that. peace in. Central
America will be established and‘ independence and
sovereignty strengthened.

internal contradictions in Nicaragua were:at the very
opposite pole from the labour gains, progress in the
agrarian sector and social advancement which gradually came about in our country.
82. The alternative’sought by the peopleof Nicaragua
through a violent, collective endeavour which involved *
every-sector in that country-from peasants to industrialists-was the result of a political phenomenon not
encountered in Honduras. The alternative sought bythe people of Honduras was the peaceful path within an
electoralprocess which gave rise to the establishment
of a representative, democratic and pluralistic Govern
ment dedicated to working within a framework of peace
so.as to implement our development, plans which are
designed, not for the benefit of one family nor to respond to special interests, but to favour the national
community, bearing in mind that the human being is the
supreme value of society and State and that human
dignity is inviolable.

76. The PRESIDENT [interprerationfrom &&an]:
The next speaker is the representative of Honduras.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table- and to
make- his st.atement.
77. Mr.’ FLORES BERM,oDEZ (Honduras) [interfrom Spunis%]: I wish, Sir, to express my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you presiding over
the. Council, since your broad experience and distinguished career are a:guarantee of the successful outcome of the matters to be discussed in this body this
month.
.
78. The debate on the-complaint by the delegation of
Nicaraguahas been enriched by$the opinions of various
delegations, that have shown their-interest in the situation in Central America. It is ourdesire today to make
another constructive contribution and to take advantageof,the;invitationextended to us-to take part in these.
deliberations so asto make clear the framework within
which these problems should bedealt.

prkration

83. Despite this democratic path which is now b-eing
strengthened in Honduras, my country is the object
of aggression made, manifest through a number of.
incidents by Nicaragua against our territorial integrity
and civilian population. Those elements, which- have
obliged Honduras to strengthen its defences, are mainly
the excessive and disproportionate amount of arms in
Nicaragua, the constant harassmentalong our borders,
the promotion of guerrilla groups which seek to,undermine our democratic institutions, and the waimongering attitude of the Sandinist commanders, whose
reckless, aggressive statements we mentioned earlier.

79. In several statements mentlon has been made of
historic, factors besetting our region. For our part, we
also wish to mention- some things which have not yet
been considered and which may serve to make better
known theaproblems of the region.

84. With our intervention we do not wish to get into a
squabble with our neighbour, Nicaragua. What we do
want is to say that to cast theCentral American problem
in terms of Nicaragua’s interests, as reflected in. the
initial draft resolution submitted by that country, is a
conceptual error. It is not just one country which is
affected; it is not only one country which is suffering
from conflicts. It is not only one people which is suffering and bewailing the fate of its children; it is not
just Honduras and,Nicaragua. It is a Central American
problem, and it must be solved regionally. This view
has been brought out again and again by all Central
Americans throughout the Contadora negotiation prycess and must be reflected in the Security Council%
considerations and in its decisions.

80. Although historically the Central American countries have had much incofrrmon in their political, tconomic andfsocial evolution, their relationship: has not
been characterized by equal and equitable development. Withoutgoing intotoo much detail; I would point
to the case of Nicaragua and the contrast, with recent
historical developments in Honduras. While Nicaragua
was suffering-underahatefirl dictatorship which tended
to benefit only one family, in Honduras, steady social
progress was being made through modern legislation
which sought to regulate and harmonize labourdmanage-ment relations. While. in Nicaragua for more than
40 years ferocious repression was carried out against
the people of%h_atcountry, in Honduras, agrarian reform was. gradually developing, together with civil
service‘ and social security legislation which reflected
the.interestin bringingtogetherall sectors of the nation.
WhileNicaragua’s foreigntrade tendedto benefit only
the Somoza family, in Honduras the exportation of
such important itemsascoffee benefited~45,OO@Honduran families; : ‘

85. In that regard, we were pleased to hear the
statements made today, and Monday afternoon
[2527th meeting] by the representative,of France, who
noted with satisfaction the efforts of,the four countries
of the Contadora Group to facilitate the search‘fora
settlement satisfactory-to all countries of the region. As.
he declared, “The countries of Central America-must
be permitted once again to solve their problems for
themselves.‘* [Zbid., para. 22.1 The representative of
China also agreed that the affairs of the countries of the
region must be left to their respective peoplesandgave
his support to the Contadora Group .in. its continued

81. I donot w&h to tire the Council with a detailed
account of contrastsi but it isindeed our intention to
make clear the fact- that for more than 40. years the
9

efforts $0achieve a peaceful and reasonable solution to
the Central:American question. The representative of
Guyana.made anappeal for a halt to the unbridled arms
race and for peaceful negotiated s@,ttions to problems
in Central America, and he repeated that the Contadora
process offered a practical and solid basisfor achieving
negotiated solutionsfor the problems-among the States
ofcentral America. Within the same context, we heard
the statement made by the representative of Mexico.
Amongst other things, he quoted. the President of his
country, who said during his recent visit to Colombia,
“Contadora is a Latin American effort to resolve a
Latin American conflict. The region is able to find
its own answers to the problems affecting it.” [Ibid.,

aragua has proposed the cessation of normal work in
the Commissions in order that a decision mightfifstbe.
taken on a special question dealing with aspects of
particuIar interest to Nicaragua, This attitude on the
part of Nicaragua is hindering $he activities offhe OontadoraGroup, since the attempttogive priority to some
items and to take. biased actions runs counter to the
regional approach that should prevail in those: nego+
tiations.
90. What Nicaragua is-proposing in Panama is that,so
long as those Commissions take no decisions-on mili+
tat-y and security matters it will not alIow work to
proceed. That inflexible and arbitrary position is designed to bring about acrisis inttlie Contadora negotiations in order to do.away withthat subregional group
and ultimately to bring the matter before, the United
Nations, thereby preventing Latin America and the
Central. American peoples themselves from s6lving
their own problems within the Contadora framework..
That framework has received the full support. of the
intemationai community; it has found support in the
positive thinking of most Central American statesmen
and intellectuals and of the four countri&.members~of
the%ontadora Group. It is a processthatis fully-abltto,
take up and solve the problems.of theregion, Nevertheless, the essential. element for the .succesS’of those
negotiations is the will of the Central American couni
tries themselves. It is sad to see that that element is
lacking on the part of Nicaragua.

para. 83.1

86. Indeed, for 14months we Central Americans have
been engaged in negotiations to achieve peace in our
region under the auspices of the Contadora Group.
Those negotiations have made considerable progress,
and right now the Working Commissions are meeting
on aspects relating to political affairs, security and
economic and social co-operation, This is a collective
effort the aim of which is to create a zone of peace
where the cohesive elements of freedom, justice and
solidarity are permanent, standing values so that relations among our States may prosper. All ofthis would
set-aside the possibility of confrontation; establish regional security, strengthen integral democracy and give
impetus to the economic and social development of our
peoples.

91. Indeed, yesterday in Panama, not only. in the
Security Affairs Commission but in the-political Affairs
Commission as well, Nicaragua indicatedthat thcmain
causes of the problems of Central America were the
substantive military buildup in the ‘region; the d&
placement of thousands of soldiers, the holding of
joint manoeuvres in the area, the covert war against
Nicaragua, the terrorist operationsbeingtTart‘iedstit.on
its territory with the use of aircraft and attack;bo.ats,
the activitiesof the anti-Sandinist rebels, the violation
of its territorial integrity and national sovereignty,
the threat of’force’agains~ Nicaragua and the lack of
implementation of the principles of the self-determinat
tion of peoples.
‘.
92. That position of Nicaragua-thaf- such matters
should be taken up cbeforeany of:the:work ofthe Commissions can, be resumed, including the work &the
Commission for Economic andSocial:Questions+has
created a crisis of bad faith in the Contadora process. What Nicaragua is really indicatingas,:ti.e ezutst!
of the problems are in fticYonIy eflect?%Hondilrras I’Bs;
in this. body as well as in the Grganization of. Am_crican States (OAS) and within the Contadoi Group
itself; attempted to clarify thereal caus’es.Theyinclube
interference in Central America.by anextracuntinental
Power, the breach of the terms of sectn@ in, the ccgion because-of the disproportionate arming1 by Nicd
aragua, problems of an internal order: ‘c&m&l bjr its
authoritarian: structures, its attempts co dcstabifiZ%
neighbouring regimes,’ the supplying to: Nicaragua uf

87. The- situation in Central America is complex and
calls for a comprehensive solution. Any action by a
United Nationsbody should be taken within that comprehensive context and should not be identified with
the selective and special interests of only one of the
parties.
88. None the less, the Nicaraguan tactics, of which
we- complained sin the- letter from the Government of
Honduras dated20 September 1983to4he President of
the Security Council [Sli59951, have systematically
beenconsolidated. Those tactics, based asthey are on
an attitude of duplicity, include a,disturbing campaign
of disinformation intended to.sow confusion and ambiguity with regard to what is really happeningin Central
America. They have also been condemned%y my delegation in several of the statements we have made in
recent months when the Security Council has met at
Nicaragua’s request.
89. Those activities by Nicaragua have oc.curred
within the Conadora negotiating- process. We have
already mentioned the Working Commissionson polit.3
ical, security and economic and social questions that
have been meeting at Panama City since the second of
this month. Only last. night we received from Panama
the alarming news that for two consecutive-days Nicaragua has blocked the activities of those Working
Commissions, thereby hampering negotiations ‘and
preventing variousmatters from being.takenup. Nic10

15,OOOtonsof weapons in 1983alone, a Sandinist people’s army of more than 25,OQOmen organized: into
38vregular battalions, with a reserve force: of 38,000
men. and a popular Sandinist militia numbering approximafely 50,000 men.
93. The. American military presence in Honduras
amounts at: present to approximately I.700 men.. For
the moment, those are the major Central American
manoeuvres that affect the territorial integrity of Nicar.agua.’Wha? did indeed affect stability in the region
was the sendmg, some three weeks,ago, of 2;OOOCubans: to Nicaragua, Those troops have had military
training a.nd partially replace you-ng Cuban- men and
womenwhahad been in Nicaragua. What dues indeed
affect stability in-our region is the presence in Caribbean-waters &the Soviet,helicopter-carrier Lmingrad
and the-Soviet destroyer Udaioy, accompanied bytheir
respective frigate-s, the largest Soviet presence in the
&rib&an since theend of-the 1960s What do have an
effect and.an impact.onour”negotialions are the thr.eats
from. Commander Ortega; Saavedr& the- Nicaraguan
Defe~nceMinister-, indicatingthe. possibility that bcal
guerrilla groups will mine the.gorts~fCentra1 America
from- Guatemala to Panama, as we noted on Friday-,
30 March, before the Coundl @i2Jth meeting]. On
Friday f a1so mentfoned;that,folfowing the statements
by Commande.r Ortega Saavedra five bombs exploded
in thecifiesofTegucigaIpa;smd San-I?edro&la, leaving
one person dead. Morerecently. there&as beena sabo.tage OFthe electric power provided.. fo some.areas of
H:onduras from Costa Rica through Nicaragua, which
has ledlo therationing ofeIectricpo%?erin various parts
of our national. territory.
94. Among other Nicaraguan acfivities that pose a
threat to peaceds the:continuation~f.the~ll,egal traffic in
arms to.guerrilla group5 in other countries; if is also
continuing to provide. logistic suppon to-insurgents in
neighbQuring States, whiIe its agents visit Libya, Iran
and North Korea, among,other countries# for the purpose ofiacquiring more weapons, The mining of the
Nicaraguan,*arts is an act the responsibility for which
has been attributed to insurgent prganizations oper?
sting in Nicaragua. Hence, Nicaragua’s claim- that all
States should refrain- from-carrying out any action that
mighthamperfhe exercise&the rlghttofree navigation:
in thewatersoftheregion does noi:refle?t what is really
happ,ening, since the mining was-due fo%heactivities of
Nicaraguanrebel .groups.
,
95.. Withcegard to Mi>aragua:s fulfilment of its inter+
nafionsll.~.~~-~ltments-~weare compelled to mal@reference Za Nicaragua’s &ctcral’~henomenon and..pIace
il.witliintheContadora~ontext,
sincefhat was.among
the. 21 objectives adopted.6y al1 of,the-.Central American cotmtries cm 9Sepfemb:er I983:and subsequently
rafiIied!by each..and,e~veryone of our Governments;
including that of Nicara . The. adoption of those
objectives was; one. of fI?& positive- achievements in
thene&otiations.,thathave%een hefd4nder.~,heausl?ices
of the- Confadora Group The principal objective with

reference to eIecRrpal processes in Central Americateads as follows:
“To adopt measures conducive to, the esfablishment and, where appropriate, improvement of demo?
cratic, representative and pluralistic systems that
will guarantee effective popular participation in..the
decision-making process and ensure that the various
currents of opinion have free access to fair and regular elections based on the full observance of citizen’s rights” [see S/16041, annex].
96. Another objective is
“To promote national reconciliation efforts
wherever deep divisions have taken place within-society, with a view to fostering participation in democratic political processesin accordance with the law”
[ibid.].

97. It is in the context of those commitments that we
must consider the electoral preparations- in Nicaragua.
Looking at current developments inthe electoral process we find. the following discouraging:elements.. In
Nicaragua certain sectors are forbidden-to participate;
The amnesty decreed by the Sandinist Government did
not pardon political and related common crimes, which
would have permitted Miskito refugees in Honduras
and other Nicaraguans who are out of the. country t-o
return with suitable guarantees. The Government of
Nicaragua continues to enforce the law of confiscation
and expropriation, used against those who oppose.the
regime in power, and the national emergency law under
which constitutional guarantees were and still are suspended. The Nicaraguan opposition has serious questions about the political process in that country.
Indeed, even internationally recognized officials from
European eountries whose democratic traditions are
long standing-have expressed concern about the lackof
conditions that would guarantee impartiality and equal
opportunity for full participation by. all sectors.
98. Evidence of this includes the absence of an.electoral roll or list, while those under 18 years of age are
allowed to vote-16-year-olds are permitted to vot.eso that young people completely without political
experience can be manipulated. All members of the
Sandinist PeopIe’s Army and of the other sect&y
forces are permitted to vote. There is no guaranteeof
the right of assembly., the right of association or the
right of free expression, which are essential for carrying
on an election campaign. There is an- enormous imbalance between the opposition parties and the officiai
party, when one considers thepure and absolute iden
tity among the Sandinist National LiberationRon& the
Government and the Sandinist People’s Army. That
represents a close linkage of the powers of the State
with the Sandinist political organization, which involves the use of State resources, and of the State’s
coercive<power and communications-media.for its own
politicaladvantage in the election campaign. The Nicaraguan opposition complains that it does not have the
same opportunities.

99. The opposition in. Nicaragua has also questioned
the Sandinist Government’s intentions regarding the
elections, since the Government has .violated one of
the principles set forth in the Statute of Fundamental
Guarantees of 1979, which states. that a constituent
assembly shall be elected. Now, simultaneous elections. have been called, for a constituent assembly and
for the presidency, for a six-year term. That is contrary
to the legal logic applicable here and militates, against
the democratic process: there can be no advance in the
State system without the constituent assembly taking a
prior decision.
,_
.

judiciary, the elimination of restrictions on the law of
habens corpus and a-national dialogue on the question
of elections.
104. In another communique, dated 21 February
1984, the armed opposition made up of the two groups
struggling within Nicaragua, one in the north and the
other in the south, also rejected the electoral process
as put forward and expressed its desire to participate
in an open, honest electoral process, with equal opp-or=
tunities and. appropriate guarantees.
IgS. All this opposition ta the electoral masquerade
makes us think about the .situation. in Nicaragua.
We wonder whether the Government of Nicaragua..is
adopting measures which could lead to*the establiishc
ment of a representative, pluralist democratic system.;
guaranteeing effective popular participation. We wonder whether by acting in’ the way which has been.denounced by the Nicaraguan-opposition theGovernment
is promoting action towards national reconciliation-; as
it has undertaken to- do in accordance withthe points
adopted in the Contadora negotiations1 s
j,

100. The Nicaraguan Council of State had-been discussing the electoral law, initially withthe participation
of nearly all sectors in the country. But.because of the
points i mentioned before, those, sectors have withdrawn in protest against the way in which theGovernmemis trying to manipulate the electoral process.
Among the institutions which have withdrawn are the
Liberal Conservative Party, the Social. Democratic
Party, the Democratic Conservative: Party, the Confederation, of Trade. Union Unification, the Social
C%is$n Party and the non-Sandinist W.orker’s
__
‘_

106. The answer is no, for what they.have done is 10
call for,moreweapons, for more political control and for
increasing, structural, rigidity.

IdI’. :’ I wish to,quote.the Chairmanof the Nicaraguan
Bishops’ Conference, Monsignor Pablo.Antonio. Vega,
who; with reference to the consideration of the electoral law by the Nicaraguan Council of State, said that
that Council ‘is a “totalitarian sham”.

107. .I have’ mentioned these internal problems: of
Nicaragua for the sole purpose ‘of showing how- they
extend beyond the borders of that country, witha considerable negative effect on our interest in the development of ourdemocratic institutions, in order to fulfilour
development plans and meet the, vital needs of our
population. Honduras is the.first to support multilateral
negotiations within the Contadora framework in-order
to finda negotiated peaceful soiutionto the problems of
the region, problems which are concentrated in Nitaragua.
.

102. To illustrate that fact we need only refer to the
discussions going on in the Nicaraguan Council of
State. Government officials. have said’ there that the
opposition will have the right to onehour per week for
carrying- out its political campaign on. television and
radio; those media belong to. the- State, that is, to the
Sandinist Front. Thus, the, time available will-be less
than 10 minutes a:day, and that ti.me will have to be
shared. out among the opposition parties. Owing to
th.osearbitrary, ‘minimal conditions, the opposition has
asked-for more time for its campaign, especially since
the Sandinist Front already. has nearly
. five years of
campaigning behind it.

108. The‘Ministefs for l%temal .Relations: of Costa
Rica an-dHonduras met a-few days agoat Tegucigalpa,
and on 26 March they issued a joint statement, the.
pertinent part of which, said:
“They agreed that the. democratic, representative.
and pluralist system is the only systemfor political
development guaranteeing the effective exercise of
freedom and the full enjoyment sf human.,fights. In
this regard they reiterated. the firm,.purpose&both
Governments to,promote and strengthen-democracy
in. the region. They reaffirmed the decision, of their
Governments to seek a peaceful comprehensive; regional settlement of the: crisis in ,Qntral* America.
and pointed out the appr0priatenes.s of making every
necessary effort to seethat thecountries.ofthe.,region
finalIy take the.path.ofpolitical, economic &nd~social
democracy. ‘They drew the, atte~ntion of the. international community to.‘the.needto find approp-tiate
means to guarantee security fot the ,Cenfral Amer%
ican region based on the princip!es,‘of non-interYen*
tion, rejection of the threat or use of forceandzhe use

lQ3.Y Ln addition, the opposition published, on 24 December 1983, a manifesto denouncing the Govemme&s fraudulent intentians regard&g the ,election,
That manifesto was signed by the Nicaraguan’Worker’s
Central, the Confederation’of Trade Union-Unification;
thenDemocratic Conservative Party, the Social Chris-’
tian Party, the- Social Democratic Party., the.Authentic
Social Christian Popular Party, the’Nicaraguan Chamber of Industry, the Nicaraguan Chamber of Construction, the Nicaraguan Confederation pf Professional
Associations, the Confederation ofChambers.dfCom:
merce, the Nicaraguan Development Institute and the
Unionof Agricultural Producers. The manifest.ocalIed
forthe separation of State and party, theabandonment
of-laws which. infringe on human rights, a -genuine amnesty, remspectfor freedom of religion, an independent
12

Document of Obje$tives serving as the basis for ail
nlegotiations that would henceforth be carried our.
None the less, although Nicaragua had made a commitment of support for the 21 points in the Document, if
continued to boycott the Contadora meetings, keeping,
it in recess from September last year to January this.
year, a period during which it sought to bring the matter
to the Security CounciI and even before the General
Assembly, so as to take it out of the hands of Contadora. These intentions of Nicaragua run counter to
General Assembly resolution 38/10, adopted on Ii November last year, to the effect that Centrat American
conflicts should not be made part of the East-West
confrontation.
114. In November 1983,during the General Assembly
of the Oiganization of American States, headquartered
in Washington, in the Embassy of Panama in that city
agreement was reached to convene the Technical
Group of Contadora in meetings on 1and 2 December.
This proved impossible, because using the same delaying tactic Nicaragua proposed a-written commitment
on military and security aspects, a tactic-which is faithfully reflected in the draft resolution it has introduced
here, a draft resolution which is selective, since it
takes into account oriiy the interests of that country
without considering the other matters related to the
regional peace process and departs from-the objectives
endorsed by the Central American countries at the joi.nt
meeting of Ministers for External Relations held in
Panama last September.
11.5. At the fifth joint- meeting of Foreign Ministers,
held on 7 and 8 January this year, the deiegation of
Nicaragua again presented its unilateral interests,
seeking to use Contadora only for its own ends. None
the less, at that meeting the decision was adopted to set
up three commissions on the basis ofthe document of
measures to be taken to fulfil the commitments entered
into in the Document of Objectives [S/16262, annex I,
rrppen&x]. There is now ample information that those
three commissions are designed to deal, first, with political affairs; secondly, security matters; and; thirdly,
social and economic questions.
lIzi. As we have made clear here and on other occasions, all this is part and parcel of Nicaragua’s unswerving attempt to create a crisis in the peace negotia;
tions, thereby doing away with that sub-regional body
for the sole purpose of making- the United Nationsintervene in the conflict.
117. As the representative of a Central. Ameticati
country, I have asked to speak today so-tfiat,our voice,;
which reflects the position ofa State which I@staken an
active part in restoring regional peace, can be heard
with the attention it deserves. Ma-ny statements have
been made here supporting the Contadora process. If
there is a real commitment in favour of the Comadora
initiative, serious account must be taken of the faci tliat
endorsement of the unilateral interests of Nicaragtm ifi
the terms of the draft resolution contained indocument-

S/i6463 would also mean support for that country so,
that its. actions within the context of the Contadora
negotiations will continue to harm that process. In the
terms in which they are expressed, those actions seriously threaten to destroy !he Contadora initiative; they
threaten to destroy a process which has received the
praise of the international community and earned the
pride.of LaXin AAmericans-a process-which represents
the maturity and responsibility of our peoples to resolve
our own problems by ourselves. It also embodies the
hope oWentra1 Americans to overcome their difficult
situation by peaceful means. To take part in any support for this draft resoiutior would therefore involve a
responsibility of historic proportioF that the members
of this Council must weigticaref$iy. This is not just a
political endorsement for Nicaragua. What is at stake
here is the futlure ofthe negotiating process for peace,
the future of Central Amex?&.
118. It-is timely to bring to the atten_ti?naf the-Council
the words of the Secretary-Geneml’ as they ‘appear in
the Panamanian daily La Emellp in its ediFl?onof
3 March-that is, less than 24 fiours aghwhich reads,
“Doctor lavier P&ez de CuCiiar d&cribed as highly
encouraging the report of the Panamanian Foreign Minister” on the. peaceful activities of the’ Contadora
Group, adding that “what musf be avoided is a diplomatic vacuum, because that invites adit@turism”.
119; To ignore this appeal would have irreparable
consequences for the future peace negot-iationsin Central America. Similarly, Nicaragua should abandon
attempts. to duplicate international effo~rts, in these
parallel forums, by trying to involve the Security Council again, while in the Contadora Group we have a
specific co.mmission to deal with matters of security
concerning. the countries of the region. That csmmission enjoys the support ofthe internafianal community,
as has again been expressed here. 1fNicaragp.a continues to ma&lain this attitude, it will vitiate the.
functioning of the Contadora Group as a negotiating
forum. That body, instead of being replaced, should be
strengthened.
120. The PRESIDENT finrerp-atirion
from Rirssianl: The next spe-akeris the representative of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic. I-invite him to ‘take a
place at the Council table Andyto make his statement.
127. Mr. KITTIKHQUN (Lao &Vopl‘e”s Democratic
Republic) [irzterprerationfrom
French]: My delegation
is indeed gratified to see you, Sir, presiding over the
meetings ofthe Council forthis m.onth,The-wisdom and
ski4 that ar.echaracteristid of you arean. earng*stof the
successof these very important meetings of thccouncii. My delegation woluid like also to thanWe representative of Peru for th‘e very skilful an_d’c@!!Xeo_us
way in
which,he directed the difficult and del&@ work ofthe
Counc_ir~durin@thepast month. Fi&iiy, we wc~id venture tp express our gratitude tg ail the members of the
Cou&Kjfor fiaving.been kind enougti to accommodate
0u.r reqv?uestto pa&cipate in this deb;ate, which essen-

tiaiiy affects the peace and security of Cent.rallAmedca
and of the world as a whole.
122. As we are.fully aware, this i&the sixth ti:me tl$
Nicaragua has been constrained to request an t@iiiergency meeting of the Security Counti! to corrsider-the
rising tide of aggressive acts-political, econo_mic@Bd
military-on the part ofa niajgr Power am!:perma.Derit
member of the Council agai@F that cuunfry a!%ik$ts
people. L&t Friday [252%/i rn~in&, we,fdllawed with
alarm the very detailed a&l very m~viag’ sfaten-ienr
made by the representative of Nicar&u$ in-c:omi&$an
with the new phase in the aggrW$on+being‘pr%XWaby
that great Power against Sandiiio’s @@le. Iinde.e~~in
recent months, ‘we have- witne$sed iin unpfecedented
stepping up of American r@Atary pre.ser!ce in that
high@ sensitive part of the world. With $&&pat.ch$y
the Unit_edSfates Governme.nWf thou_saml$@fsoldiers
to Honduras, the’ ~redeployniefit.oF nav& v.$ssefs and
aircraft carriers and tlie-;a~-~a!Rspic~ge~i~tl?at<egion,
we have seen a-disturbi.!ig. di@ty of @litab mjght.
123. In recent years, a nu-mbe~ofthoecdno~mi_c and
military installations of the Republic qfJ?iear%@&ere
the target of attacks otr the p@t (lf the U@tecf !%@s
Government, which used ai@anes, %eiicopters and
attack boats to carry o:ut a virl&d”air-sea QttJe; ‘&atwar i$foti eu,enwent so fat?as t_9fnigWhe @&l~,pprtsof
Nicaragua. That s!$ous act, which-is ConKa-ryt6 @i&rnaiioriai’ law, was condemned by- the &ordinatifig
Bureau of the Movement of Non-+Aiigged,sCounFfles,
has already. cost a number sf innoce.rit litres, and:& a
se&us impediment to the freedom- df int!?matiotlal
navigation, Such behaviour suteiy reveals some oFTheunderlying motives promptingthe Amerl~a~~Adnli!$sti-ationnot to go a@ngwitb’the-internaFionai.cramm*pilty
in adopting the UniW$Natioris C;orrvenFio~on-the.Law
of tfie- Sea, that m@nmientai docW~X%~adopt&: by
those peopleswho vigorously defWlfr@Xlom ofdnrernatio:nal navigation,
/
124. In conjunction with these host@ activities” in
Nicaragua, the Anierican Adii-inistri&VY is.fii?ancQig~,
organizing and ‘arming Sampzist 0iefcWary- forces
wl&h, accordin to certain @Tici@py@!gyncements
of the Central BPfelligence. Agenf: [Q).; will %?on
amount to 181000-armed men; witt ‘:-thei atin of averthroiing thelegalGovernmeilt:of tIiaicc>un_tiiy,a-&mbet of the United Nations p@, of the NW-AfigWd
Move-merit.
125. This, then, is the bizare way ixi:wl&$ iSd$aIS
with those peoples which havfleopt&:&@ %ociainnd
pol@icaisystemzha0+es not ~ppea~t@@eAmericans,

during thedebate onthe Libyan complaint against the
samemajor Power [252Wmeering]. csfcomposing two
sentences and leaving it tothe conscience of the Council;to. choose which.is. the. more honest,, realistic and
acceptable.
“Se.ntence one: micara@aT is behind every. international problem in Central America and the rest.of
L&in America. Sentence.two: The United States is
behind every internationalproblem in CentralAmerica and the rest of Latin America.“*
i2’kr. Und!8rbt:edly, I could chooseevesmore extravagant language, but- none couId.Cl?mpare withthe fantastic, unfounded and totally unretilistic statements we
heard at the very beginning of this debate- from the
United‘States delegationinits attempt4omislead world
public opinion.
128. Furthermore, thisincan!tation:is not at all new.
The world will recall that be&t% its. brutal aggressionthe Amerlc,anGovernment:consid&ed.fhe small island.
of Grenada as being a,threat to&own- security.
i29. The anti-Nicaragua: propaganda unfortunately
did not stop there it even went: 64 far as to- maintain
unscrupulously that the anti$andirrist &be1 forces
were based- within- the: territory of: Nicaragua; in an,
attempt, as usual, th0ugh.a vainattempt, to make the
world believe thatNicaragua was &fact facing a purely
domestic etisisj
130. Idonot intend to take up-too muchofthe Council’s valuable time, but thee%ot.mcilmay.&interested to
be. informed. of a manifesto signed by a number of
Honduranpers~nalitiesand politicai readers, including
the former President, Ram&t Cruz, as reported. by
Agence France Presse on 24 March 1984. The signatorlesof the-manifesto call for, intPr alia; opposition to
the American desire to estabhsh @permanent base to
continue to train non-Honduran- soldiers, particularly
the NicaraguanoppositiDn. The manifesto naturally has
not been mentionediby the irnpeiSa1ist.sand the other
detractors of Nicaragua,
I31. The world knows full wellthat tie problem‘s of
CentraI~Americaare real and that%liey must beres~lved
urgently-. FOr hs part, Nic;eragua has; in its wisdom,
generally given a warm welco’me ‘to?peace- initiatives
by third @untries, particnla?rly those’ belonging trr
the Contadora- Group, aiming at a. political sot&on
to the problems Gf$lie r-e-@on.in thiscatmectlon, the
Co-ordmating Bureau ofthe.Movement ofNonAligned
Countries, in: its communi:gue u!&he.d, on 15 March
{+S/f6422;annex], welcome& Fficaragua’s. firm atfachmenttageace, as shown.l$%h;lt cou@ry’smost recent.
initiatives, and once againgroclaimedits solidarity with
the Government of National Reconstruction and the
people of Nicaragua in.their struggle fo’protect th,eir
,
* Quoted in English by ihe speaker.

sovereignty, territorial integrity and right to independence.
132. As for the United States Government, c.ontrary
to the policy of peace which it claims tohave chosen, it
is simply increasing its military presence in the area and.
intensely pursuing, its air and sea attacks against Nicaragua.
.133. My delegation learned with indignation of the
news from Agence France -Presse on I April that a
former commander-in-chief of the Honduran army had
sent the Kissinger Commission a document recommending military intervention in Nicaragua in-order to
resolve the conflict in Central America. This is the plot
the,imperialist forces and their hirelings&tend to hatch
in order to neutralize the valiant people of Nicaragua.
‘.
134. In the face of this serious situation, the pe.aee
efforts being made by the Contado.ra Group have been.
sorely tested, and the danger of armed confrontationin
that trouble-d. part of the world has become a reality..
Consequently, it is incumbent onthe international COMmunity, the United Nations; and in particular the
Security Council, whose purpose is to safeguardinternational peace, to condemn the: mining of the main
Nicaraguan ports and to require that the United S,tates
Government end its belligerent policy in Central America and agree that a political solution should be found to
the problems of the region.
135. In conclusion, we express our deep convictian
that the people of Nicaragua, strengthened by their.
tradition of heroic struggle, under the Sandinist National Liberation Front, will be able to thwart all aggressive manoeuvres by the imperiaIists. Ourpeople is fully
behind the fraternal people of Nicaragua in its just
struggle to protect its independence, sovereignty. and
territorial integrity, until final, complete victory.
136. The PRESIDENT [interprefarion
from RlssThe next speaker is the- representative of
Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take a place. at the.
Council table .and to-make his statement.
,.
.137. Mr. KOVA.CIC (Czechoslovakia]: Mr. President, let me first thank you and sill the other memb.ers
of the Security Council for granting me this opporttmity
to speak on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation on
the important issue on the Conncil’s agenda today, an
issue which is of profaund concern to us..This issue is
the continuing and ever-escalating; iicts of aggression,
terror and provocation against Nicaragua; It-is the escalation of unlawful, hostile acts organized and financed:
by., or even directly carriedout by, the United States
against an independent, non-aligned and: freedomloving.CentrdAmerican State. It is theescalationofthe
undeclared war by the United Statesagainst Nicaragua.
sib]:

138. Mr. Javier Chamorro Mora, representative of
Ni.caragua, informed this body of the scope of the
United States aggression against -Nicaragua and thes

means chosen by President Reagan’s Administration to
bend the Nicaraguan people to its diktat and to turn
back the ‘progressive socio-economic development of
that country. He provided information on the unprecedented escalation of the United States.military
presence in the Central American, region, with the
practically perpetual holding of milifary exercises and
the highly concentrated deployment of United States
warships and spy planes, while advantage is being taken-for that purpose of the territory and military capacity of some neighbouring States.

circles of intematio.nal public opittion as.we’ll! as by a
growing number ofpoliticar personahties,in the.United
States itself. The- fact that the current United States
Administration ignores the unlawful nature@the acts
against Nicaragua and the voices of the resolute resistance causesserious damage to-the Nicaraguan people.,
constitutes a-grave threat to peace inthe Central A-met-ican region and sabotages the peace+making.efforts of
Nicaragguaand other Latin American States, including
the initiatives of the ContadoraGroup.
144. The aggression and terror against Nicaragua are’
not.an isolatedphenomenon in the foreignpolicy strategy.of the United States. Washington is-practising a
poiicyof blackmail and diktat in other parts ofthe world
also, and it arbitrarily proclaims spheres of so-called j
vital interest- to the United States, It does not at all
hesitate to use armed force to suppress revolutionary
liberation movements and to impose its will on independent States, as has,beendemonstrated <bythe armed
intervention against Grenada, by the press.ure-exerted
against Cuba, Syria and Libya, by events in Lebanon,
by the gruwing military presence of the United States
in the Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf and the Mediterraneanand by the feverish.arm~sbuiidppon1and, at sea
as well as in outer space, including the deploymentof
new United States:first-strikeweapons in thet%ritories
of three-States in Western-Europe. And it-is this-policy;
these acts of intimidation, pressure-and.outright aggression by the: reactionary forces of imperialism, headed
by the United States, which have caused’s marked
deterioration in the overall international situation.
145. The Czecho.slovak people and the. Guvem-ment
of the Czechoslovak Socialist. Republic feel profound
indignation at the aggressive and terrorist actionsagainst the friendly people of Nicaragua, They resolutely support the popular Sandinist.revolution and she
struggle’of the Nicaraguan people to preserve their
revolutionary achieveme.nts and. todefend,their independence and legitimate right to economic and. social
developme~ntof their.nation. They arein ful! solidarity
with the people of Ntcaragua. They appreciate the&itiatives of the Government of Nicaragua an&the con
tinued. endeavours to‘achieve a peaceful and just settlement of the conflict situationin,.XZenfrai Am.erica and
in the Caribbean region* including the efforts of the.
Contadora Group. They resolutely c,ondems.the-@cts
of
destabilization, pressure,~~d.armed~~gtes~~ootl~ag~~~st
Nicaragua, and they demand an i$nmediate ha& to
them, This was clearly expressed& the statement by
ou-r-Federal Ministry of Foreign ffffairs of3Q March.
1984.
146; Let me express the hope that the conclusions
reached by the Security Council in the implemenfatfon
of itsaoble mandate wihbedirected towardsthatx%jecV
tive.

139. The representative of Nicaragua i-nformed the
Council aboutthe escalation ofterrorist actions against
military and-economic targets in Nicaragua, organized
as a part of United States.efforts to destabilize, that
country. He informed it of therecruitment of mercenaries fromthe ranks of the Somoza adherents and other
counter-revolutionaries and criminals financed from
the funds of the CIA and other agenciesof the United
States Administration, He also menti-oned acts of air
and naval piracy and terrorism inspired and even directly controlled by Washington. He presented facts
and evidence on the Ieading role of the United States,
and in particular the CIA, in the mining ofl%caragua’s
major P&Kc and Atlantic ports-actions that are directed not only against thepeopie,andGovemment af
Nicaraguabut outright against international navigation,
communicationsand international trade.
140. The..aiarming factsmentioned in thestatement of
the Nicaraguan‘.representative attest beyond’doubt that
the United StatesAdministration stands behind the acts
of aggression and violence against Nicaragua andthat it
is responsible for all the immeasurable damage that is
being caused -to the Nicaraguan people in both human
and’~material terms by the continuing~and escalating
aggression.
141. We are speaking here of acts,that are unequivocaiiy prohibited by the Charter; by the most significant
documents 6fthe Organization, induding;the Deciaration on Principles of International Law: concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations’ and
the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention
and~Interference in the Internal AI&&s of States,2as
well as the norms ofinternational law.
142: We are speaking&f acts that are in full contradiction of important resolutions of the Organization,
inchtding -ihe unanimously adopted. General aAssembiy
resolution 38/10 and Security Council resolution 530
(1983), These are acts that have. rightIy been conde.mnedby the historic meetings of theforeign ministers of rmon-alignedcountries in Nicaragua and by the
New. Delhi summit of <he Non-Aligned Moveme& as
well as by.the subsequent sessions&he Co-ordinating
Bureuof that Movement,

147. The PRESIDENT [irlfetp~efati~n firm RUTThe next speaker is the representative. of Guatemala. I invite him to take apiaceat the Cotmc~~able
and.to make his statement.

sim]:

143; The United States aggression against Nicaragua
is-be&
critic’ d!::y
and+.:resohtteiy condemned -by broad
i-,. ,,<:’; ~.~#$
<,,.
16
..

148. Mr. FAJARDO-MALDONABO’
(Guatemala)
[[flterprerationfiom Spanish]: First,of all I should like,
on behalf of Lrnydelegation to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption to the presidency. We are sure that
under your leadership the. work of the Council will be
successful.,Similarly I wish to express my gratitude to
the represem.ative ofPeru, Mr., Javier Arias Stella, forthe able and effective way in which he conducted the
delicate business of the Council during his term,
,,
:’
2.
149. My delegation has followed with interest and
concern this furtherdebate on the delicate situation in
Central America in this major body of the United Nations. We havelistenedto the statements and views of
various delegations and we are concerned to see that,,
with, the tail for a meeting of the Security Council to
dis.cuss’the Central American crisis, our region has
, beencaught upin,this interminable vortex, this ciassic
East-West confrontation, so that the. negotiations and
peace efforts being carried, out within the Contadora
frameworkare beingseriously jeopardized. Hence, asa
member of;the Central American family, Guatemalais
directly affected by the regional crisis. Aware of the
historic links that bind the countriesof the region,, and
cif the need to, maintain and strengthen those Iinks
through the peaceful settlement of regional disputes,
we.considerit-our highest responsibility to kjrpress our
Government% point of view in thislmportant United
Nations forum in the hope. that we-can thus contribute
to’s peaceful political negotiated solution for Central
Am&&.
t.
’
.
.
I ‘,
‘.,
.
150. My country, as a founding~Memberof the United
Nations,.agreed to, observes andadheres to the principles-on which it was establishedand which are today
embodied in its constituent Charter. In particular, we
wish to mention the maintenance ofinternational peace
and security, respect for the sovereign equahty of
States, the peaceful, settlement ‘of international .disputes, reje.ctionof the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or poIitica1 ind.ependence of any,
State, the right of peoples to self-determination, nonintervention or noninterference in the internal affairs
of other States.pndthe right to freenavigation and trade
in internat@nai.waters, as set f&h& ‘Security Counci1 resolution 540 (1983) on another situation. Sin+,
larly; C;uatemaia adheres. to- the 2.1 Contadora objectives endorsed in Sept.ember of 1ast year [sl16041,
annex], includingthe- reje.ctionof terrorism andsuhxer:
sion as a basis for any comprehensive” negotiated settlement inC@ntral America.
:
L,
,,
151. Because of al1 those principles and owing to’its
deep commitmentto Central Americanism, my country
has.remained outside the arms race problem and the
problem of-the exportation of armed groups.and5ntends
to continue with that policy so as to make a positive.
contribution in the search for a peaceful settlement
to the situation,which at. present. prevails in Gentrai
American countries. Hence we Gelieve; indeed insist,
that the Contadora Group is the’ regional body that
we have chosen-and which must bestrengthened, My17

countrv is confident that it is in that context that we as
Centi- Americans, in a constructive manner and acting
in good faith, must seekgolutions to our current problems and differences.
152. My country now, wishes to ‘make ‘an appeal for
reconciliation among Central Americans. Let us con-.
tinue to work within. the Contadora framework, with
resolution and patience to achieve peaceful coexistence
and to settle .our differences, Let us strengthen the
peace initiative that we have been offered by our fraternal countries in Latin America, members of the Contadora Group, and let us not- allow hegemonistic and
extracontinental conflicts ,which are. foreign to our.
interests and which in no way contribute to our devel-.
opment .to sweep us .up:in the ongoing confrontation
they,sustain.
,I’ .
+: i ..! ; :.
-, .. .-‘I
: .’
153. Finally, my,Govkrnment~ wishes ‘to reaffirm iis
support for the Contadora Group. We completely support General ,Assembly resolution 38/10 and hope that
the Security Council will further thc,peace,efforts being
made in this -forum. The problems are those..of Central
America and Latin America;, they are comprehensive
and must be negotiated. It isfor us toresclve them. The.
United Nations must help to create the conditions conducive to lasting peace in . the region. ‘I %
, , I”
I
154. The PRl%II&T
[int&p&ation
‘j&m
Russian]: The next speaker.is the representative of Afghanistan. I invite bimto take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
-‘.
_..
.,
155. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): Earlier. this week
I had an opportunity most warmly to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the high office of President
of the Security Council. However, I should like now to
express our admiration and thanks for the brilliant manner in which you have so far conducted the Council’s
/
work.
,
I.
,’
* j ./
.,
.._ II_
:
..
156. The aiready’tcnse situation in Central America
has taken an ominous. turn for the, worse. .The main
cause behind this dangerous change is, ,as always, the
stepped-up United States imperialist intervention in the
internal, affairs of the’eountries of the region.
.>
t ,..
,.
157. United States intervention in Nicaragua is,being
carried out practically on all fronts. The armed intervention which once had the form of isoiated Provo:
cations and :occasionai subversive, actions against
Nicaraguan border -villages by. the former Somozist
National,Guard bandits has now been developed into a
large-scale undeclared war launched by* a mercenary
legion of the CIA which is highly organized, well’
trained and fu11yequipped with sophisticated light and
heavy weaponry. The CIA mercenaries <haveinvaded.
Nicaragua from the north, the south, the Atlantic coast
and the Pacific coast. They have chosenas-their targets
defenceless villages, agricultural plantations, public
service institutions such as schools and.hospita,ls, and
economic installations. They forcibly displace the vil-

lagers, destroy their houses and bum their crops. To
carry out those acts of aggression they make continuous use of high-powered speed-boats, helicopters
and small planes.

Nicaragua. Every effort must be made to revive the
process of diplomatic contacts initiated by the Go&
tadora Group with a view to finding:a lasting peaceful
solution to the problems of the region.

158. Economic pressures that started with the cessation of all United States economic assistance to Nicaragua by the Reagan.Administration have now been
elevated to the level of an all-out economic blockade.

165. May I, in conclusion, Mr. President, thank you
and, through you, the other members of the Council, for
extending to-my delegation the privilege of participating
in the debate of the Council on the item. before it.

159. Coupled with all those is the psychological and
propaganda warfare waged at all levels to discredit the
revolutionary gains of the Nicaraguan people.

166. Sir John THOMSON (United. Kingdom): Although you, Mr. President, like myseIf and-one or two
of our neighbours, suffer under the disability of representing.a deIegation that does not begin with “Plz but
with “U,” you have already set us an excellent example by asking us to be brief in our congratulations.
I therefore congratuiate yourheartily on what you have
already done and on what I am sure you will do, and,
similarly, I repeat what I said a few days ago aboutthe
skill of our Peruvian colleague in leading the Co~unc$l;
last month.

160. The modest hope for stabilization and tranquillity in the region which was created with the endeavours and proposals of the Contadora Group faded away
because of the negative attitude adopted by the United
States Administration and the pressures it has exerted
on its regional lackeys.
161. The situation recently acquired a new and very
explosive dimension as a result of the mining of Nicaraguan territorial waters around the important seaports of Corinto and Sandino. These mines which have
been laid in a SO-kilometer belt across Lake,Nicaragua,
from Sapoa River to the town of Col6n, have already
destroyed or damaged 10cargo ships and fishing boats.
Among those damaged were Panamanian, Soviet,
Liberian, Japanese and Dutch-registered vessels. The
mining of Nicaraguan territorial waters by CIA mercenaries constitutes not only an act of intervention
and aggression against that country but aiso poses a
grave danger to. international navigation. The international: community should vehemently condemn, this
brazen act of, aggression against Nicaragua by the
United States.
162.. The Peace, Friendship and Soiidarity Organization of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan has
issued a statement on the recent escalation of the
United States dirty undeclared war against Nicaragua
in which the United States Administration is strongly
condemned for itsacts of aggression. The statement has
reiterated fui1 support to and complete solidarity with
the fraternal people of Nicaragua in their struggle to
defend their independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and the proud achievements of their revolution.

167. I must apologize, not only to my calleagues,on
the Council for making a speech at this hour. of: the
night, but also to the interpreters and’thetranslatorsfor
making what is more or less an impromptuspeech, Thespeech that i.had prepared to give either. this eveningor
tomorrow--l was not sure which-is no longer wholly
relevant, and this, puts me-and I apologize. for it--in
some difficulty. The reason for the difficulty is the
very recent amendments put forward to thedraft resolution that was submitted, I believe, last night. These
amendmentsare, 1repeat, the reason for mymaking an
ex ternpore speech.
168. The amendments are quite. simple; there aretwo,
of them, one to the last preambular paragraphand fhe
other to. paragraph 1, and my deiegatiorrt5d.s that in
part they are good and in part they are bad-r at any
rate awkward.

163; The people and Government of the Democratic
Republic- of Afghanistan fully associate themselves
with,the legitimate concern of the people and Govemment of Nicaragua, which was eloquently echoed in this
CounciI by Mr. Chamorro Mora, the representative of
Nicaragua.

169. I do not find difficulty with the-amended paragraphs as they now stand in the text before us, twishto
make it quite clear that the United. King$om-deplores
the miningnf Nicaraguan waters, Responsibility-for~the
laying of mines has been claimed by t,wo organizations
which have declared. themselves. in opposition: to: the
Government of Nicaragua, Themmtingoperations have
already caused damage to me.rcha.nt ships sf several
nationalities and injuries. to. merchant. se,amen,-Our
position is well known and consistent: as-a.maritime.
nation, we are committed to freedom. of navigatiqni
including innocent passage through theI te~rriiorial sea
and access to foreign ports for peaceful. trade. We
deplore any threats to navigation, whenever @id
wherever they occur. I reaffirm our adherence to&at
principle.

164. We demand the cessationofall imperialist interference and intervention in the internal affairs of Nicaragua and .other countries of the region. The Security
Council shouldtake appropriate measuresto put an end
to the acts of aggression by the United Stat-esagainst

170. ‘Having said that-and irepeat thatrhaVisave.ry
clear, unequivocal and firm.position on thepart CS~~QIY
Government-we in the United-Kingdom ne.ve.rtheIess
feel that the draft resolution’ as it. now stands.iaCkS
balance.
18.

“2. To halt all ,military manoeuvres or exercises
in the region;

171. I may have been under a mistipprehension in the
last fewdays, but 1think Iam entitled at this pointto. ask
what this debate is about. Our agenda, which we have
adopted at the beginning ofzeach. of these meetings,
refers to the letter from our colleague from Nicaragua,
and that letter [S/J6449] says as follows:

“3. To end the escalation of the clandestine war
against Nicaragua which takes the form of air and sea
attacks and the mining of harbours;

“On specific instructions from my. Government,
Ihave.the honour to requesta meetingofthe Security
Council as a matter of urgency and immediacy, in
ordeeto consider theescalationof-actsof aggression
currently. being p.erpetrated against my country.”

“4. To withdraw its request for the allocation of
$21 million, which is at present under consideration
in the United States Congress.”
175. Then when we come to the letter of 29 March
[S/16448] we find a sentence in the annexed comrnunique which rather worried my delegation. It says:

There was no specific reference to which acts of aggression, 0.0 specific reference, for exam@, to mining, in
ouragenda. But I thit&no onedoubtedthat miningwas
oneoffhe matters whichthe Nicaraguandelegation-was
complaining about when it gut-for&&this letter which.
we as a Council adopted as our agenda,

“The Government of Nicaragua confirms once
again its readiness to continue to struggle for peace in
the Central American-region and reiterates its appeal
to the internationalcommunity to provide Nicaragua
with the necessary technical and military means to
defend itself from. the State terrorism unleashed by
the United States Government.”

172. However, I think it is also fair for others of us,
including my delegation, to have assumed that this
w.ording- which I have just. read o.utd“acts of aggression currently beingperpetrated againstmy country”refe.rred to the other recent Ni.caraguan letters. For
example, there were other letters: on 26 March,
27 March, 29 March and 2 April. If my coIleagues.will
excus.e me, I would just Iike to, quote briefly a few
@@ages here and there from these Nicaraguan Ietters
to illustrate why I had fhe impression. that our debate
was about something wider than the mining, question.

176. Then we come to the letter of 2 April [S/164571,
which states:
“I have the honour to inform you of the following:

173. For example, the first of these letters [.S/164.?9],
of,26 Marich, says in part:

“Dam writing to inform~ou of the following:

177. I think that what I have briefly quoted from these
letters does entitle my delegation to think that this
debate was on a wider matter than-the.mining-question,
serious though the mining question,&, andr‘was further
persuaded that this was the subject of thedebate by the
opening speech made by the representative of Nicaragua. That speech ranged over material which, unfortunately, is ail too familiar to the Council because we
have debatedthe matter on several previuus occasions.
But amongst other things, there were, by my count,
nine pages of complaints before we reached the question of mining.

“Yesterday, 25March 1984, art3.30a.m., agroup
of Honduran military ~erzontiel; 6f undetertlned
number, carried out an attack fro-m Honduran terf&y upon the units ofthe Sandinlst People’s~Army
situatetis kilometres southjtvest of Somotillo, tiring
40 rounds from 81-mm mortars. Fortunately, no
cast&ties resulted from.this criminal attack, which
lasted &etween 20 and 3O%lnutes.”
174: The-next letter [.SII6?4~, of:;?7 March; enclosed
a communique. by the Gov@%lng Junta of National
Reconstruction dated 26 March, which c0vered.a large:
ntnhber~of~points. It is atxo-page:document, so L will
not attempttoquote it@, but, amongstother-things, it
said: “This.titutitio.n, which brings e-veacloserthepossibllityofUnited Stateslrrilitary interventionagainst-El
Salvador and Nicaragua, has frustrated the efforts for
peace”. It goes on-in anotherpassage to,ask the United
States Government:

178. So, once again, I shouldjustlike to affirm that my
delegation thought that this debate was about the problems of Central America. We thought that it was about
the problems of Central America as put forward by
Nictiragua, but that other Central American countries,
other countries closely involved, and other membersof
the Council would have something to say in contribu
tion, and indeed they did; we have heard a number of
speeches in this debate.

“1. To stop escalating the stationingof troops-in
Central America a@ ta- withdraw- the contingents
sent in in the fast few weeks to join those already
stationerlthere, together with the espionage aircraft;
aircraft-carriers and twarships recently dispatched to
the region;
\

“Yesterday, 29 Marcli 1984; at 2.05 a.m., an
unspecified number of personnel of the Honduran
army attacked, from Honduras, the Catarina sector,
3 kiIometers south-west of La Ceiba and 5 kilometers
west of Somotillo, with rounds of small-arms and
81-mm mortar fire. Fortunately, no casualties resulted from this criminal act of aggression.”

179. And what have they been about? All these
speeches seem to me to have ranged over a very wide
area of international affairs. I even- heard one speaker
19

this. evening referring to the stationing of missiles’in
Europe. But we have certainly covered a great deal
about United States relationships with Central America, ahout internal Central American relationships,
about the relationship of Central America to the four
Contadora Group countries. We have talked about.the
importance of various principles: Article 2 of the Charter, for example, which forbids intervention in the internal affairs of other countries and calls for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We have talked about the application of democratic principles to Central America. We
have talked about social and economic development in
Central America.

debate or, indeed, of the Central American problem. I.n
theopinion of my delegation, the draftresalutmn before
us would have been improved if the final preambular
paragraph and paragraph 1 as originally circulated in
the provisional version had been amended.
184. Now members will see why I began by saying
that the changes reflected in the versionof the draft
resolution just circulated have. put me in some difficulty: aithough.as amended they are acceptable to my
delegation, the original wording of the.provisional text
would, we thought, have beenimproved if to. the final
preambuiar paragraph-

18fl.’ So I feel that it is not only the agenda we adopted,
but the speecheswe have heard, which led us to think
that we are dealing here with the whole problem of
Central America. For example, in the very opening
speech; we heard the following from our colleague from
Nicaragua:
I

“Noting also with deep concern the mining of Nicaraguan ports and other attacks, as we11asovertand
covert hostile acts and threats against Nicaragua>“had been added “and other Statesin CentraMmerica”.
185. Similarly, in para raph 1 of the provisional wersion, where’we called. ifor “an immediate end to all
threats, attacks ‘and overt and covert hostile acts
against the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Nicaragua”, we should have preferre@to
say $~otjust Nicaragua, but “the States of Central
America-“. And, indeed, it seemed to us,that there was
indeed much purpose in calling for an immediateendto
all threats, attacks and overt and covert hostile acts
agamst the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity ofali States of Central America. I.can.not vc-ry
easily believe that any delegation represented around
this table would have opposed that; sureiythisis apsint
on which we are all agreed, and my delegation would
have liked.@ have said-so.

“On theother hand, we are absolutely certain that
.our region is now in a particularly critical and difficult
period and that at any time this could lead to a conflict
with serious consequences.” [See 2525th meering,
para. 26.1 t

As a matter of fact, my delegation thinks that that is a
fairly accurate statement of the position; That, it seems
to us, is what this debate is really about.
181. The speech by the representative of Nicaragua
was followed by a speech by the representative of the
United States which dealt with a large number of matters which really do not seem to be ve_ry adequately
reflected--if- they are at ail-in the draft resolution
before us: Then, if we turn to the other parties involved
in this dispute, we:have just heard this evening a powerfuI speech by ‘the representative of Honduras, which
contained information that my delegation is not able to
verify or deny-, such~information as a large number of
Cuban troops going to Nicaragua, andso forth. Wealso
heard. a speech ‘from the delegation of EI Salvador,
which was pretty critical of-one of its fellow Central
American-countries. This evening we heard a speech
from therepresentative ofCosta Rica, who was pointing out to us the importance of not undermining the
Contadomprocess and suggesting that perhaps it was
being undermined by the way in which we were conducting this debate. Finally, we have just heard-a powerful
speech from-the representative of Guatemala.

186. In short, it seems to us that it is wrong to deal
only with the mining question, though it is perfe.ctly
right that we should deal with the mining question, It
is wrong, we feef, to deal with the interests ofonly6ne
of the countries involved in the situation- in Ccntrai
America.
187. Sir, I recaiI the. declaration your predecessor made on behalf of all of us only last week
I2%th meeting1 on another very serious matter,
namely, the use-zver-@ied by the Secretary-General’s
group of experts-of chemical weapons. But when we
discussed this matter, and when we-:agre,edon the&claration that was issued by your predecedss.orT
we put
that in.the context of the>whole situation which was
occurring there. I should have liked to’do,the same sort
of thing on this occasion.

182. It seems to me,.listening to,ali these,speeches,
that this body is falling into the habit-which I am afraid
is becoming ingraineddf producingresults that do not
havemuch relevance to the debate. One begins to wonder whetherit is worth our while having debates at all, if
we have long debates and then end up with something
that is, not- congruent with them.
:
183. I repeat that our present draft resolution does
noti‘it seems to’my delegation, match the scope of the

188. Always with the same object in views we. a&o
find other problems with this draft resolution, We
should have liked to seemore balance. The draflresofutionrefers to SecurityCouncil re.s.oiution.530(1983Jand
to General AssembIy resolution 38MOfbut it refers to
the-m selectively. Hence it seems’to us. that it. lacks
balance, and we believe that the draft re.solution~uld.
be improved in a way that wouId’command general
20

consent at this table, For exampIe.:$ve&lieve it would
have 6.eenimproved had it refiecteZl~&sembly resolution 3800 m-ore accurately and fully-for example, by
the addition-crf the foilov&ig.par~gtaphs, which I shall
quote verbatim. The si.xthp~eamb;uitirparagragb~~uid
re:zgl.as.follows:
“Mindful of the necessity of promoting. the
achievement of-peace on a souad,basis, which would
make;possibie agenuine democratic process, respect
for human rights, and. eoonomio and- social developnie.m,”
andparagraph 5 wouldread:
“N6te~with safisfac@on.that.the countries of the.
r@on- have agreed-to @Ice;meawes leading to the
establishment and; where- appropfiate, the i-mprovenienf sf democratic, regresentatitfe and- pluralistic
systems which will guarantee effective. popular. participation. in decision-making and ensure the free.
access of various currents .of op$tion to. honest and
periodic electoral processesbased-on the fuEobservance-ofcivil rights, emph.asi-izin$
that the strength7
etiingaf democratic institutions. & clos:ely linked- to
evolution and advances. @hieved in the sphere uf
e~anottlic development andsocial justice;“;
189, Euthermore, we believe. that we might not only
have4iected more accuately. the resolutions cited in;
this draft resolution but also some&the wise wurdsuttered only recently, on 28!March, by thePresident of
Mexico, Mr. Miguel delaMad-rid; whichwerequoted in
the statement of the representative of Mexi~co, as
foiiows:
“ ‘Ifispossible forcountrie~-bqrdeyng.on the area of
conflict and generally i~nterested4n the soiutisn of
probie.ms that might eventually. involve the-mto-play
anactive-and important-role in restoring di.alogueand
negotiation, thus relieving. tension and restoring:
peace. It is equally im ortant that&e c0untrje.s involved, directly or in Birectiy, ina regionalconflict
shouldrefrain from- taking-action that c.ouid exacerbate, that- conflict, should j renounce hege-monistic
aspiratjoes and should not engage i-n interference or
destabilization actions.
‘1 ‘ . . .
“ ‘Latin Am~~ca;needsastabiean_dpiuralistic.~ntra1 America which. c;m tit into-the. patterns of cooperation and enrich: the joint emndeavoursof the
re-gjsn.’ ”
I-Iear, hear b
“ ‘The path to achieving that is_clearly one of’
dialogue and: negotiation, based’ on respect for
national &lent&s and .forms of expression, and it. is
certa@ily not the p@h of confrontation and conflict,
of destabiiizing actions,or the imposition ofmodels.

designed elsewhere- by those who think that they
know better than the Central Americans themselves
what Central Americans want and should have.’ ”
[See 2527th meeting, para. 76.1
Well, that is the authentic voice of the only memberof”
the Contadora Group who has spoken in this debatesas
far as I am aware, and I think we might: have triedto
reflect that statement in the draft resolution.
190. I know that we all support the two resolutions
that are cited-Security Council resolution 530 (1983)
and General Assembly resolution 38/1O-and we:are
very glib in citing previous resolutions; it is something
we are all trying to do ail the time. But I fhink we should
pay special attention to the circumstances in which
Assembly resolution 38/10 was negotiated. Ali~of,us
must remember sitting around for a-whole morning and
all through lunch-time twiddling our thumbs while-the
delegations most closely eoncemed negotiated its&text,
and there was a great deal of dissatisfaction as ali:our
stomachs got emptier. But when they came up with an
agreed text, which was then accepted by: acclamation,
we all thought it had been- worth while and we all
applauded them. And I do not like the feeling that this
resolution, which was achieved not only by consensus
of the countries most closely concerned but also by
consensus of the entire General Assembly, should, in a
sense, be undercut by- our selective quotation and’by
not being fully and fairly reflected.
191. I come to what is really my mainessential posi?
tive point. In listening to this debate, in reading the
statements when I was unable to be presenthere, I have
got the.strong impression that there is one thing that.&;
common to virtually all the speeches: that is, support
for the Contadora process and support for the 21points
ofthe Document of Objectives [S/16041, annex]. These
are very important matters which, as I sai& seem to-be.
of general acceptance not only to the mem6ersof4re
Council but also to members-of the General <Assembly
who-were invited to speak here and who.have stressed,
for example, free elections, pluralism, democratic, processes,human rights and eco.nomicand social development Surely, ail these things are part of the wh.ole
problemof Central America, and they should be refleeted in this draft resolution. And let us remember
that we are dealing not just with a problem-because
that sounds a bit abstract-but with a problem about .
people, people who have suffered agreatdeal and foraIongJime. In my personal estimation, de-spite someof
thestatements in this debate, we,are not-reallydealingwith. a great. East-West dispute here-which we. quite
often do get into. We are re.aliy dealing, with amuch.
more local situation-which the peopie,f Central~AmerT
ica unfortunately find themselves in but which, we
believe, they can cope with. And here I.refer again&o
the concluding.words of the statement of thePresident
of Mexico I quoted earlier to the effect- that Central
Americans can find Central American solutions.
192. We found a great deal in the.analysis.the representative of the United States quoted at the-6eginning of

the debate [252&h nzeetingjl-the Kissinger Report. We
foundthat very persuasive. One does nothave to agree
with every word’ of it, but there is a lot in that report
with which I have not heard any delegation seriously
disagree.
193. So.we had hoped that the Council at the end.of
this debate would produce a resolution, a presidential
statement, or whatever, that would be really constructive and not in any way vindictive. We had also hoped
for all these elements I have mentioned to-be reflected
in the present draft resolution so that we would have a
tn.@ btianced statement Making it.easier for the-four
countriesofthe Contadora Group to exercise their very
valuable function in-bringing the fiveCentral American
c.mntries into agreement.

supplying of these forces has been carried out by: %he
United States at a cost of tens ofmillions~ofdoIlars, @id
the size of this “American assistance”, as it is op.enIy
referred to by the President of the United States and his
Secretary of Defence, will grow. As far asthe.reprcsentatives of the United’ States at the United Nations @Y
concerned, they have openly tried to provide a veneer
of diplomatic respectability for their intervention in
Nicaragua’s internal affairs .
20. An undeclared war is being waged against 6%
country and its people, and every day it is assuming
increasingly threatening and serious diMens@rs,
gravely menacing peace an,dsecurity in Central’AmeF
ica and in the worId as a whole. The large contingents-rlf
naval and air-force landing units that have been seat
one after the other towards the coasts of Nicgraguaare
meant to. serve a policy of intimidation. The manaeuvres that have become a permanent feature of this
region are intended to create a miiitary infrastructure
with the building of airports, bases, munitions dumps
and so on. No sooner hadthe Big Pine II Manoeuvres,
which had lasted for six months near the frontiers of
Nicaragua and which had involved the landing of
United States and Honduran soldiers, come-to~an:~@‘rd
than they were succeeded by the Granadero 6 and
Ocean Venture 84 Manoeuvres. According to information from the Pentagon, these will involve the partisfirsation of 33,000 United States troops. How can.w&a&to
recall that it was precisely the Ocean Venture~81 @a*
noeuvres that were used asa dress rehearsal for the
eventuaiinvasion of-Grenada.

t94. We find that missing from thedraft ~esglution as
it.now stands. Therefore, I must say.t,hatmydelegation,
indisappointment, will abstain when thedraft isput, to
the vote.
195, The PRESIDENT [interprx%zticvz from. Russ&]: I should. now like to speak in my capacity
as representative of the UKRAINIAN
SOVIET
SQCIALIST REPUBLIC.
196, The Security Council is considering a matter
wh&.h:affects a vital aspe.ctof the lie of,any Stateor
peapIe: the right to an independen?andaov.ereign existence in conditions of peace and security without any
foreign interference inits internal affairs. That right is
enshrined~in the Charter of the United Nations and in
other fundamental international legal documents, Any
directorindirect vioiatlonofthat rightnecessarily leads
tolawlessness in international relations;

201. A new and extremely menacing development has
been the United States attempt to set up. a marine
blockade around Nicaragua. The approaches to” its
ports have been strewn with various kinds of Mines,
which merchant ships from Panama.,the Netherlands,
the Soviet Union, Liberia, Japan and ,cammercial!and
tishingve-sseIs from Nicaragua-have foundered on. This
is a gross transgression of the traditional. usages.of
internationalnavigation and trade. These actions- cannot be,termed anything but an act of piracy and internationat terrorism.

197. The! statements made by most delegations have
pruved cogently that the Security Council, is dealing
with precisely the: kind of wilfulness where generally
a&no-wledged norms and principles of international
law are!being ignored and flouted. SimpIy because the
present Government ofNicaragua& not- to the liking of
the.Uaited States-s has frequently been stated by the
latter’s representatives in- the Security Council-the
United States has set itself the goal of overthrowing
that Government.

202. Sure& the representatives of>the United States
donot seriously believe that the Inrernational.col~
nity is so naive: as to believe their assertions. tliat
al1 these mines are simpIy hand-made and have been.
placed there by some casual bystanders. Incontrovertible data has been cited here demonstrating that the
most sophisticated kinds of technical methods were
used in Mining the ports. The nature and size oFthe
attacks on Merchant ships en route TONicaragua:&ve
quite clearly indicated that they have been carried roUt
at United States expense and with,the.direct participation of organizations and persons controlled fiy the”
United States Government, which is directly responsible for these criminal acts.

198: An afte-Mptfiasbeen made toprove to us that the
Government of this Central American country aIIeged& represents some kind of threat to the. United
Statesi something that country cannot. foferate. May
I tecalIthat the same kind of putative threat- was Mentionedby the United States in the case of Grenada,
aga&t which.it directed its regular military units.
199. There. is every reason to-assumetiat the United
States& pianning .preciseIy the same-kind of operation
inthe caseof Nicaragua. However, for the time being it
prefers- to do this through third-parties; using hostile
elements from among. the followers of Som0z.a and
other d.&%ffectedelements. The training- and: military

203. In the opinion of the deiegaaon &Xhe U%r?&&m
SSR, the Security Council shauldfirmlycondi
%ts
22

of: aggression against the sovereigm, indepen-denge
and. territorial integrity of-Nicaragua and reaffirm the
rig@ of the Nicaraguan people to.determine its own
future, f&e from foreign infetference. Particuiarfy repr.ehenslbIe is the mining of the ports and territorial
waters Of-Nicaragua, since it represents a further stage
inthe terrorism that seriously threatens the freedom of
nayigat,ion and trade and is a gross. violation of the
enerally- ncognized norms of international law. The
B@~ltZiQ Council shaaid re:quire the United States
immed$‘teIy to cease all hostile actions against Nicaragtm Maximum use shouldbe made oftheefforts the
states of the Contadora Group, which are aimed at
securing ape_aceful settlement of the conflict inCentr”a1
America..

b:ody for discussing problems affecting international
peace and security. We do not object to this. Further,
we would urge the representative of the United King:
dom to suggest to the United States or any country in
Central America-if he deems it appropriate-that it
come here and complain of any situation confronting it,
even if it is a situation caused by my country’s actions;
let it complain of that too. We agree with that completely. We would be the fist member of the Council to
support such a request, if the United Statesor any other
member of the Council should decide at any time that
there was a need to discuss here in the Security Council
any other specific issue of Central America; However,
what we are discussing today are the acts of aggression
being committed against Nicaragua.

Bo$; The Ukrainian SSR is firm?y against United
S-b&s intervention in the internal affairs of Nicaragua
andaffirms its complete solidarity with the heroic Nicaraguan people.

210. The representative of the United Kingdom also
made reference to the communiqut of Nicaragua’s
Governing Junta of National Reconstruction distrib*
uted to Council members and mentioned some of its
paragraphs, among them, those referring to the appeal
for military co-operation which my country publicly
made in order to defend itself against the undeclared
war and the military and tradeblockade it is now facing.
I wish to say to him and to the rest of the international
community that this appeal-has just been repeated in
another communique we are sending to the Security
Council.

I: shall now resume my functions as PRESIDRNT of the Council.

205.

206. Mr. CHAMCXRRO MGRA. (Nicaragua) [interpretrrttoanfrom Spani&]: I wish tomake it clear to the
members of the Council that I had requested to speak
eefore Iheard the statementofth.erepresentative of the
united’ Kingdom, since I considered it important to
provide additional information, as I-have been doing
throughout the debate. i3ut having-beard his statement,
I believe it important to makesa few brief references to
what he said, which, in. o.ur opinion, was almost an
explanation- of vote.
203. %-St, the representative oftie United Kingdom
mentioned our letter in which we r-equested the convet&g of these meetings of the Couatil, [s/16&9l.
I shouldbke to read it out to himand I request: him to
fisten carefully and-he wiIl.~ndeXtandthat our.request
was “in order to consider the escalation of acts of
aggression currently being perpetrated against my
country?‘.
208. We have been clear from the time we called for a
m-eeting that it: was to discuss the acts of aggression
against Nicaragua, that there- had been various such.
acts, and among them the miningofithe ports has now
assumed extraordinary significance because of its
sc0p.eand its origin.
209. I wish.ais.0 to say that qe are ~ware%liat Central
American probiems are multiple and sompiex. We are
aware that the way in which we mus1&al with them and
the sohrtion we must findfor themalsohas to be multiple andcomplex in nature. Hence, wethereforehave to
explore: every possible form. andmake every possible
peace eflorr, precisely in. order to arrive at a cornpie+
hens% set&merit of the probl&~s affecting Central
America. In this.respect Nicaragua has never objected
to the problems of Central Americabeing discussed in
the Security Council, which is the most appropriate

211. We sincerely hope that among those countries
responding to this appeal will be,the United Kingdom.
Perhaps it could send us some minesweepers to clean
up our coasts. We would be very grateful to the United
Kingdom if it could help us in this endeavour, knowing
the facilities his country enjoys and that during the
Second World War the United Kingdom was one of
those countries receiving military co-operation from
others in order to defend itself against Nazi aggression;
I seem to remember also that the United States leased
the United Kingdom aircraft at a nominal sum of a
dollar or so in order that it could defend itself against
bombings from,which, unfortunately, his country was,
suffering at the time.
212. We hope that, once we come to vote on the draft.
resolution we, have presented to the Council for its
consideration-which to our mind precisely reflects the
actions of which Nicaragua has complained and is suffering at present-the United Kingdom will be one of
the countries that will be in a position to.vote in favour,
taking into account the fact that, among other things, it
condemns the mining of the ports and refers to the need
to respect the right to free trade and navigation which
should prevail in every region of the world. Furthermore, there have been other resolutions adopted in the
Security Council along the same lines-1 seem to rem11
resolution 540 (I983)--on which the United Kingdom
was able to vote in favour.
213. I also wish to refer to some statements-as 1.have
already done on a previous occasion-of American and

other politician$, to the effect that the aggression is
having an impact on the problems of Central America.
These problems arecomplex, wide-ranging andne-edful
of resolution. I tliink that it is not just’ the acts of
aggression committed-against Nicaragua fiathave to be
resolved; that is but one aspect, albeit the most-importanf one under discussion at the moment. But there are
other aspects that in the long run will have t.o be resolved, either through the Security Council, the General Assembly or the Contadora Group, whose efforts,
we hope, will be successftil.

Sena?orKennedy’s introduction of some amendmet&.
I shall quote Senator Inouye, who said:
“I. find myself sadly supporting funds & rnif&y
assistance. If I ever felt thatzthe$2,1milliunw.erezh&
amount which would prevail-here, I would be on~ur.
side.”
Recalling the Administration’s original-reqqesf, uv@ch
was for $92 million, Senator Inouye added; “Y~.XBXI
kill less people with $62miIIion than with D2:~il~i~ts.”

214. In this connection I shall mention certain statements.madeby the Secretary-General during hfs visit to
Panama. a few days ago, because during the debate
some few seemedto wish to place the Central American
problem within the context of the East-West cris’is. To
our mind, this is not in keeping with-the reality prevailingin our region, nor is it &the root of theproblems
Gesettingus. The fad is that because&these problems
there are civil wars being waged in some-Latin American countries, for example, in El Salvador.

220. According to The New York Z&es &Rm$
James D. Strachan said, “There is increasing u@$rstanding in the region that the Nicaraguan threg is
regional, calling for regional. co-operation. md:g$ re+
gional solution.” I ask members of thecouncil whelhefi
&at is not a real threat-to my country fi%m a~~!on@&i
the United States Army.
221. I wish next to refer to- a short article- that
appeared in The Christian Science Monitor @day, precisely about the request for this.convening.oZthe Security Council by Nicaragua. It said at the end:

215 The Secretary-General said that the, Central
American crisis- was very complex and that, to his
regret, there were elements that were hampering the
peaceefforts of the Contadora Group. He also said that
the Contadora Group’s approach to$he. regional problems-was correct because what was fundament@ to the
crisis in that region were its economic and social aspects. At. the same time, he mentioned $h;it all acts of
interfirence in the internal affairs QIXentral &me&an
counties were deplorable.

“The resolution will have tie trouble get1i.m at
least nine votes on the i5-member Security coun:ciI.
It is not clear whether the United States wiil.veta ar
support the resolution.“-We, ofcourse, wouId.$il@
the ‘U&ted States to support it.-“A veto mlghf indicate the US harbors aggressive intentions toward Nicaragua, one Western dipIomat says.”
222. I shall now referbriefly to other statementsm-age
during the debate on Nicaragua’s complaint aboafthe
acts of aggression against our country.

216. Recently, President de la Madrid, inexpressing
some. views on the Central Ame&aa isue& mentioned; @no_ng:otherthings; that-ihe problem-ofQntra1
Americis must.be resolve-d by Central Americans themselves free from foreign interference fr_om whatever
source.

223. A few representatives salidthat the convetljn-at:
these meetings, their results and ot@raspects teai!! ed.
to’ hamper and jeopaydize the Contadora, procms,
I should iike to ask the internation@ commu&y:
whettier a peacep;ocess can%e-hampered;paraly@or
obstructed‘by a request from a coomry which is sllffering aggression to.a b;ody responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security.

217. As.we are all aware, in the f?asrtwo weeksthere
have been long debates in, the Unite@ States.Senate
about military assistance to Central~Ametica, including
those which I mentioned in my two e;rrlier interventions. I shall quote a few statements w&h, according
to the press, have. been made in the. Senate in the past
f&v days.

224. I should aIso like. to ask whether it was not pxecisely fbe efforts of Nicaragua, both in the !&u&y
Council and in the Gene@ Assembly~espite~~h~~~~ac~
that the same arguments were advanced-and@ s;l-me’
accusations were made, that we were trying$o-i@gede
the Comadora process--that led fo Se&Q Council
resolution 530 (1983) an&General Assem~l~resoh$an
38710.

218. Senator Sasser, in an attempt to e@tin why
Congress isreluctant to take drastic measures to halt
the i4cessant call for funds. by the Reagan Administration.to carry on the- war in CentraI.America, said:“There:& areluctance around Fiereto-be too assertive6n CMtral America. Peoplefe@Zongress will be
blamed b the Admfnistralion fdr Ioslng Central
Americ_a l!.. cthingsgo awry there.‘”

225. Lastly, I should like to ask whether, on”the.cgntrary, the negotiating process, whether t&at ofthz&&ntadora,GrQpp or of any other groupi &not S&g-&mpered~%ytlie carrying.0t.n. of militXQ manp-aYr-esi by
the.establishmem of military eases,@&$y thcopJos&
tion by certain countriesofthe region:tp.an-immediate
moratorium on the shtpment Qf arms to the fegizm,

219. 2% New York Times on 3April also told us about
some.aspectsof the debate origina0$d in$he Senate by
24.

Incidentally, my country was theox@?.one to agree t-0
such a freeze when the Costadortiraug suggested it,
I wonder whether the Contadora peaceprocess is being
hampered by the justified al&-m of Nicaragua, which
comes here to complain of the aggression and the miiitary and CammerciaI%iockade that it is suffering at the
hands of a great Power, or, on the contrary, by that
great Power, the United.States, andits-continuiflgmilitat-y presence in Central America with-its warsh$s, its
manoeuvres and its troops on the territory of Honduras, and by its mining of our ports, thus blockading us.
226. Even the least sophisticated should be able -to
understand that it is the perpetrator of acts of aggression and.miiitary actions who is really against a negotiated political solution.
227. Finally, I recall. that, in my two previous~ statements I put two specific questions toghe United States
delegation. Those questions. appear in the offXal records of the Council, but so far they have not been
answered; Ishould like an-answer, if the United States
deIeg?tion is in a position to answer.me. I should also
iike to know when the United- States wil1 hear the universal.cry and halt its acts-of aggression and the dirty,
undeclared war that it is waging against my country.
228, The PRESIDENT [interprerution
from Russian]: Members of the Council have received the text of

a,draft -resolution presented by Nicaragua, contained in
document $116463..If there is no objection, I shall now
put the draft resolution to.the vote.
229. I shall first call on. those representataes. who
wish to speak in expianation,of vote before the vote.
230. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): Before we
proce-ed toXhe vote I should like to point out that my
delegation continues to have reservations concerning
&he di-aft resolution as it stands. Indeed, we liaened
with great sympathy to the suggestions for improvement of the text madejust now by-the representative of
the Un.ited Kingdom.
231. In th& connection I shot.@ also Iike to make.
PaXicuiarteference to the fourthpreambuiar paragraph
because-it singles out one admittedly important, but
nevertheless just one, element of General. Assembly
res-oliution 3-S/10.As I’ htid--occasio,nto indicate earlier
in our debate, we fee1 that ail-1 repeat, ail--the aims
of the Document ofobjectives must form rhe basis for
a peaceful sett@ment of the problems tzesettiingthe
region. I need not erhphasize. that my Govenrment
attaches p;ai%cniar importance to the establishment
and improvement of democratic, representative and
pIuralistic systemsofGovemmentwhich will guarantee
effective &pufar p$rticipation in decision-making and
ensuref~e!Xccess,for the varicrusc,urrents ofopinion fo
honest and periodic expressions of the will of the people
based on fuI1 observance of civii‘and poIitical rights.
232. Havingsaid that, Imay rem&d theCounc-il of tile
long-standirig and firm commitment of my- country to

the principle of free navigation. This commitment and
the importance we attach to it has made us decide to
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us notwithstafiding the reservations I have just.expresstd.
233. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) [inferpreratian
from
The fact of the matter is that ‘the Egyptian
delegation would have preferred some time to be made
available for us toconsult on the draft resolutionthat is
now to be put to the vote. We had ho ed that a text
could be arrived at that would be generaPly accepted by
the Council and would better reflect resolution: 530
(1983) and General Assembly resolution 38/iO, which
was adopted unanimously. Unfortunately we have not
had that opportunity.

Arabic]:

234. In its statement yesterday [252&h meeiing] my
delegation was at pains to point out that the States of
Central America are facing social, economic and political challenges that cannot be overcome except by the
creation of a regionalatmospherein the area that would
break the circle of violence and counter-vioien’ce atid
be based on the rejection of the use or threat of force
and the rejection of confrontation and intervention in
the internal affairs of other States, which tiduid have
accorded with the principles of good-neighbouriiness
and respect for the s-overeignty of the region’s States,
their independenci and territorial integrity. ‘,
235. In the circumstances we wish to stress that it is
our understanding that the last two- preambuiar paragraphs are closely linked. On that basis we-shafl-vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
236. As a matter of fact-the Egyptian delegation would
have preferred the language of some of the other paragraphs to be more balanced than they are, in which case
they might have contributed to the result of the COI&
cil’s-discussion of the issues by lesseiiing tension and
breaking the circle of violence in Central America. In
our opinion that is the one aim that should
3 ‘.be PUPbefore
all others.
237. We say this despiteailthe difficulties that arc! still
facing the Contadora Group. We sincerely hope that
their construdtive efforts will continue and will be revived;
238. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America):
I desire to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency and to express our confidence that you
will conduct the affairs of the Council with-fairnessand
efficiency. .I also desire to express the satisfaction ofmy
Government with the skill with which your predecessor, the representative of Peru, Mr, Javier.Arias Steila,
conducted the affairs ofthe Council during the month of
March.
-’
:., 239. The draft resolution before us is seriously
flawed. Above ail it lacks balance and fairness. It is not
well suited to the purposes it ostensibly seeks to se,rve,
notably the peace of the area. In an area rent by vio-

lence, it expresses. concern about only one kind of
violence and against only one target
240. The United States would have no problem with
this draft resolution if it were concerned with all the
violence in the region, if its object were respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the countries
of the region and not just Nicar.agua. But this draft
resolution expresses.no concern. for the many attacks
on El Salvador or on El Salvador’s electoral process or
for the continued violation of that country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by Nicaragua’s continui.ng shipment of a.rmsto the Salvadorian guerrillas. It
expresses no concern for the repeated violations of the
borders of Honduras or Costa Rica. Surely the international community also has an interest in these.
241. This draft resolution therefore is seriously unbalanced. The rush to.decision by the Council is itself
an example of seriously unbalanced’concern.
242. TheCouncil had-before it.last week an attack on
the Sudan by Libya. The evidence was clear, as many
members of the Council understood. But the Council
took no. action. The Council has had before it two
att.acks-by Libya on Chad, But the Council has taken no
action. The Council has had before it- the appalling
tragedy of the Iran-Iraq war, with, children sent- into
battle unarmed and’ with chemical. weapons used in
violation of international agreements. But the Council
has not been able to act decisively.
243. Today, however, the Council is able to act-not
in opposition to crimes against human beings butout of
concern for actions against property; not out of concern
for human beings denied freedom or self-determination
or out of concern for peace in Central America, but in
response to the demands of a country.which violates its
promises to its own people, violates its.promises to the
&ganization of American States, violates. its neighbours’ borders, attempts to destroy the march towards
democracy in the region and ignores every principle of
good-neighbourliness.

247. The United States will not acquiesce-in such a
resolution. In voting against this draft resolution-, we
reaffirmour commitment to peace in-Central&merica,
to regionalnegotiations leading to regional settlements,
to the demiiitarization of the region, to mutu@lrespect
for sovereignty and secure borders, the withdrawalof
all foreign military personnel, respect for therule oflaw
and the establishment of democratic institutions based
on free and periodic elections.
248. We hope that the members ofthe Council,voting
for this draft resolution will note, as they recommend
the Contadora process, that Nicaragua declined yesterday to attend the meeting of the Contadora. Working
Commissions, so busy were they trying to subvert&at
very process. Today, with this draft resolution, it
further damages the single best hope for peaceful settlement of the region’s problems.
249. Naturally, the United States will vote, no.
250. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): We would leave preferred
just a little more time for consultations on the fwt
now being put to the vote so as to have made a final
effort to achieve consensus by broadening the terms of
the&aft resolution. We realize, however, thatthe rnatter is urgent and,that perfection is not easily achieved
under pressure.
-251. We believe that the text, as now amended; is
positive enough to deserve our support, and we. &ill
vote accordingly. In doing so we take comfort from the
fact that all who have explained their vote have peace in
Central America and the role of the Contadora Groupas
the major considerations.
252. The PRESIDENT [interpretation porn R_ussiafll; I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution in
document S/16463.
A vote was taken-by show of hands.
&favour: China, Egypt, France, India, Malt-a, Neth-.
erlands. Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Repubii.c,. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.

244. Apparently the only crime against the peace that
the Security Council is concerned with is mining. Not
bombing, as in Sudan; not shelling, as in Costa Rica;
not in child sacrifice or gassing, as in the Iran-Iraq
war; not infiltrating and subverting, as in El Sdvador; not invading, as in Chad; not occupying, pillaging
or burning, as in Afghanistan; not yellow rain, as
against defenceless South-East Asian.. populations.
OnIy mining, How extraordinary that the prohibitions
of-th:eCharter should have been reduced to one simple
negative.

Against: Unit.ed States of America.
AWaitzing: United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The result of the vote was 13infavour, I~@LSL and.
1 abstention.

245. The actions taken here today do not advance the
causeof peace. They do not address the probIems of the
region. They do not address, much less protect, the
principles of the Charter.

The draft resolution was not adopted; the tlegative
vote being that of a permanent member ofth_e-4&Mtcil.
253. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua), [toterpretation from Spanish]; Before the debate ~loseson
the act-sof aggression against my country, $:tltish. to
thank members of the Council who voted for the&aft

246.. Instead, Nicaragua comes=tothe Council seeking
not peace but seeking the right-of repression at home
and aggression. abroad with impunity.
26

resoluti.on submitted by my Government. I wish also to
thank the representative of the United Kingdom for
his abstention, which represents a significant understandbg of the gravity of the subject of our present
co.mp@mt-theminingof our ports, which amounts to a
military and trade blockade against my- country.
254. I wish also to say that my delegation sincerely
made the greatest efforts possible-it made enormous
efforts+o try and obtain consensus in the Council on
the draft resolution. We worked very closely with. the
non-aligned members of the Council; we were in constant contact with other members of the Council, and
VIICembodied most-I would even say 99 per cent-of
the positive suggestions made by many members of the
Chln’Cii.

255. We never thought ofcoming here to hold discussions andEabmit a draft resolution that would not be
adopted by the Council because-of a veto by a permanent member. On the contrary, our intention was to try
and. enable that permanent member to advocate and
work for peace in Central America. That, unfortunately, was. not possrbie.
256. Unfortunately, too, the veto cast today hasgiven
a clear answerto the final question in-my laststatement
addressed to the representative of the United States.
I asked.him when the United States would hear the
universal outcry and halt the dirty, undeclared war that
it was waging against my country. The veto cast by the
United States today against the draft resolution is. a ’

clear reply: there is no intention to halt that war of
aggression and no intention to stop mining our ports.
257. For this reason we are obliged to continue trying
to acquire the appropriate technological and military
means to defend ourselves against this war of aggression. Given the meagre resources at our disposal, we
would have preferred to dedicate our efforts to our
people’s social and economic advancement, but who
knows how long we shall be forced to defend our sovereignty and territorial integrity?
258. I can guarantee, however, that once again, in
Nicaragua, the Bible story of David and Goliath will
be fulfilled; the mouse will defeat the elephant; the
children of Sandino will rise again and vanquish the
invaders.
259. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America): The
representative of Nicaragua is, of course, free to interpret the American vote in any way he pleases. I just
want to reiterate that our vote has been explained in our
explanation of vote and, as we have said many times
before, we say what we mean and mean what we say.
The meeting rose at 8.30 p.m:

NOTES
’ General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
2 General Assembly resolution 36/103, annex.

_.

HOW

TO OBTAlN

UNfTED

NATIONS

f UBLICATIONS

United Nations pub&trions may be obtained from hook&xc% an&distributors throughout the
world. Consutt yout+@Dokstoreor write to: United Satwns. Sales Section. Mew York ar Geneva.
COMMENT

SE P@OQJJ@R

LES PLrBLiCATlOKS

DES %‘AT@lXS

UNIES

L.espublicqtionsdes Nations Unies sent en vente dam les hhrairiestt les aeeilces-d~~ositaires-du
monde enrier. Lnforrnez~~ auprk de vatre libraire ou adressez-vour g : NiRiQnS Unies. Section
des venres, New York ou.Cien&e.

COMO’CONSEGWRCLlstICAC~~NES

DE tAs:N&CIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de tas Naciones Unidas estan en vem en librerias y casasdislribuidoras en
todas partesdel mando, Gonsult@a su librero o didjase a: Nacioncs Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

LithMn Urtited +&lions,

New York

00400
