UNITEb NATIONS
.’

OFFICIAL

REC

THIRTY:EIGNTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

NEW

19 MAY 1983

”.

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. ... ..... ., ,,...... .. ..... ..,.. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . , . , , . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of Nicaragua on the Security
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15746) .,.....

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2437)

WPV.2437

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Co&il. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2437th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

President: Mr. UMBA

di LUTETE

(Zaire).

Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Traor6 (Mali),
Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr. Mutioz Ledo (Mexico),
Mr. &ores
Typaldos (Panama), Mr. Cassandra (Sao
Tome and Principe), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. de
Pinit (Spain), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr.
Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela) .and
Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2437)
1. Adoption
2.

19 May 1983, at 11 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like also to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of India and Yugoslavia in which they asked to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda, In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

of the agenda.

‘Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746).
The meeting was called to order at II.45 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Krishnan (India)
and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
member of the Council have before them a draft resolution in document S/15770, sponsored by Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Togo, Zaire and
Zimbabwe. The Council also has before it document
S/15771, containing the text of a letter dated 13 May
1983 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings
devoted to this item [243Zst to 2436th meetings], I invite
the representative of Honduras to take a place at the
Council table. I also invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, the
Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Panama, Sao
Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Uganda, Venezuela and Viet Nam to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

4. The first speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
5. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): It is my pleasant duty at
the outset to extend to you, Sir, the sincere felicitations of
my delegation on your assumption of the office of President of this body for the month of May. Your country
and my own enjoy traditionally close and cordial relations. We take special pride in seeing in the chair the
representative of a fellow non-aligned country. We are
confident that, with your rich experience and diplomatic
acumen, you will be able to guide the proceedings of the
Council in a constructive and purposeful manner, not
merely in the course of the present debate but during the
remaining period of your stewardship of the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table: Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. Mufiiz (Argentina), Mr. Albrin Ho&in
(Colombia), Mr. Mangouta (Congo), Mr. Zumbado Jim.6
nez (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Knipping
Victoria (Dominican Republic), Mr. Resales-Rivera (E1
Salvador), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Dountas (Greece),
Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. QuiAones-Amtfzquita (Guatemala), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr.
Vongsaly (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic),

1

6. For the second time in less than two months Nicaragua has felt obliged to come before the Council pointing
to the serious situation that exists within and around its
borders as a consequence of insurgent activity. The Minister for External ReIations of Nicaragua, Mr. Miguel
D’Escoto Brockmann, has presented Nicaragua’s case
before the Council [2431st meeting] in telling terms and
with his customary lucidity. We share the anguish of
Nicaragua, a non-aligned country with which we have
very friendly and co-operative relations. It is clear that
the situation in Central America has continued to deteriorate, carrying within it the seeds of a possible wider
conflagration in the region, evoking ever-increasing concern and distress. During the debate on this item last
March [242&h to 2427th meetings], a larger number of
delegations gave expression to their anxiety over developments in the region. During the present debate this
month several delegations have given further expression
to ever-growing concern.

observance of the principles that should govern relations
among States in the region, Essentially these are: selfdetermination and non-interference in the affairs of other
States, the obligation not to allow the territory of a State
to be used for the commission of acts of aggression
against other States, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the prohibition of the threat or use of force to resolve
conflict.
10. It is our sincere hope that the States of the region
will heed this call and co-operate fully with the Contadora
Group in its efforts to de-escalate tensions in the area and
to bring about peace, stability and co-operation in Central America. We are also confident that resolute action
now by the Security Council would provide much-needed
support and encouragement for the Contadora Group in
its noble efforts.
11, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Yugosvia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

7. The provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the objectives and principles which guide the countries of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries clearly
stipulate that every State must enjoy the right to chart its
own course, to pursue its own political and social system
and to determine the destiny of its people without any
form of external pressure, interference or intervention.
That right was reaffirmed recently by the heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries at their Seventh
Conference, held at New Delhi in March, when they
declared the right of any State to freely choose its own
political, social and economic system to be of paramount
importance. In the course of its most recent statement in
the Council, on 25 March [2423ru’meeting], my delegation
had occasion to apprise the Council in exkxro of the pronouncements made in the context of the situation in Central America by the seventh summit conference of
non-aligned countries, and I need not repeat those again
t,oday.

12. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): I wish to join previous
speakers, Sir, in congratulating you on the assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We are convinced that you, as a representative of a
friendly and non-aligned country, will provide the leadership necessary for successful work by the Council. I
should like also to convey our appreciation and congratulations to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the representative of
the United States, who so ably presided over the’council’s
proceedings in the course of the month of April.
13. The issue of the complaint by Nicaragua has remained‘unresolved by the Security Council. The exhaustive debate held in the Council in March outlined the
principal problems and, at the same time, pointed to
the differences burdening the efforts aimed at solving
them.

8. It is an established lesson of history, particularly the
history of the Central American region, that peace and
stability can be built only on the basis of an acceptance of
shared aspirations and the affording of full scope to a
pluralism of political values and systems. It cannot be
served by the exclusion of one or another State from the
mainstream of regional development on one pretext or
another. The Government of India believes that the present situation in Central America must not be allowed to
deteriorate further, for if it did it could escalate into a
horrible conflict, which nobody wants and in which all
would be losers. It is incumbent upon the Council to
ensure that this does not happen. The path to peace is
through dialogue and negotiations.

14. The Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua,
Mr. MigueI D’Escoto Brockmann, asked clearly and eloquently at a recent Council meeting for dialogue, a
search for peace and a political solution.
15. We wish to give our support to the Council’s endeavours to enhance the existing efforts aimed at a peaceful,
political solution of the dispute, and we believe that the
situation in Central America should not be allowed to
deteriorate any further.
16. We believe that the solution of the problems of
Central America, a region deeply shaken by political controversies, social unrest and economic problems, can be
achieved only through negotiation and respect for the
principles of the Charter of the, United Nations. In this
context, the initiative of the countries referred to as the
Contadora Group is invaluable. Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela earlier elaborated a framework for a
political solution based on the Charter and the principles
of non-alignment. That framework deserves the full support of all involved and all the interested parties, as well

9. We believe in this context that the efforts of the Contadora Group to build further upon its initiative to promote peace in the region through a process of dialogue
constitute a step in the right direction. We welcome the
positive response of all States in the region to these
efforts. The information bulletin issued after the last meeting of the Group at Panama City on 11 and 12 May
[S/15762, annex] launched an appeal for scrupulous
2

as the international community at large. The perception
and action of the,,members of the Contadora Group are
particularly valuable since they belong to the same region
and are close to, the problems facing Central America
today. They have proceeded from existing realities and
proposed a comprehensive, political, peaceful solution
based on negotiations and on justified demands for
national and political emancipation, taking into account
the historical necessities of development.

kind of pressure or interference in the internal affairs of
the countries of Latin America, Central America and the
Caribbean.
22. The draft resolution submitted by the non-aligned
countries members of the Security Council-Guyana,
Jordan, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Togo, Zaire and
Zimbabwe-complements
the efforts of the Contadora
Group. It neither condemns nor recriminates but shows
the way to search for peace. We feel that the draft resolution deserves the Council’s support.

17. Only last week, the Foreign Ministers of Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, in an information bulletin [ibid.], repeated their call for observance of the principles of self-determination, non-interference and respect
for territorial integrity. They also underlined the obligation of all States not to allow their territory to be used for
purposes of aggression against others and called for the
peaceful solution of the conflicts and the rejection of the
threat or use of force to resolve them. They appealed to
the Central American countries to contribute to the cause
of peace and pledge their political will to search for dialogue and understanding. Moreover, they have arranged
for another meeting at the end of May.

23. Finally, we feel that at a certain point in the future
it may very well be necessary to draw upon the knowledge, authority and wisdom of the Secretary-General.
24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
There are no more speakers on the list at this stage of the
debate, but before proceeding to the vote on the draft
resolution which is before us, I give the floor to the representative or Malta.
25. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): As the moment of decision is
upon us, I wish briefly to compliment you, Sir, on your
assiduously efficient work since your assumption of the
presidency and also to praise the charming and dedicated
performance of your predecessor.

18. Yugoslavia gives it full support to those efforts of
the Contadora Group. We believe these are the premises
from which to proceed to halt further deterioration of the
situation, eliminate foreign interference, prevent the transformation of that region into an area of big-Power and
bloc rivalry and achieve peace in that troubled region.

26. In deference to the wishes expressed to us by a
number of Latin American countries and in conformity
with the dictates of diplomatic courtesy and practice, the
sponsors of draft resolution S/l 5770 have agreed that the
opening words of paragraph 4-“Calls upon”-should
be replaced by ‘Urges”. I believe that in the interest of
factual accuracy it is also necessary that the date of the
communique of the Contadora Group referred to in the
sixth preambular paragraph should be “12 May 1983”
instead of “13 May 1983”. With those two exceptions,
the text remains unchanged, and the sponsors commend
it to the favourable attention and decision of the
members of the Council.

19. As I have said, we are deeply concerned by the developments in Central America and the ever greater threatnow even through incursions of armed groups-to
the
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and inhindered development of Nicaragua. Nicaragua is in the Central American and the Caribbean area, where increased
pressures and foreign interference threaten to turn the
region into a dangerous,focus of crisis, with far-reaching
consequences.
20. Differences in political systems are, in our view, an
inherent feature of the contemporary world, and efforts to
transform them by foreign intervention and the imposition of foreign models by any side always endanger peace.
We support the people of Nicaragua in its determination
to consolidate its independence on the basis of the authentic principles of the policy of non-alignment, outside bloc
confrontation and the struggle for spheres of influence
and domination.
.‘.

27. As members are aware, the draft resolution is the
outcome of a sustained collective effort. The text speaks
for itself and takes into account to the extent possible all
the views expressed in the course of our debate
condensed into a positive formula which encourages dialogue, mutual understanding, restraint and concerted
efforts in the search for peace and development. We
therefore hope that it will be adopted unanimously.
28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn French): I
thank the representative of Malta for the clarification
given. It is my understanding that the Council is now
ready to take a vote on the draft resolution presented by
Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Togo,
Zaire and Zimbabwe contained in document S/15770, as
orally amended.

21. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held last March
at New Delhi, pointed to the danger of perceiving the
situation in Central America within the context of EastWest confrontation. It reaffirmed the need to implement
the principles of the policy of non-alignment, particularly
the right of countries to choose freely their political, social
and economic systems. ‘It also called for respect for the
principle of non-interference and non-intervention. The
authentic principles of non-alignment continue to be the
basic criteria underlying Yugoslavia’s attitude to the probiems of this and other regions, Therefore, we oppose any

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resoluiion was adopted unanimously [resolution 530 (1983)].

3

I

we have just adopted. We believe that even in this form
the resolution represents an expression of the profound
concern which is being felt not only within the region but
throughout the international community for the acts of
aggression being perpetrated against Nicaragua.

29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): As
the resolution is adopted, I .shall call upon those
members who wish to make statements after the vote. I
call upon the representative of Guyana.
30. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): Since this is my first
formal statement in the Council for the month of May,
Sir, permit me to welcome your return to New York as
the head of Zaire’s mission to the United Nations. I also
congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of
the Council for the .month of May. Our agenda for the
remainder of this month is daunting, indeed, but my delegation is confident that with your mature wisdom, your
diplomatic skill, your vast experience and your fortitude
you will guide the Council’s work successfully during
what remains of this month.

36. Guyana makes a solemn appeal for an end to these
acts, for an end to intervention against this country. Nicaragua’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
must be respected, as must be the right of the people of
that State to pursue its own political, economic and social
development free from outside interference or pressure of
any kind. Likewise, States must refrain from allowing
their territories to be used as springboards for aggression
against others and must settle their disputes by exclusively
peaceful means.
37. It has been said and repeated ad nauieam in this
forum and elsewhere that the problems facing the peoples of Central America have their roots in the archaic
and unjust political and economic structures which they
have inherited. These problems are not explainable in
terms of an East-West confrontation, and it is a dangerous mistake to try to fit them into an ideological mould.
These problems require, instead, peaceful solutions
through political, negotiated settlements between parties
concerned.

31. At the same time, I must pay tribute to your distinguished predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick
of the
United States, for the very competent manner in which
she conducted the Council’s affairs during the month of
April.
32. This is the second occasion since April I982 that
Nicaragua has approached the Council, and on each of
these two occasions the representatives of that Government have described situations that have deteriorated considerably since the preceding complaint and that move the
entire Central American region closer to an all-out war,

38. In this regard, my delegation would like to pay a
special tribute to the countries in the Contadora
Group-Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuelafor their patient, painstaking efforts on behalf of peace.

33. Members of the Council agree that there is nothing
arcane or mysterious about the charges which the Nicaraguan Minister for External Relations advanced here last
week [2#31st meeting]. The news media, including 7?ze
New York Times, The WashingtonPost and Time and
Newsweekmagazines, have been generous and graphic,
indeed, in their descriptions of the involvement of the
Central Intelligence Agency in equipping and training
anti-Sandinist elements. We have before us, as a Security
Council document [see S/1.5753], an article from The
WashingtonPost of 8 May in which the writers describe
the deepening concern‘being felt in Washington about
the nature and extent of these activities being perpetrated
against Nicaragua.

39. The thrust of the diplomatic activity of the Contadora Group, that of promoting solutions to Central
American conflicts by peaceful means through negotiated solutions, symbolizes the consensus of the overwhelming majority of the international community on
the problems facing Central America and what the
approach to their solution should be. My delegation calls
for the most active support for and co-operation with
these States in their noble efforts on behalf of peace. In
this connection, we would like to underscore their call
issued to Central American countries in the bulletin of 12
May “to help attain the goal of peace and, to that end, to
apply their political will to search for ways leading to
dia!ogue and understanding to settle their current differences” [see S/15762, annex].

34. The representatives of Nicaragua are therefore performing a valuable service to the cause of peace in Central
America in denouncing before the Council and in exposing to the attention of the world the systematic escalation
of aggression against their country, in gross violation of
its sovereignty and territorial integrity and jeopardizing
the peace and security of the Central American region
and beyond. The Council, as the body’ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security,
has an obligation to make a credible and effective
response to the situation which Nicaragua has brought to
our attention.

40. The resolution just adopted does not give a direct
role to the Secretary-General in relation to the efforts of
the Contadora Group. Guyana has consistently taken
the position that the United Nations represents the best
shield for the protection and defence of arrangements for
the promotion of peace and security. Guyana would like
to pay a tribute to the concern which the SecretaryGeneral, for his part, has been demonstrating at the existence or persistence of situations of tension and instability
in whatever part of the world and to his resolute, dedicated pursuit of the goal of peace. We reaffirm our support for him in these endeavours,. My delegation would
therefore have liked to see in the Council’s resolution a
greater role given to the Secretary-General. We are reas-

35, For this reason, my delegation would have preferred
a more forthright and unequivocal response by the Council to the systematic and escalating aggression of which
Nicaragua is the victim. Yet this did not prevent us from
supporting and even co-sponsoring the resolution which
4

sured by the confidence that his good offices nevertheless
continue to be at the disposal of all who seek peace and
stability in Central ,America.
41.

Mr. de La BARRE

de NANTEUIL

(France) (inter-

pretation from French): I should first like to express to

you, Sir, our warm congratulations on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. The responsible functions you have performed
here, in your country and elsewhere in the world have
fitted you particularly well to exercise your office with
exceptional confidence and authority. Your accession to
the iresidency is also a source of great satisfaction for my
country, which has particularly friendly and trustful relations with yours. I should also like to extend our congratulations to your predecessor, Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
who
performed the functions of President of the Security
Council for the month of April with remarkable tact and
skill.
42. I should like now briefly to make clear the spirit in
which my delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution that has just been adopted,
43. It is has always been France’s opinion that in this
region beset with tensions and conflicts the countries of
the region should themselves seek for peaceful and negotiated solutions. We believe that any regional action
should deal particularly with the deep-rooted causes of
the problems of Central America, which are of an economic and social nature, and should do everything to
ensure that such tensions do not become an element in the
East-West conflict.
44. This is why France was one of the first countries to
welcome and to support the initiative taken by the Contadora Group. France earnestly hopes that the regional
action taken by that Group leaves the door open to all the
means of settlement, including bilateral negotiations
between countries directly concerned. It is furthermore in
that spirit that we welcomed the initiative of the Presidents of Mexico and Venezuela in September 1982.
45. With regard to the role of the United Nations, I
would mention that the position of France was set forth
very thoroughly in the letter I addressed to the President
of the Security Council on 6 April [S/15689].

our duty of alerting the Security Council, and through it
the international community as a whole, to the fact that,
to the extent that the Government of Honduras continues
to allow itself to be used by the United States as an instrument in this dirty war, the possibility of war between
Nicaragua and Honduras, which we have always wished
and continue to wish to avoid, will become increasingly
real.
48. We stated clearly that our people and our Government want peace and that because we want peace we
have come to the Council for the third time in quest of a
clear and categorical answer that will remind all States
of the obligation to respect the principles of the Charter
and Nicaragua’s right to live in peace and security, free
from all outside interference. We also asked that the
Council remind all States of their obligation to use dialogue to solve situations that may threaten international
peace.
49. It is my belief that this resolution, which was sponsored by all eight non-aligned countries members of the
Council and subsequently endorsed by the seven other
members, is an important one and that, if it is taken into
account with the seriousness due all Council resolutions,
it should succeed in bringing about the end of the armed
invasion of and aggressions against Nicaragua and in
ensuring respect for our territorial
integrity and
sovereignty.
50. With this resolution the competence of the Security
Council in the matter of the acts of aggression against
Nicaragua is clearly and categorically established, as is
our own right to return to the Council if, despite the
resolution, the acts of armed aggression against Nicaragua being directed by the United States using third countries as its base are not brought to an end.
51. In expressing Nicaragua’s gratitude first to the
countries that sponsored the resoIution, we should also
like to thank the entire Council for its efforts to achieve a
resolution that, although it is certainly the minimum
required by an objective analysis of the facts, must not be
underestimated, particularly when we take into account
the fact that the aggressor country is in fact-and why
not say so-a Power that considers itself untouchable.

pretation from Spanish): We came before the Council to

52. The very fact that the United States did not oppose
the resolution is one we would wish to interpret as a rnanifestation of its will to put an end to armed aggression
against our country and to respect the right of the people
of Nicaragua to live in peace and security free from any
foreign interference.

explain the serious consequences for Nicaragua of the
immoral and totally unjustifiable armed invasion of our country from Honduran territory by Somozist mercenaries
directed and financed by the Reagan Administration. We
also explained the dangers-not only for Nicaragua but
also for international peace-that stem from the fact that
this major Power is using the Government and army of
the sister Republic of Honduras to perpetrate aggression
against Nicaragua, and ‘in this connection we performed

53. As I have said, we would like to be able to construe
in this way the attitude displayed today by the representative of the United States. However, I have to express
some fears that we may be wrong, since only the day
before yesterday-some 36 hours ago-President
Reagan, in a press conference, once again actually admitted
his support to the mercenaries who are attempting to
overthrow our Government.

46. France would like to express the earnest hope that
there will be a positive outcome to the action undertaken
by the four countries members of the Contadora Group.
47.

Mr, D’ESCOTO

BROCKMANN

(Nicaragua) (inter-

cratic system, which is so much to the liking of President
Reagan and Mrs. Kirkpatrick.
Honduras has been very
much involved in this debate because of its policy of complicity in the invasion and aggression directed by the Reagan Administration
through Honduran territory against
Nicaragua, a fact which obviously constitutes the most
serious danger to international peace in Central America.

54. Permit me to quote the question put to President
Reagan and his reply, which form the basis for these
comments. The question was:
“Since you have described the Sandinist regime as
hostile and opposed to our interests in the western
hemisphere, why are we not openly supporting those
7,000 guerrillas who are rebelling, instead of lending
them assistance by means of covert operations?”

60. In this connection, we attach particular importance
to the third preambular paragraph of the resolution, in
which the Security Council expressesits deep concern “at
the situation prevailing on and inside the northern border
of Nicaragua, and . . . at the consequent danger of a
military confrontation between Honduras and Nicaragua”. In view of this situation, can anyone reasonably
object to the countries between which there is a danger of
war meeting for an immediate bilateral dialogue? We
believe that this is precisely the kind of situation referred
to by the Contadora Group in its information bulletin of
21 April [S/15727, annex], since by its very nature it is one
that requires, as the Group says, bilateral dialogue. It is
the sort of case that by its very nature needs bilateral
dialogue. We shall continue to support the praiseworthy
efforts of the Contadora Group to achieve such a
dialogue.

The President’s reply was, “Because we wzmt to continue
to abide by the laws of our country.” Because they want
to continue to abide by their legislation, they will not do
openly what they obviously recognize they are doing
covertly.
55. Nevertheless, we hope that the position taken here a
few minutes ago by the representative of the United
States means a change of policy, a new readiness to
respect the principles of the Charter and to resolve conflicts exclusively by peaceful means and not to resort to
the threat or use of force or unlawful pressure to impose
its will upon our country, as stated in the fourth preambular paragraph of the resolution and repeated in the
sixth. Accordingly we hope that the United States will
accept the frank and constructive dialogue that Nicaragua has always proposed and that has always met with a
systematic rejection on the part of the Reagan
Administration.

61. We are convinced that it is not through military
solutions or the sending of military forces for any purpose to Central American countries that we shall achieve
the peace and security that our peoples seek and need. It
is through frank and constructive dialogue that we must
achieve that objective, and the proof of this may be seen
in the achievements arrived at in the search for solutions
to problems on our southern border caused by the use of
Costa Rican territory, behind the back of the Government of Costa Rica and against its will, to carry out
aggression against Nicaragua within the framework of
the aggressions orchestrated by the Reagan Administration.

56. We want to have normal relations with the United
States. We shah never bow to its pressure, its threats or its
invasions, but the fact that we defend our sovereignty and
independence must not be construed by any country as a
hostile or unfriendly act. Whoever takes offence at our
position of independence and non-alignment does so
because he is not really interested in friendship, which
must always be based on respect, but is only trying to
subjugate us. We will always be friends to those who want
our friendship. We will never be subservient to anyone.

62. I believe that it would be useful and interesting for
the Council to become familiar with at least part of Communique No. 3, issued at the last meeting of the
Nicaragua-Costa Rica Joint Bilateral Commission, held
at Managua only two days ago. Allow me to quote from
that:

57. Our watchword of “free homeland or death” is not
an empty one; it is the clearest expression of the feelings of
the children of Sandino.
58. In our statements during the debate we have clearly
stated that we did not come here to discuss the problems
existing in each of the Central American countriesoppression, political assassinations, the assassinations of
bishops and of national or foreign religious figures, summary executions, the existence of death squads or the genocide that is perpetrated in some countries-all of which
the world is aware of and have been condemned in the
Commission on Human Rights and the Genera1 Assembly itself.

“The third meeting of the Nicaragua-Costa Rica
Joint Bilateral Commission was held in the city of
Managua on 16 and 17 May 1983. The delegation of
Costa Rica was led by Licenciado Manuel Carballo,
Vice-Minister of the Republic of Costa Rica. . . . . The
delegation of Nicaragua was ,led by Dr. Rodrigo
Reyes, Minister and Secretary-General of the Govern,ing Junta of National Reconstruction. . , .

59. We came here to speak of the invasion of Nicaragua
and not what is taking place in other countries’of Central
America or the situations endangering international peace
which may arise from the refusal of a Central American
country to recognize the sovereign existence of another
nation of the region. While we have referred to Honduras,
it was not to speak of the merits or demerits of its demo-

“At the meeting, which took place in a cordial.
frank and friendly atmosphere,, the integration anti
competence of the Commission.were established and a
sincere and broad analysis of, the relations between
Costa Rica and Nicaragua was carried out with regard
to all the matters dealt with at:the meeting, particularly the situation in the border-area and the measures
6

that could be applied by common agreement by the
two States totfind a solution.

matter and in the present proceeding. At precisely that
moment when the Junta of Nicaragua shows a willingness
to fulfil its obligations and its promises, which it initiated,
to its neighbours and to its own people, there need be no
further problems between my Government and people
and the Government and people of Nicaragua.

“The delegation
of Costa Rica reported on the
machinery that had been adopted by its Government
in order to ensure its neutrality and the efforts it is
making to prevent the use of its territory by counterrevolutionary elements engaged in activities aimed
against the integrity and sovereignty of Nicaragua.
The Nicaraguan side stated that it had not been confirmed that any members of the Sandinist’People’s
Army had entered the territory of Costa Rica and
that, if any had, it was without the knowledge of the
authorities of the Sandinist People’s Army, and they
noted that the Nicaraguan military authorities would
severely punish any such conduct. Both parties reaffirmed their readiness to promote and adopt all the
necessary measures, within their jurisdictional limits,
to solve the border problems. Both delegations reaffirmed their conviction that bilateral, direct and frank
dialogue, as reflected in the work of the Joint Commission, was the most appropriate means of solving
any differences or misunderstandings which might
arise, particularly between sister countries. Both delegations agreed that the fourth meeting of the Joint
Commission would take place in San Jose, Costa
Rica, in July.”

68. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Does anybody else wish to speak? I had the impression
that the debate was closed, but we seem to be reopening
it. The representative of Honduras has asked to be
allowed to speak. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to do so.
69. Mr. ORTEZ COLINDRES (Honduras) (interpretution from Spanish): Honduras will not reopen the debate,
but we have an obligation to our country to state its position, since it has been accused by the sister Republic of
Nicaragua through its Sandinist Government.
70. In his statement the Minister for External Relations
of Nicaragua made a mistake using a word that he subsequently corrected. That is precisely the difference between
his country and mine. He is mistaken when he used the
word “acatar”, confusing it with the word “atacur”.
71. We, the people of Honduras, wish to state that we
fully respect the Council’s extraordinary efforts to find a
peaceful solution in keeping with the machinery established by the Charter of the United Nations and with the
norms contained therein.

63. We believe that peace is possible provided there is
the political will to respect the principles embodied in the
resolution adopted today. We should like to believe that
that political will exists, in which case we should have no
reason to come back to the Council to denounce aggression against our country. If it does not, it will be our
duty, in exercising our sovereign rights and as a Member
of the Organization, once again to come to the Council
to demand full compliance with the terms of this resolution or the application of the measures contemplated in
the Charter with regard to those that defy the authority
of the Council.

72. In earlier cases and past statements I have put forward arguments defending my Government against the
attacks to which we have again been subjected by the
Nicaraguan Minister. I simply wish to repeat these to
make it clear that our country cannot remain silent in the
face of the new veiled threat of war which we have just
heard.
73. We should like to address a cordial appeal to our
brothers in Nicaragua. It is my impression that when
there is a deep-rooted desire to achieve an objective and
when good faith is applied with respect to international
agreements, it is very easy to reach solutions. The Council, by placing its faith and trust in the subregional Contadora Group, has indicated the body that we must make
full use of in order to show, with real diplomatic and
political responsibility, that we believe in the sincere
effort of these countries to help.

64. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in right of reply.
65. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
The Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua tests
our patience, our tolerance and, indeed, our sense of reality. He has heretofore maligned and misrepresented the
policies of my Government and of its elected President.
We have responded and I stand by our response. He has
heretofore, and again .today, maligned and misrepresented the policies and the actions of the Government of
Honduras. The representative of Honduras has heretofore responded with fact, and I will not make any attempt
to add to what he has put on the record.

74. As Honduras, at this time when the highest United
Nations body has made a recommendation to us, we
cannot make a priori judgements as to a future failure
and a return to this body. Therefore we urge our brothers
in Nicaragua, represented by their Minister for External
Relations, that on 28,29 and 30 of this month we should
not just sit down at a table to enjoy a frugal meal without
being able to speak bilaterally or multilaterally.
These
are matters of procedure. The Nicaraguan Minister, who
is a priest, should have a more profound understanding
of the meaning of dialogue. We Hondurans understand it
to mean a healthy mental attitude and that we listen to

66. This morning the Minister of Nicaragua has attempted to rewrite the resolution on which we have voted. My
Government stands by its vote-its vote on that text.
67. Finally, I wish simply to reiterate what we have had
occasion to say already in the previous proceeding on this
7

the other parties and pay attention to their comments
and arguments, and in particular that we should adopt
an emotional and mental attitude of truly wanting to
implant and instil in the heart and mind of the other
party the good and pure solution that is the basis of pacta
sunt servanda, namely, good faith in negotiation among
States.
75. Let us stop attacking each other. I should like the
Nicaraguan Minister to believe me sincerely. I have
served my country for 15 years and I am prepared to
continue to do so. We shall strongly urge our Government in good faith to try to establish a definitive solution
to our dispute within the Contadora Group. I trust in
God-as he does-more than in the watchword “homeland or death”, because I believe that one can establish a
homeland to live in rather than think of dying for that
sacrosanct concept.
76. I should like to thank the Council for having
allowed me to make this brief statement. I should very
much like to continue speaking, but I believe it is for the
Contadora Group to listen to the two sides and to the

other Central Americans, and with the help of God, we
shall not have to return to this forum, since we are going
to work on the basis of conciliation, common sense and
respect.
77. As regards the concern voiced by the Council about
a possible military confrontation between Honduras and
Nicaragua, I shouldlike to state once again in the Council that this military confrontation will never be caused
by my Government or by the armed forces of my country. With God’s help the moderates in Nicaragua will
temper feelings and analyse what is the true meaning of
the right of self-determination of peoples and the principle of non-intervention.
78. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn French):
There are no further speakers at this time, nor anything
else that needs to be said. Therefore, on these words of
peace and of promise for dialogue, I adjourn this morning’s meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
