S/PV.6776

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6776th meeting

Tuesday, 29 May 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Eick
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Mbeou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

12-35334 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1235334*

S/PV.6776

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General for Yemen, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Benomar.
Mr. Benomar: The political transition in Yemen
has recently entered its sixth month since the signing
of the transition agreement on 23 November 2011 in
Riyadh. The Yemeni sides have made much progress in
implementing the agreement and resolution 2014 (2011).
The formation of the Government of national unity, the
beginning of the restructuring of the armed forces and
the holding of presidential elections in February, with
overwhelming public support, secured a peaceful transfer
of power and marked the successful completion of the
first phase of Yemen’s transition. Those steps, combined
with the recent launch of initial preparations for an
all-inclusive national dialogue conference, indicate that
Yemen’s transition remains largely on track.
Since assuming office, President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour has shown strong leadership
and determination to lead the country through the
transition. The President has continued to take important
steps to advance the transition. His efforts have received
the overwhelming support and goodwill of the Yemenis.
In that context, he began the process of reform of the
military and the security services by issuing several
decrees announcing the appointment of commanders
to new positions. The Military Affairs Committee
established under the transition agreement has made
considerable progress in demilitarizing urban areas
despite many difficulties. Most checkpoints and battle
positions in Sana’a and Taiz have been removed.
That said, the transition of Yemen is taking place
against a backdrop of serious security concerns, an

2

unprecedented humanitarian crisis and many unresolved
conflicts. The timeline for the transition is very tight,
and there is no time to lose. One of Yemen’s key
challenges is to assert the authority of the State in an
environment that is dominated by a multitude of armed
non-State actors competing for power. Al-Qaida, in
particular, continues to pose a major threat. However,
President Mansour’s efforts to combat its advance in the
south and elsewhere are beginning to bear fruit.
During my eleventh good offices mission to
Yemen, from 18 to 30 April, new tensions arose as a
result of President Mansour’s decisions to replace
the Commander of the Air Force, Mohammed Saleh
Al-Ahmar, a half-brother of former President Saleh,
and the Commander of the Presidential Guard, Tariq
Saleh, former President Saleh’s nephew. Their refusal
to follow the President’s instructions to move to other
positions created a dangerous situation.
During the mission, I worked very closely with
President Mansour and met former President Saleh and
his son, Ahmed Ali, Commander of the Republican
Guard, several times to help defuse the stand-off.
Finally, we reached an agreement to allow for the
handover to take place, and I personally witnessed the
handover ceremony of both the Air Force Command and
the Third Battalion.
However, I regret that, after my departure and as
of today, open defiance and a stand-off continue to
prevent the Colonel appointed by the President from
leading the Third Battalion. It should be noted that
the Third Battalion is one of the best equipped and
resourced military units in Yemen and is located next
to the presidential compound in the heart of the capital,
Sana’a.
Such developments demonstrate that the underlying
causes of tensions remain in place. Obstructionist
moves to impede President Mansour’s reorganization
and control of the military and security forces could
derail Yemen’s fragile transition process and result in
serious instability. All efforts must be made to keep the
transition on track.
The planned national dialogue conference could
be an essential step towards that end. If it is well
prepared and gains legitimacy, in the eyes of all Yemeni
constituencies, as a forum for shaping the framework of
Yemen’s future, it could become an important vehicle
for democratic empowerment and for creating a positive

12-35334

S/PV.6776

political dynamic in the country towards greater stability
and security.

informed and included in the discussions taking place
throughout the process.

The main parameters for the national dialogue
process are outlined in the transition agreement. On the
basis of consultations with all national constituencies,
we have identified a number of key principles in relation
to the national dialogue that are accepted by all.

My Office will lead United Nations efforts in
support of the national dialogue, in close cooperation
with the United Nations country team. To that end,
a $2 million project initiative, to be funded from the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, will cover support
needs during the dialogue’s preparatory phase. A small
team of political advisers, who will work closely with
the country team, has also been deployed to Sana’a
to assist with the preparatory process. The success or
failure of the national dialogue is likely to make or
break Yemen’s transition. Helping to ensure its success
will therefore be the top United Nations priority in
Yemen in the coming months, and we look forward to
working closely with other international actors who can
offer support for that process.

First, it must be fully inclusive, which means that all
relevant segments of Yemeni society must be represented,
including political parties, the Southern Movement, the
Houthis and civil society representatives, including
youth and women’s groups. Secondly, the process must
be genuinely participatory, which is to say that all those
included in the process must have a say in its design and
conduct, and must be assured that their views will be
heard. Thirdly, the dialogue process must be transparent,
meaning that key decisions on its timeline, membership,
agenda and methods of work should be publicly shared.
And finally, the dialogue has to generate results, meaning
that its outcomes must be fully implemented.
On 6 May, President Mansour issued a decree
appointing a contact committee for the national dialogue
process. The committee is tasked with facilitating the
formation of a preparatory committee for the national
dialogue by 30 June. That committee’s appointment is
a welcome first step in launching the process on time.
The main task of the preparatory committee will be to
develop and agree on a concrete plan for conducting a
national dialogue conference, including agreement on
the format, membership criteria, participation and rules
of procedure. The outcome of that conference will feed
into the constitution-making process that is to conclude
in late 2013, enabling general elections to take place in
February 2014.
To be successful, the national dialogue process must
be designed and driven by the Yemenis themselves.
While that will require strong international support, its
footprint should be light. Based on consultations with
Yemeni actors, the United Nations will provide support
in four key areas: first, with political facilitation to help
stakeholders resolve disputes as they arise; secondly, with
technical support to the secretariats of the preparatory
committee and the national dialogue conference; thirdly,
with capacity-building of key constituencies, including
young people, women and internally displaced persons,
to ensure that they can participate effectively in the
Conference; and fourthly, with a public information and
awareness campaign to ensure that the public is properly

Yemen’s security situation remains a source of
major concern. Military restructuring and steps towards
a unified command will take time and sustained effort.
In the meantime, the Government’s overall security
capacity remains limited. In the North, the Houthis
continue to assert their control in Sa’ada and parts of
the governorates of Hajjah, Amran and Al-Jouf. In the
southern province of Abyan, Yemeni security forces
have stepped up their campaign against Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) and Ansar Al-Sharia with
air and navy support, with some recent success. Loder
has reportedly been retaken by the Yemeni army, and
significant inroads have been made in Jaar and Zinjibar,
while Shukra remains under the control of Ansar
Al-Sharia.
However, AQAP and Ansar Al-Sharia have
extended their reach into areas not previously associated
with their activities. Last week’s terrorist bombing in
Sana’a — which targeted a military parade, killing some
96 soldiers and wounding more than 300 others — and
the recently foiled airliner bomb plot are reminders
that AQAP remains the most lethal Al-Qaida affiliate,
intent on striking both Western and regional targets. In
areas under its control, Ansar Al-Sharia has established
governance structures that provide social services
and justice administration in a region that has long
complained of discrimination and neglect by the central
Government.
Separatist sentiments in the South have been on
the rise. The Hirak, or Southern Movement, began
in late 2006 as a rights-based movement demanding

12-353343

S/PV.6776

equality, non-discrimination and a change in relations
between North and South, all within a unitary State.
That movement was met with repression, and a few
years later groups within the Hirak began to advocate
the South’s independence.
Other security issues remain. Incidents of abduction,
assassination and hostage-taking have increased in the
past few weeks. On the streets of Sana’a and throughout
the country, the presence of armed forces and militia
remains a reality. Major weapons and other military
capabilities can be redeployed in a matter of hours.
Furthermore, oil and gas pipelines and electricity lines
continue to be attacked frequently. Many of those attacks
are politically motivated, while others are criminal acts
committed in the context of the lawlessness that prevails
in parts of the country. Such attacks and sabotage cost
the State an average loss of revenue from the national
budget of around $250 million a month, or $3 billion a
year. That loss of revenue is a crime against the Yemeni
people. It adds more misery to the poor and vulnerable
groups. Yemen remains the poorest country in the Arab
world, with a fiscal deficit of around $2 billion, or 7 per
cent of gross domestic product.
The current scale of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen
is unprecedented, and the figures are much bleaker than
previously reported. Ten million people, almost half
of the country’s entire population, are food-insecure,
with half of those — 5 million people — severely
food-insecure and in need of immediate assistance.
Almost one million children under the age of five suffer
from malnutrition. Ongoing fighting has displaced more
than half a million Yemenis within the country. Yemen
is also hosting 219,000 refugees and continues to record
a high influx.
To address the growing humanitarian needs in
Yemen, the humanitarian response from the United
Nations has been significantly expanded in 2012, but
delivering assistance still poses a number of challenges.
Key among them are capacity, security and funding.
Both the Yemeni Government and the international
community must prioritize this acute humanitarian
crisis. The Yemen humanitarian response plan, for
$455 million, is currently only 43 per cent funded. Since
the original appeal, however, the number of people in
acute humanitarian need has increased, and the financial
requirements are being revised. Substantially scaled up
support from the international donor community will
be needed to meet those increased needs. Members of

4

the Security Council should play a more active role in
bringing the humanitarian crisis in Yemen to the world’s
attention.
A good development is that the international
community is now committing to scaling up its support.
The ministerial meeting of the Group of Friends of
Yemen, hosted by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in
Riyadh on 23 May, was aimed at providing a framework
and momentum for supporting Yemen’s political,
economic and security reform plans in line with specific
timelines.
Other urgent issues also demand our attention.
The fate of those who were detained during the recent
conflict by Government security forces and armed
opposition groups has not been addressed, despite the
best efforts of the Government of National Unity. Those
who still hold individuals in custody must account for
them, allow access to them and grant their rapid release.
We are also mindful of the need to address the many
injustices of the past. Those who committed human
rights violations should be held to account.
I commend those in the Government who have
worked hard to generate a credible law on transitional
justice, a law that is the outcome of public consultations.
Unfortunately, in a cabinet meeting today, ministers
from the ex-ruling party, the General Peoples’ Congress,
have again failed to endorse the draft of that law. As
stipulated in the transition agreement, the draft should
now be submitted to the Prime Minister and the President
for their decision.
In April, the Council of Ministers adopted a
decision to set up an independent national human rights
institution and requested that the Ministry of Human
Rights follow up the decision and prepare the necessary
draft legislation. This is a positive step and will require
considerable support from the United Nations and
international donors.
President Mansour and the Government of national
unity, led by Prime Minister Basendwah, are steadily
making progress in moving the country forward and
realizing the young people’s aspirations to change.
They deserve the Council’s continuing support. While
demonstrations continue to take place, youth, civil
society, women’s groups and emerging political parties
have shifted their focus from contestation to preparatory
efforts and initiatives for the national dialogue process
and participation in the political process.

12-35334

S/PV.6776

In conclusion, let me reiterate that, while Yemen’s
transition remains largely on track, it cannot take place
under the shadow of continued military threats. If
legitimate governance is to take hold, the Yemeni people
must be able to see that those who hold legitimate
authority are in a position to exercise their powers
effectively, and those who encourage sabotage and
obstruction from behind the scenes must know that they
are being observed, that they will be held accountable
and that international patience is starting to wear thin.

transition in my country to a successful outcome. First,
measures have been taken to establish the environment
necessary to begin the national dialogue between the
various partners in the political process in Yemen. The
President of the Republic issued Decision 13 on 6 May
2012 establishing a contact committee to expedite the
establishment of the preparatory committee for the
national dialogue conference by 30 June 2012, and has
established seven working groups to continue outreach
activities with the parties.

Resolution 2014 (2011) is clear in this regard in that
it commits all Yemeni sides to play a full and constructive
role in implementing the transition agreement. Those
who do not live up to this commitment should be
prepared to be held to account by the Yemeni people and
the Security Council.

The Government is considering a law on transitional
justice and national reconciliation with a view to
reaffirming the political transition in Yemen on the
basis of forgiveness, tolerance, the rights of the victims,
individual, collective and national reconciliation, and
the renunciation of all forms of violence and retaliation.
It would also seek to prevent the recurrence of human
rights violations in the future and establish a modern,
civil State based on democracy, the rule of law and
human rights. The Government will submit this project,
when its consideration is completed, to Parliament
with a view to its adoption in the form of a presidential
decision.

The Secretary-General remains concerned about
efforts to undermine Yemen’s transition. He has asked
me to continue to exercise his good offices, working
closely with members of the Security Council, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and other international partners
to facilitate the effective implementation of Yemen’s
transition agreement as a model for peaceful change that
could offer valuable lessons for other situations in the
region.
The President: I thank Mr. Benomar for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your delegation on your successful conduct of
the work of the Security Council this month. I also
thank and congratulate Ambassador Susan Rice of the
United States of America for her successful presidency
last month. We would further like to express our
appreciation for the continued and tangible efforts and
good offices of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
his Special Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar, and his team
aimed at leading the political process in my country to a
successful outcome.
Yemen has witnessed several positive developments
since the signing of the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its implementation mechanism by partners
in the political process. In this, the efforts of the President
of my country, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour,
and the national unity Government must be noted.
I also draw the Council’s attention to several
measures taken by my country with a view to leading the

The Government has also established a ministerial
committee to prepare a draft law for the establishment
of an independent human rights agency. In the wake
of the national dialogue conference, a constitutional
committee will be established to draft a new constitution
that will determine the political shape and system of the
country, to be put to a referendum by the end of the
transitional period and the conduct of parliamentary and
presidential elections.
The military commission has continued to discharge
its duties in the maintenance of peace and security
in Yemen, to remove all military roadblocks, and to
restructure the armed forces and the security forces. The
President of the Republic has issued many important
decisions effecting transfers and changes in the security
and military leadership.
However, and as mentioned by Mr. Benomar, Yemen
still faces many difficult challenges. Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula has taken advantage of the unstable
political situation in the country over the past year and
has extended its control to parts of the country, attacked
and plundered many Government agencies, and killed
numerous innocent people. Following the presidential
elections and the establishment of the national unity
Government, the security and armed forces focused
their military operations against the Al-Qaida terrorist

12-353345

S/PV.6776

organization, which threatens Yemen and its stability
and has also pledged several times to extend its
operations to the sea, threatening international peace and
security. Government forces have tightened the noose
on Al-Qaida in the Abyan governorate, eliminated many
terrorists, and also carried out numerous pre-emptive
strikes against the leaders who have taken refuge in the
mountains.
Recently, Al-Qaida committed a horrible act of
terrorism, killing 100 people and injuring over 300 of
our best youth in the national security forces as they
trained for the celebration of Yemeni unification. I take
this opportunity to extend our sincere condolences to the
families of the martyrs and wish a speedy recovery to
the injured. I would like to thank all the Heads of State,
the Secretary-General, and the President and members
of the Security Council for their condemnation of that
wanton act.
I reiterate that the threat of terrorism and bias in
Yemen cannot addressed solely by military efforts.
These efforts must extend to the intellectual, cultural,
development and rehabilitation activities to be
conducted by the Government, with the necessary
international support at the bilateral and multilateral
levels, and further assistance in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate.
There are now 500,000 internally displaced persons
in my country. While some $477 million have been
pledged, only $63 million have been received, whereas
meeting the needs of so many displaced is no easy task.
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Catherine Bragg, who visited Yemen recently, has stated
that the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen
is not only a result of the conflicts within and outside
the country, but is foremost a humanitarian problem that
requires urgent attention. The World Food Programme
has conducted a survey in Yemen and has warned that
levels of malnutrition have reached alarming levels.
Three million people are suffering extreme malnutrition;
5 million — 22 per cent of the entire population — suffer
from one form of malnutrition or another; and half the
population of the country has experienced extreme
hunger.
According to statistics provided by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
44.5 per cent of the population — that is, 10 million
people — suffers from food insecurity in general,

6

and 22 per cent — 5 million citizens — suffers from
acute malnutrition. There are 465,000 displaced
people, 169,855 refugees, 140,000 returnees, 116,830
war-affected people and 12,000 forcibly displaced
people, in addition to the almost 3 million people who
lack potable water and proper sanitation. We appeal to
all Member States to provide Yemen with the support
necessary for it to be able to meet the needs of all of the
displaced people and refugees.
In spite of all our internal problems, we have
hosted more than 1 million refugees from neighbouring
countries. We had attached great hopes to the most
recent appeal by OCHA; however, it has not generated
the reaction that we had hoped for. Alarms have been
sounded before the Council with regard to the myriad
problems resulting from such a high number of refugees,
including from drug and weapons smugglers as well as
terrorists coming from the Horn of Africa and other
neighbouring and European countries.
Since the winds of change blew through Yemen
last year, many people have lost their jobs and many
companies have had to close their doors. That has
led to an alarming increase in the unemployment and
poverty rates, and many heads of household are unable
to provide for their families. The general economic
deterioration poses a tremendous obstacle to the Yemeni
Government, particularly given the decrease in the gross
domestic product growth rate and the state of paralysis
of various economic activities as a result of the political
and security situation in the country, which is reflected
in every aspect of life in Yemen.
In conclusion, at the meeting of the Friends of
Yemen held on 23 May, His Royal Highness Prince
Saud Al-Faisal, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, stated that Yemen is an
ancient civilization with a long history and that it is not
a source of discouragement or disappointment. Yemenis
are capable and responsible enough to support the
efforts necessary to ensure peace, security and stability
in the country. Here I would stress the different projects,
programmes and development plans aimed at providing
support to the Yemeni people.
We would like to thank our brothers in Saudi Arabia,
in particular His Majesty the Custodian of the Two
Holy Mosques, King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
for their support and their hospitality. We would also
like to thank the United Kingdom of Great Britain and

12-35334

S/PV.6776

Northern Ireland for all its support and for hosting the
donors’ conference next June.

The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on the
subject.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

12-353347
