UNITED NATIONS

rd
MEETING:

14 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2353)

. . , , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.*......*..........*.......

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14969) . . , . . , , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV .2353

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI, . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Of~cial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2353rd MEETING
eld in New York on Wednesday, 14 April 1982, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. KAMANDA
(Zaire).

wa KAMANDA

Council table; Ms. Mohammrrd
(Iraq), Mr. Ncrik
(Pakistna), Mr. Allnguny (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. Kirfa
(Turkey) took the plrrces reserved for them ut the side
of the Council chamber; Mr. Ahdel Rcrhrnon (Prrlestine Liberation Orgurzization) took the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chnmher.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received from the representatives
of Bangladesh, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia, the Sudan,
and the Syrian Arab Republic letters in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives
to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2353)

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14969)
The meeting

At the invittrtion of the President, Mr. Sobhrrn (Bangltrdesh), Ms. Co~rmh~~sstr (Guinecr), Mr. Dj&rl (Indonesia), Mr. R&lie-Khorcrsscni
(Iran), Mr. Zninal
Abidin (Muloysia),
Mr. Abdall (Sudan) and Mr. ElFctttal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places rewrved
fx them crt the side of the CounciI chnmber.

wns cvlled to order ot 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

3, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
.P<lrn French):
The first speaker is the representative
of Pakistan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

The ugendcr IIWS udopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14969)

4. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): This day, 14 April, is being
observed throughout the Islamic world as a day of
solidarity with the Palestinian people. The people of
Pakistan, like their brothers in other Islamic countries,
are observing this day with great solemnity in response
to the appeal launched by His Majesty King Khaled
Bin Abdul Aziz. In Pakistan there is a complete stoppage of normal work in the governmental
as well as
private sectors, and special meetings and prayers are
being held for the rights of the Palestinian people and
for the safety and sanctity of the Holy Places in AIQuds al-Sharif. President Mohammad
Zia ul-Haq, in
a special declaration on the eve of this day, has reaffirmed the deep and abiding commitment
of the people
of Pakistan to solidarity with and support for their
Palestinian brothers in their just struggle.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2352nd meeting,
I invite the representatives of Israel and Morocco to
take places at the Council table. I invite the represen-.
tatives of Iraq, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Turkey to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber. I invite the representative
of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The shock and indignation
felt throughout
the
Islamic world over the reprehensible massacre and violence inside the precincts of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque
this Easter Sunday moved the member States of

At the invitcrtion of the President, Mr. Blurn (Israel)
and Mr. Mrrrni Zentnr (Morocco) took places at the
1

the Organization of the Islamic Conference to request
the convening of an urgent meeting of the Council. The
details of this grave incident were given yesterday
by my colleagues from Jordan and the PLO, and I shall
not go into them. It is our hope, Sir, that under your
presidency the Council will be able to ensure the taking
of decisions which will prevent further exacerbation of
the deteriorating
situation in Al-Quds al-Sharif and
other Arab and Palestinian
territories occupied by
Israel and will serve to warn the occupying Power
against the recurrence of acts of sacrilege against the
Islamic shrines of the Holy City. We have confidence
in your wisdom, vast experience and diplomatic
skills, which will benefit the Council and enable it to
take unanimous action in respect of the grave issue
facing it.

for fanning the fires of religious hatred. The facts,
however, point to the contrary. The successive acts
of the 1969 arson and the latest desecration of AlAqsa, the sustained digging underneath its ancient
structure and the frequent discoveries of explosives
in the vicinity ofthe Holy Sanctuary cannot be regarded
as isolated incidents. They reinforce the deep fears that
the Islamic holy shrines in Jerusalem, particularly
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock, are
facing a real threat of destruction at the hands of
Zionist extremists.
9. Since the occupation of Jerusalem in 1967, fanatic
groups and terrorist organizations have been encouraged and protected by the Israeli authorities in their
sinister schemes to destroy the holy relics of the
Islamic faith in the Holy City. They make no secret
of their hatred for the Arab and Palestinian inhabitants
of Jerusalem and openly threaten to demolish every
thing which symbolizes the spiritual traditions of other
faiths and to expel the indigenous population in an
attempt to complete the Judaization of the Holy City.

6. The Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock
are among the holiest shrines of the Islamic faith and
carry a special spiritual significance and meaning
for the 900 million Muslims throughout
the world.
Al-Quds is the first &blah of Islam, and the sacred
precincts of Al-Aqsa are consecrated by the tradition
of the ascension of the Holy Prophet-peace
be upon
him-and
remain a most hallowed part of the Islamic
legacy. That is why the act of arson which demolished
part of the Holy Mosque in August 1969 stirred the
deepest emotions throughout the lslamic world, which
is now expressing the same revulsion and concern at
the outrageous sacrilege committed
inside the precincts of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the
Rock this Easter Sunday.

IO. The complicity of the Israeli authorities is not
confined to comiivance at the wanton actions and
the dangerous designs of these terrorist organizations; they are themselves systematically engaged in
the obliteration
of the Holy City’s unique historical
and spiritual heritage. It is for that reason that, since
Jerusalem was occupied, the Council has adopted
several resolutions to censure Israeli acts which are
aimed at changing the character and status of the Holy
City. Resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (1969) were the
two early resolutions adopted by the Council which
considered all measures taken by Israel, including
expropriation
of land and property which tend to
change the legal status of Jerusalem, as invalid and
called upon Israel to rescind those measures forthwith.

7. The horrifying shooting of innocent worshippers
inside the holy precincts of Al-Aqsa Mosque should
be a source of grief not only to the adherents of the
Islamic faith but to all those who cherish the preservation of the peace of the Holy City of Jerusalem, which
represents a unique confluence of the great spiritual
tradition of the three great religions, Judaism, Christianity and Islam. This unique tradition was constantly
nurtured and venerated throughout
the centuries
when the Holy City was under Islamic administration,
The second Caliph of Islam, Omer Ibn Al-Khatab,
who first established Islamic sovereignty over Jerusalem, allowed the Jewish people to return to the city
and to their places of worship after an exile of more
than 500 years. From that time, under Islamic guardianship, the sacred rights of all these three faiths to
the Holy Places in Jerusalem were scrupulously respected and securely guaranteed and the universal
spiritual heritage of Jerusalem was fully honoured.

11, After the arson at the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque in
1969, the Council adopted resolution 27 1 (1969)) which
recognized that acts of destruction or profanation of
Holy Places and religious buildings, or any encouragement of or connivance at any such acts, may seriously
endanger international peace and security. The resolution called upon Israel scrupulously to observe the
provisions of the Geneva Conventions and to refrain
from causing any hindrance to the discharge of the
established functions of the Supreme Muslim Council
of Jerusalem, including any co-operation that Council
might desire from the countries with a predominantly
Muslim population
and from Muslim communities
in relation to its plans for the maintenance and repair
of the Islamic Holy Places in Jerusalem.

8. The tragedy of the Holy City began when Palestine fell prey to colonialism at the turn of the century
and, more specifically, since its occupation by Israel
in 1967. The sacrilege committed
against the Islamic
Holy Places is only one aspect of this tragedy. The
Israeli authorities have attempted to explain away
the violence in Al-Aqsa Mosque as the insane act of
a deranged individual. The Islamic countries, reacting
to that despicable incident, have also been blamed

12. But as the occupying Power, Israel not only
wilfully refused to comply with these Security Council
resolutions but, in flagrant defiance of these resolutions and others relating to the status of the occupied
territories, proceeded with its policy to permanently
annex the Holy City and to alter its character and
status.
2

Y

13. In 1980 the Knesset enacted a so-called basic
law declaring the Holy City the “capital”
of Israel.
In its resolution 478 (1980), the Council once again
determined
that all legislative
and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, that had altered or purported to alter the
character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem,
and in particular the so-called basic law, were without
any legal validity and must be rescinded forthwith.
14. Clearly Israel has failed to carry out its obligations under the universally accepted norms of international law, particularly the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’ and its measures and policy in respect of
the Holy City constitute blatant and repeated violations of the Charter of the United Nations, which
forbids the acquisition of territory by use of force.
15. The issue of the preservation of the Holy Places
of Islam in Jerusalem in all their sanctity is not a matter
of religious belief alone; it impinges directly on international peace and security. It is not only on account
of the immensity of their grief and resentment that the
member States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference have brought to the Council the consideration
of the horrifying crime committed in Al-Aqsa three
days ago, but also because without effective measures
to guarantee respect for the sanctity of the Holy Places
in Jerusalem and preservation of its unique historical
and spiritual heritage, and without a remedy for the
grievous situation which exists in the occupied territories, the Middle East will soon be pushed to the
brink of a catastrophic conflict,
16. For quite some time, we have witnessed in the
Council and in other organs of the United Nations
harsh and unbecoming expressions from Mr. Blum
against all those countrie? which support the Palestinian cause, accusing them of hypocrisy and immorality. By the same token, he has been describing the
United Nations-which
ironically
was responsible
for the birth of Israel-as a “charade of bigotry” and
a “cesspool of lies”. Even the persons of the representatives of the Islamic countries are not spared
these derogatory outbursts, Mr, Blum is also fond of
portraying the Islamic people as violent, the Islamic
lands as rife with conflict and the freedom-loving
Palestinians as terrorists.
17. I do not wish to go into detail, as even a cursory
knowledge of the history of this century would reveal
to any individual the truth about violence and the
stark calumny of Mr. Blum’s assertions. The Islamic
people, far from being violent, have been the victims
of violence and colonialism perpetrated against them
for more than two centuries. As for the Palestinian
people, their claim to the land of Palestine is as old
as civilization itself. They have .committed no crimes
against the Jewish people. But today their land is
occupied, their properties are expropriated and they
are being persecuted and systematically
expelled
from the land they have inhabited for scores of centuries,

18. What the Islamic countries and other peaceloving countries are demanding of Israel in the United
Nations is that it abide by the Charter and withdraw
from all the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied
in I967 and recognize the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination,
a sacrosanct principle of international law. The description of the Palestinian people
struggling for this right as terrorists and those who
support them as hypocrites can hardly, by any measure, be considered a sane interpretation
of morality
or human values.
19. The death and horror inflicted inside the holy
precincts of Al-Aqsa Mosque last Sunday, which
epitomize
the terror and intolerance
perpetrated
against the Palestinian
and Arab population under
Israeli occupation, have sparked off street demonstrations and agitation throughout
the occupied territories. Israeli occupation authorities have resorted to
repressive measures which have resulted in indiscriminate killings and scores of casualties. They have
even apprehended
religious leaders and arrested
hundreds of people whose only fault is that they have
expressed their outrage at the heinous crime committed in the holy precincts of Al-Aqsa Mosque. This
bruta!ity against an unarmed population
that is suffering the travail of occupation defies all norms of
decency and fundamental human rights.
20. At this moment there is an absolute need for the
Council to demand of Israel, the occupying Power, that
it put an end to its repression against the Arab and
Palestinian population of the occupied territories. The
Council must emphatically
remind Israel of its responsibility in accordance with the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the relevant resolutions of the
Council concerning the safety and protection of the
Holy Places in Jerusalem.
21. The Council must condemn in the strongest terms
the appalling acts of sacrilege that have been perpetrated within the precincts of Al-Aqsa Mosque and
deplore the failure of Israel to protect and safeguard
the sanctity of that holy shrine. The Council must once
again emphasize that any act of destruction or profanation of Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in
Jerusalem, or any encouragement
of or connivance
at any such acts, seriously endangers international
peace and security. The Council must also call upon
Israel scrupulously to carry out its obligations under
the provisions of the Geneva Convention and the principles of international
law governing military occupation.
22. Pakistan also feels that the Council should
reactivate the Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979) to investigate the grave situation prevailing in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories
and especially the, serious matter of the safety and
sanctity of the Holy Places of Jerusalem.
23. Finally, at this stage the Council must make these
demands and expect Israel to comply with them.

remind the Council that whenever a calamity befell the
Holy City anger and anguish pervaded the lands of
Islam. When in the eleventh century the Haram alSharif was confiscated and handed over to a new
order of knights, a famous Arab poet, Abi Wardi,
depicted
the grief of the whole nation in the following
words:

We believe, however, that the sacred character of
Jerusalem
and its Holy Places cannot be preserved
for any length of time if the Holy City continues to
suffer illegal occupation, which is at the heart of its
present agony.
24. The PRESIDENT
(inteuprctation fiorn French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a Place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

“Our blood we have mixed with overflow of tears
“When our line of defence was no more.
“A man’s worst weapon is tears
“To shed when war is waged with cutting swords.
“Oh, ye sons of Islam, behold
“Onslaughts on all sides!
“How can you close your eyes
“To a calamity that awakens those who are sound
asleep?
“How long will Arab heroes endure such injury
“And submit to disgrace from barbarians?”

2.5. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic): When
on that dark day of 3 I August 1969 the Al-Aqsa Mosque
in Jerusalem went up in flames, Israeli spokesmen described it as an individual act committed by a madman; and when on Sunday last worshippers inside the
Dome of the Rock were riddled by bullets and armed
occupation forces invaded the shrine, it was again
explained away as an act of a madman. Other such
outrageous acts are being committed and will be committed by the same kind of madmen. Ironically, the
victims are persons protected by the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949.

31. That injury was endured for almost a century
until Saladin restored Jerusalem to its legitimate
owners. Today the staunch resistance put up by
students, workers, women, intellectuals, farmers and
teachers all over Palestine and the Golan Heights
demonstrates that patience has run out when unarmed
Palestinian children are shot and killed because they
raise a flag; when a student throws a stone at a charging
armed vehicle: when a man tears up an Israeli identity
card; when a merchant closes his shop, knowing that
it will be vandalized; when a girl marches in a demonstration; when a strike enters its tenth week in the
Golan Heights-when
all that is happening, the whole
world watches with awe. In the face of this heroism
we invite the United States Administration
to defend
once again the barbarian behaviour of its “democratic friend and ally”.

26. Threats by Israeli groups to blow up the entire
Haram al-Sharif are dismissed as raving by madmen,
such as Rabbi Kahane. And these are but a few additional examples: the assassination in 1948 of Count
Folke Bernadotte, the United Nations Mediator on
Palestine; the massacres at Deir Yassin and Qafr
Kassem; the blowing up of the King David Hotel.
Such acts and many others have similarly been attributed to lunatic individuals or groups,
27, Are not the excavations underneath the Haram
al-Sharif, which are corroding the very foundations
of that most beautiful of Holy Places, being carried out
by a group of deranged people? Was not the infamous
Israeli master plan for the City of Jerusalem-the
sole
aim of which is to obliterate the character of the entire
City-conceived
and is it not being executed by the
same obsessed minds?

32. I would conclude by saying that resistance grows
and spreads in so far as oppression inherent in occupation grows: and Israeli oppression is that of a settlercolonialist seeking the land without its people. In the
words of David Hirst, a correspondent of the English
daily newspaper Thr Guwdicr~2, the Israeli motto in the
case of Jerusalem, as in the case of all occupied territories, is: “We take the land first and the law comes
after.” The same journalist, David Hirst, says:

28. No rationalization
on the part of the Zionist
establishment, neither excuses nor justifications, can
any longer be used to claim that Israeli acts are being
committed in the name of God-a god who was invented by the founders of Zionism but whose features
and characteristics are today incarnated in the shapes
of Begin, Sharon, Shamir and others.

“Taking the land has always been Zionism’s
basic impulse. Taking it in Jerusalem was a sacred
compulsion.
They”-the
Zionists-“applied
to
the Holy City essentially the same methods they
had learned in the pioneering frontier days. In a
frantic programme of expropriation
and construction, immigration
and settlement, they sought ta
obliterate, as quickly as possible and by sheer physical presence, the remaining
Arab claim to Jerusalem.”

29. This recent premeditated armed invasion of one
of the holiest shrines of Islam was meant to insult the
faith. Nor was the deep-felt world reaction unexpected.
Israel is seeking to create conditions in order to inaugurate the third phase of its ominous design in the
occupied territories, that is, the mass exodus of the
inhabitants, those who resist in Jerusalem, in the
West Bank, in Gaza and in the Syrian Golan Heights.

33. The tragic events of Jerusalem have only strength-

30. The hour may not be appropriate for us to recount
the history of Jerusalem. Yet I find it necessary
to

ened our unswerving determination
to regain our
usurped rights. Today the eyes of both Muslims and
4

Christians
are turned towards Jerusalem,
whose
inhabitants,
whose shrines, whose very institutions
are at the mercy of an enemy who is psychopathically
racist, exclusivist, exclusionist-an
enemy bent on
destroying our common Arab culture and heritage so
finely embodied in Jerusalem.

40. The indignation and outrage of the Arab population in Jerusalem and of all Muslims the world over,
including those in my country, at this blatant sacrilege
should be clearly understood. Was it not only 13 years
ago that an attempt was made to burn down the AlAqsa Mosque? To treat the latest incident lightly and to
feel that the Israelis could easily ride over the strong
tide of world reaction would be, in our view, a serious
mistake and a gross underestimation.
The attempt
to belittle the incident as the work of a mentally-ill
soldier, a madman, cannot absolve Israel from responsibility for the incident and for the events that followed
in Jerusalem and the occupied territories,

34. Need we remind the Council that Israeli policies
and practices in the West Bank, Gaza and the Syrian
Golan Heights exacerbate further the grave threat to
world peace and security arising from Israeli lawlessness?
35. Need we remind the Council that unless and
until it shoulders its responsibilities,
Israel will continue its expansionist
and annexationist
practices,
aided and encouraged by the United States? The Council is requested-and
we say this with due respect
for all its members-to
apply mandatory sanctions
and all other possible coercive measures under Chapter VII of the Charter in order to deter Israel from
destroying the very foundations of world order that
the Charter provides for.

41. The Government of Israel has always been quick
to use the harshest language against any Arab suspected of using violence against an Israeli national.
But in the latest incident at Al-Aqsa and the Dome of
the Rock-an
incident that certainly deserves more
than Israel’s customary harsh language-we
cannot
but notice an unusually mild reaction. The attempt to
play down the incident and the ease with which the
so-called mentally sick soldier, with a gun in hand,
passed through the Israeli security check-points
indeed give strong grounds to believe that the killing
and the desecration of Al-Aqsa could not be an isolated incident, but part of a bigger conspiracy to
terrorize and demoralize the Arab population, which
is now in the midst of a struggle for its basic rights.
Indeed it would be difficult for my delegation to conclude otherwise, after having seen the systematic
action of the Israeli authorities to deny the Palestinians
of their legitimate rights.

36. Israel is not a peace-loving Member State; that is
declared in General Assembly resolution ES-9/l, of
8 February 1982. Its expulsion, therefore, from the
United Nations is a cogent step in order to preserve
the integrity and the credibility of the United Nations
system as a whole.
37. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fiorn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

42. Just two weeks ago, the Council met to consider
Israel’s action dismissing the democratically-elected
Mayors of Nablus and Ramallah and disbanding the
Municipal
Council of Al-Bireh. That action, together
with the suspension of the civil liberties of the inhabitants in the occupied territories which followed the
Israeli annexation of the Golan Heights, exacerbates
the already fragile situation in the area. The responsibility for the increased tension and violence in the
region must rest squarely with the Israeli Government, which has consistently violated the letter and
spirit of the fourth Geneva Convention, of 12 August
1949,’ and defied all resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the Middle East. My Government has on
numerous occasions in the past spoken out against
the policies of Israel in the Middle East, and it is only
appropriate
on this occasion to reiterate our total
opposition to the recent Israeli measures against the
elected representatives of the Palestinian people.

38. Mr. ZAINAL
ABIDIN
(Malaysia):
Sir, like
other representatives who have addressed the Council
before me, let me first congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I wish also to express my delegation’s appreciation to all members of the Council for giving me the
privilege of participating in its deliberations today.
39. The attack and cold-blooded murder committed
by an Israeli soldier against innocent Muslims
at
prayer in the Al-Aqsa Mosque represents a despicable
act of sacrilege and a direct attack on the religious and
spiritual sensitivities of all Muslims all over the world.
The Government and people of Malaysia condemned
this action-an
action which not only took innocent
lives, but also destroyed the sanctity and sacredness
of the second-holiest shrine of Islam and the Dome of
the Rock. That the Al-Aqsa Mosque, one of the holiest
Islamic shrines, had to suffer such sacrilege from a
member of the Israeli armed forces is symptomatic of
the utter contempt and ill intention of the Israeli authorities towards the Palestinian people. It is a contempt
bred in the Zionist tradition and its dream of perpetuating control over all the occupied territories,
at
the expense of their rightful inhabitants.

43. As the Council meets today to consider the
desecration of one of Islam’s holiest shrines, the stormcloud of further threat to the Palestinians looms large.
Thousands of Israeli troops are gathered on the southern border of Lebanon, poised to strike against the
Palestinian people there. As members of the Council
are well aware, Lebanon has in the past suffered
heavy damage and loss of life as a result of Israeli
5

.A

attacks on its people. In its attempt to obliterate the
legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people, Israel
has caused heavy casualties among innocent people.
The people of southern Lebanon are living under the
spectre of the Israeli threat of aggression and annihilation. The latest reports of Israel’s concentration of
troops and heavy armour along the border have once
again created renewed fear of the threat of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon,
with serious consequences for peace and stability in the region. The
attendant danger of widening the conflict is real.
I wish therefore to voice my delegation’s concern at
the tense situation
along the southern Lebanese
border and at the threat of the possible outbreak of new
Israeli attacks into Lebanon.

which has formed itself into a Government
on the
conquered land of another people, should be able
to become a member of the civilized international
community under the disguise of being a peace-loving
State that “ ‘unreservedly accepts the obligations of
the United Nations Charter and undertakes to honour
them from the day when it becomes a Member of the
United Nations’ “.*
49. That declaration was a complete fraud and decep.
tion, for Israel has not abided by, but rather has violated, every General Assembly and Security Council
resolution adopted before and since its admission
under General Assembly resolution 273 (III). What is
most baffling, and gravely destructive of the Organization, is that the international community has been
able to do absolutely nothing to implement its resolutions or to deter Israel from its persistent defiance of
the will of the international community expressed on
the basis of the Charter. I do not like repetition, but
my Government believes-and
I am certain that the
vast majority of the Member States genuinely share its
belief-that
Israel is going to cause the end of the
United Nations and bring about a return to the law of
the jungle, particularly when it finds powerful friends
who are able to see virtue in all its evil deeds.

44. Turning back to the issue before the Council
today, which constitutes
a part of the total threat
to peace and security in the area, I wish to stress my
delegation’s conviction that Israel, as the occupying
Power in the occupied Arab territories, exercises a
major responsibility
for the event that took place in
the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Its failure to safeguard the
sanctity of the holy shrine and its attitude towards the
whole incident are indeed deplorable. We join other
delegations in urging the Council to express its strong
condemnation
of the incident and to demand that
adequate measures be taken by Israel, as the occupying Power, to protect this holy Islamic shrine.

50. The problem, of course, is that power politics
is being over-played, to the degree of exhausting
scruples or moral principles. No one in the Organization can possibly believe that the colonialist, racist and
totally insensitive policy pursued by Israel, and its
expansionist, repressive and inhuman measures in the
occupied territories conform to the provisions of
the Charter, to the established resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and the Security Council, to the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’
to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights3 and to
the various relevant provisions of international law,
Any statement to that effect betrays collusion with the
policy and practices of Israel and indeed helps to
accelerate the explosion of the time bomb which has
been assembled in the Middle East and which, without
question, will gravely jeopardize international peace
and security.

45. The Malaysian
Government
considered it its
moral and religious obligation to associate itself with
other members of the Organization of the Islam@ Conference in calling upon the Council to meet in oI;der to
deliberate and to take the necessary action ori such
a serious issue. This is a manifestation oi our sdlidarity with the Islamic community
and a restrengthening
of our resolve to further the Islamic cause and the
preservation of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people under the leadership of the PLO. It is indeed
our hope that the draft resolution that will be submitted
will receive the unanimous support of the members of
the Council.
46. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
porn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
47. Mr. ALLAGANY
(Saudi Arabia): Sir, on behalf
of my delegation I wish to seize this opportunity
to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of this body. We are confident that with your
skill and experience you will guide the proceedings
the Council is now embarked on fairly and in a manner
that is consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law. I wish also
to express my thanks to you and to the members of
the Council for allowing me to participate in these
proceedings.

51. Irrespective of the merits or demerits of Council
resolution 242 (1967), Israel was required to withdraw
its armed forces from the territories occupied in 1967%
on the clear premise that the acquisition of territory
by war was inadmissible.
Despite that resolution,
Israel proceeded immediately
with the annexation of
East Jerusalem and with the confiscation of thousands
upon thousands of acres of Arab lands in order to
establish settlements for armed hostile Jews whose sole
doctrine and ambition is to grab and grab, and in the
process to drive the Palestinian Arabs from their
antes tral homelands,

48. One of the greatest enigmas of the present era
is that a small entity of fanatic and paranoid zealots,

52. Israel’s Prime Minister and the members of his
Cabinet have made no attempt to disguise their Plans
6

of robbery and gangsterism-inspired
by a self-imbued
concept of being the chosen and above the laws of
ordinary mankind, by sheer racism and contempt for
the human dignity of their Arab victims.

55. The recent measures taken by Israel in the West
Bank, Gaza and other illegally occupied territories
are totally illegal and unwarranted and devoid of any
legitimacy.
They are part of a chain of illegal and
illegitimate
actions that have been taken by Israel
since its establishment, in particular since 1967. In the
recent developments it is not the duly-elected representatives in the West Bank who are guilty of any
irregularity of conduct; it is the Israeli authorities and
Mr. Milson-a
so-called professor-and
his fanatic
mentor Ariel Sharon, who have decided to eliminate
every source of opposition to their annexation plan
for the West Bank, as they had done with the Syrian
Golan Heights. It was not the unarmed students, protesting and demonstrating in their towns and villages,
who committed a breach of the peace, but the Israeli
troops and armed settlers who fired on them, killing
and wounding scores of those youths-some
of whom
were no older than I4 or 15 years of age. It was not
the shop owners who closed their shops in protest,
who committed any crimes, but the high-handed Israeli
troops who broke the locks on the shops and opened
the shops to be easy targets for looters under the protection of Israeli arms. It was not illegal for dulyIicenced Palestinians to build homes on their own
lands; it was illegal for the armed and protected Israeli
settlers, whose unlicenced homes were built on stolen
Arab lands, to intimidate those Arab buiIders and stop
them from proceeding with their legitimate pursuit. It
was not illegal for the Palestinian Arabs to travel to and
from their towns and villages in the West Bank; it is
the height of illegality and despotism to encourage
Israeli militant convicts like Meir Kahane, a so-called
rabbi, to don military uniforms and arrest and beat
Palestinian
Arabs in the West Bank, as reported in
The New York Times of 18 February. That Israeli
Jew was, or is, a United States citizen who has been
imprisoned both in the United States and in Israel on
criminal
charges involving
violence. While in the
United States, which he visits at will, he advocates
the emigration of all American Jews to Israel. While
in Israel he wrote a book entitled They MLrst Go, in
which he advocated an even more extreme policy of
expelling all the Arab inhabitants from Israel and the
occupied Palestinian and other Arab lands.

53. What is happening in the illegally occupied territories is not God’s will, for God does not countenance
injustice. It is the ‘evil work of evil men and Israel
should remember that what is done by man can be
undone by man. Had the Israelis been a little more
rational and not blinded by their insatiable greed,
they would have foreseen that they were following an
irreversible course that could lead only to their own
destruction. Of course we are not so blind as not to
admit that such a situation will hurt everyone in the
region, but Israel can be assured that it and its supporters will be the biggest losers. It is obvious that the
arrogant Zionists have learnt very little from history.
54. It is also obvious that Israel has already sown the
winds of racial and religious fanaticism and that a
dangerous and uncontrollable
cyclone is already in
the making. One need only cite the developments that
have taken place in the last two months. The annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights was immediately followed by the appointment of a so-called civilian to
administer the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
This self-proclaimed-but
truly ignorant-expert
on
Arab affairs immediately
proceeded, high-handedly
and ruthlessly, to dismiss the duly elected mayors
and municipal councils on the West Bank or to divest
them of their inherent authority-two
of those mayors
had already been maimed by Israeli explosives; two
others had been deported at an earlier stage. He has
placed some under house arrest and with the aid of his
troops and armed Jewish settlers he has proceeded
ruthlessly to stamp out all opposition to his repressive measures. This has been followed or accompanied
by the shooting and killing of unarmed young men
and women and by deliberate and calculated efforts
to suppress and stamp out all national sentiment among
the Palestinians
there and force them to submit to
new concoctions called “village leagues”, which are
being armed and financed by the occupation administration and given the authority to process all claims
and complaints by the local inha,bitants. The purpose
is, of course, to replace the elected municipal councils, which represent the will of the people, by new
bodies that are lavishly paid to implement the will of
the occupiers. One of these so-called village leagues
had received $20 million from Israel to be distributed
to mercenaries for arms and other benefits-as
reported in The New York Times of 23 March. The
leading
Israeli English-language
newspaper,
The
Jrrsrscrlern Post, in an article reprinted in The New
York Times of 1 April, described the situation as
follows:

56. The constant but totally unconvincing
excuse
that the Israeli oppressors give is that the elected
mayors are PLO agents. In fact they conveniently
pretend to see a PLO agent in every demonstrating
youth, in every Palestinian who resents colonialism
and aspires to self-determination.
In the highly advertised Israeli democracy there is no room for dissent
by any Arab against the “benevolent”
and “democratic” confiscation of all Arab land and the uprooting
of the unarmed population,
supplanting them with
foreign indoctrinated
Jews who are determined to see
an expanded Israel free of its Arab inhabitants. As the
Israeli newspaper Ha’aretz
wrote in an article reprinted in The New York Times of 23 March:
“the Government
has decided to continue with
Israeli rule in the territories as though they have

“The leaders chosen for the village leagues were
some of the most discredited persons in the West
Bank community, even before they agreed to collaborate with Israel, and their adjutants regular
ruffians who commanded . . . plain loathing.”
7

already been annexed. In these circumstances
it
does not require PLO directives in order to inflame
the Arab population.”

blowing the smoke into the Mosque and driving out
the persons praying inside, coughing and wiping their
eyes. One elderly man was carried to an ambulance and
“a few of the troops walked away laughing”, Of course,
to the sadistic Israeli troops, the shooting, the killing,
the desecration and the mischief played with tear gas
bombs were all a source of fun and amusement,

57. Following an extensive visit by Mr. Anthony
Lewis of The New Yor;k Times to Israel and the West
Bank, he wrote the following in that newspaper’s issue
of I April:

59. Israel was created on the basis of illegitimacy
and fraud. Fraud continues to be the essence of its
policies. It attacks and cries wolf and deludes itself
that the world will accept the results regardless of the
means used to achieve them. Israel has established a
couple of illegal settlements in the Sinai. The other
day we heard a Western statesman describe the evac.
uation of these settlements as a traumatic experience for Israel. There are already more than 70 ille.
gal settlements on the West Bank and expeditious
efforts are in progress to build more illegal settlements
as soon as possible to foreclose any possibility of selfdetermination for the Palestinian people. No one seems
to consider this a traumatic, or rather a tragic, experience for the legitimate inhabitants of that part of
Palestine which is being stolen in broad daylight. Or
are the Palestinian Arabs less human and thus unable
to suffer the trauma of already having lost part of their
country and witnessing the loss of the remaining
part?

“Mr. Milson funneled money for West Bank communities through the village leagues, for roads and
other needs, denying local councils permission
even to bring in foreign donations. The village league
‘adjutants’ were armed with submachine guns and
trained by Israeli settlers.
‘“The tactics were exactly those that have been
used by colonial Powers against fractious natives:
push aside the real political leaders and try to deal
with backward rural elements. In old Rhodesia,
for example, Ian Smith used to produce tribal
chiefs as black representatives.
Expectably
the
device was just as unsuccessful in the West Bank.”
Mr, Lewis went on to state, sarcastically:
“All this, Mr. Milson explained, had to be done
to smooth the way for negotiations on West Bank
autonomy. Exactly: now that the inhabitants have
been provoked, pushed toward extremist views, put
under curfew, they will quietly sit down to accept
permanent Israeli control. There is the true Commentary mind:” -a
reference to the periodical
Commeiztaty,
known for its extremist
Zionist
views-with
apologies to Mrs. Kirkpatrick--‘&the
denial of uncomfortable
realities, the arrogance, the
infantile belief that total power can be yours if you
talk loudly.”

60. Once again, I urge the Council to give more
sense and seriousness to its resolutions.
Israel’s
measures cannot and must not be condoned in any
circumstances. The members of the Council know
this in their hearts. Emotions in the Arab and Islamic
countries are totally inflamed-inflamed
by the insane
policies and practises of the Israeli authorities. In
response to public sentiment in these countries, His
Majesty King Khaled Bin Abdul Aziz, King of Saudi
Arabia and Chairman of the Islamic Summit Conference, has appealed to all Islamic countries to
observe a work stoppage on this 14th day of April in
solidarity with and support for the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories, I sincerely hope that the
Council and the entire international community will
not fail to give honest expression to their revulsion
at and condemnation of Israel’s dangerous policies
and practices,

58. The most recent episode, the armed attack on
Masjid al-Aqsa in Jerusalem, is a clear indication that
the cyclone has already built up sufficient force to
become uncontrollable.
The terrorist Alan Goodman,
who stormed into the Holy Mosque and fired into the
praying crowd, killing and wounding a number of
innocent people, is a man from Baltimore
who has
been caught up in the cyclone of zealotry, fanaticism,
racism and utter hatred. Goodman is a deranged individual, but he is not alone. He is an integral part of
a deranged social and political entity. He is a member
of the Israeli army, which is being deployed to subdue
the Palestinian
inhabitants
of the West Bank and
the occupied territories.
The soldiers who rushed
to Masjid al-Aqsa, ostensibly to arrest Goodman,
actually went there to save him from the wrath of the
unarmed Arab civilians who were there. The same
soldiers fired into and at the Mosque, killing and
wounding a large number of other agitated civilian
Arabs. According to a report published by The New
York Times on 12 April, when orders finally were
issued to the troops to withdraw, one of them threw
a tear gas grenade near the open door of the Mosque,

61. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I apologize for intruding in the debate when there are other names on
the list of speakers, but I feel that what 1 have to say
is very germane to what we are discussing.
62. Now there has been a pervasive view, more or
less ambivalently
expressed, that the criminal act
committed on Sunday was the act of a deranged soldier. I have before me the text of a press statement
concerning a conference which was held in Jerusalem
by the Islamic Higher Council, as well as by other
public institutions, and I believe-in
fact it says this,
in a footnote-that
a cable of protest from the Islamic
Higher Council containing that text has been sent to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
a

63. I believe that because of the importance of that
press statement and the light which it throws on what
happened on Sunday, I may be excused for reading
out some of it; I hope it will be distributed as an official
document to the members of the Council. That statement, dated 12 April, reads:
“In the Name of Allah, the Merciful
passionate,

cause they are fully armed”-presumably
refers to the armed Israeli settlers.

this

“This has enabled these organizations
to carry
out acts of abduction and wanton assassination as
they see fit, drawing their support from the authority which had been accorded to them by the Government to perpetrate acts against the people, who are
totally devoid of any arms.

and Com-

“The Islamic Higher Council in Jerusalem had
earlier convened an emergency press conference,
in which the Council outlined concisely some of
the events to which the blessed AI-Aqsa Mosque
had been exposed and also outlined in categorical
terms the warnings which it had addressed to the
responsible officials on the highest levels in the
Israeli Government.

“Therefore,
we take this opportunity
to demand
of the Government that it put a stop to these acts
of provocation and to place upon it responsibility for
all the events and consequences that might occur.
“6. The precedent which occurred at the holy
Ibrahimi
sanctuary and has resulted in depriving
the Moslems from freely performing their prayers
makes it imperative upon us to warn of the serious
consequences which would accrue to the holy AlAqsa Mosque in consequence of the occupation of
Al-Aqsa Mosque by the Israeli forces and their
forbidding the worshippers to perform their religious
duties. Such a situation gravely contradicts the
Islamic Sharia law which absolutely forbids any
closure of the Mosque to the worshippers for any
reasons whatsoever and under any circumstances.

“It had requested them to shoulder their responsibilities
in preventing what happened yesterday
or what might happen in the future against this
great sanctuary.
“Today,
and in the light of the new facts, disclosures and consequences which have become
evident in consequence of the outrageous acts
which occurred yesterday and what accompanied
and followed those sad events, the Islamic Higher
Council wishes to state the following:

“7. The description of the criminal in the official
statements as deranged is rejected and should not be
issued by any responsible Government;
for it is
unreasonable that one of the regular soldiers in its
army, who is required to pass a medical examination,
should be allowed to carry arms amidst other soldiers. If anyone alleges that this criminal is deranged,
then what can be said about the other soldiers who
assisted him in the firing spreefrom the western area?
The Islamic Higher Council rejects the statements of
the responsible Israeli officials, which contained
audacious and clear distortions against the Islamic
Higher Council, and the attempts of the Israeli officials to offer excuses for the events which occurred.

” 1. The number of those who were murdered
yesterday”-that
is, Sunday-“was
two: and the
number of the wounded exceeded 100.
“2. The forcible assault of the criminal soldier
was only an initial p,hase of the criminal operation.
It has been established that firing did not emanate
from him alone but from many directions and, in
particular,
from the western wing of the holy AlAqsa Mosque as well as from the roof of the religious school which belongs to the Islamic Higher
Council and is under the occupation of the Israeli
armed forces, which had expelled the students
who were taking Islamic studies there. This proves
that the operation had been well prepared and coordinated in advance of the actual event.

“We shall move forthwith to perform our worship
at the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque.”
That statement emanates from the Islamic Higher
Council and all national institutions and public bodies.

“3.
The assault upon the structure of the Dome
of the Rock resulted in damage to it.
“4.
The grand glass mosaic panel at the entrance
to the gate of the Dome of the Rock from its western
side was totally destroyed; and serious damage was
inflicted on the Dome of the Rock and on the marble
pillars within it.

64. I would add that the members of the Islamic
Higher Council did move to go and say their prayers
at the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque. Venerable and elderly
persons such as Sheikh Sa’ad Aldin Alami were put
on a truck and taken away by the security forces. Thus
they were prevented from performing their prayers at
the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

Such an operation should not be allowed to
“5.
happen without warning of the serious consequences
which result from enabling armed civilian organizations to impose their authority on the people and to
regard themselves as responsible for the land be-

65. I believe that this clarifies the situation and the
misconception that has surrounded this whole incident
all along-that
it was the work of a lone, deranged individual. The facts have now been disclosed. They were
witnessed by hundreds of persons present on the spot.
9

This proves that it was a well planned, well co-ordinated attack against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and not the
work of a lone, deranged individual.

that coming here is not an exercise in futility. We are
keen to make the diplomatic option credible. We are
keen to make the United Nations mechanism effective and respected. We are keen to interpret the Charter
of the United Nations as it was intended to be interpreted. We are keen to see the very many resolutions
of the General Assembly and other United Nations
bodies constituting a jurisprudence worthy of respect
and implementation.
We are keen to see an end put to
Israel’s violations of international
law, its contempt
for General Assembly resolutions, its defiance of
Security Council resolutions and its utter dependency
on a built-in veto exercised by the United States, as
it has done during the last two weeks.

66. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
67. Mr. MAKSOUD:
1 should like to take this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council. I should like also to
recall our friendship with the people of your country
and the peoples of the African nations in general. Along
with the people of your country and the other peoples
of Africa, we are engaged in a common struggle, and
we have common aspirations. We have no doubt that
your wise guidance of the deliberations of the Council
will help achieve realization of the desired objective.

7 1. We recognize that this is a great challenge and we
should therefore like to repeat that, despite the frustrations and anger prevalent throughout the Arab
nation, our firm belief and conviction are that the
United Nations can salvage its credibility and establish
legitimacy.

68. Once again the Council is meeting to deliberate
on and to resolve an issue pertaining to Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab territories.
It seems that the frequency of the Israeli aggressions
against the Palestinian and other Arab peoples is
intended to be a form of psychological warfare that
Israel and Zionism are conducting against the Security Council and the mechanisms of the United Nations
to rob them of effectiveness and consequence. It is
this deliberate psychological warfare that leads Israel
and some of its supporters to seek to project the idea
that our resort to the Council is simply a repetition of
complaints that have characterized our relationship
with the United Nations since the emergence of the
Palestinian question in 1947. This frequency is projected as though the Arab States were trying to utilize
the United Nations and the Security Council as a
platform from which to verbalize their frustrations
inasmuch as international diplomacy and the options
of peace have been unable to achieve effectiveness
and credibility.

72. That having been said, it is also necessary to
realize that the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
through its spokesman the Chairman of the Al-Quds
Committee, has submitted this complaint because the
Israeli action hits at the basic spiritual values, convictions and beliefs not only of all Arab peoples but also
of Islamic peoples throughout the world. It is as if
Israel is trying to dance on the nerves of the population within and outside Palestine, as if Israel is seeking
to project its innocence by focusing on the deranged
character of one of its army members.
73. It is rather amazing that a Mr. Hinckley sought
to assassinate the President of the United States and yet
the whole judicial process of this country has not yet
determined whether or not Mr, Hinckley is deranged.
But when an Israeli soldier goes and massacres one of
the holiest places of Islam, in one of the holiest ptaces
of Palestine and one of the holiest cities of the world,
there appears to be an instant realization that he is
deranged. Or if a more objective assessment is attempted, it is claimed that he is on the lunatic fringe,
trying to act out the Zionist fantasies about exterminating the other in the land of Palestine-“the
other” being the Palestinians. In this case we find
Alan Goodman is described as “deranged” in order to
absolve the entire Israeli occupation mechanism of its
primary responsibility for implementing
the articles
of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. I

69. The nagging complaints about our resort to the
United Nations are echoed in our own Arab national
constituency and we are therefore caught between
these two poles. Within the Arab nation Arab people
ask why we keep going to the United Nations when
the Security Council and the various other mechanisms
are helpless and seem to be paralysed when any attempt
is made to deter Israeli aggression, expansion and
racism. We who represent the various Arab States
and our Governments and our heads of State are asked
by people throughout the Arab world: Why do you go
to the United Nations when you know that there is a
built-in veto that will underwrite Israeli objectives and
policies? In doing so, you are merely accepting the
impotence of the United Nations, we are told.

74. Any attempt to describe the reality of the situation in the occupied territories is distorted by Israeli
representatives, because they believe that by undermining their critics’ credibility in advance, they can
destroy the content of the criticism.
75. Alan Goodman is part of the lunatic fringe of
another political lunatic fringe, headed by Kahane;
Kahane is part of another lunatic fringe-Gush
Emunim, the party of the armed settlers marauding in the

70. But, despite the legitimate frustrations that the
Arab peoples feel about the United Nations, we know
10

ccupied territories; Gush Emunim is part of the Herut
IDatic fringe; the Herut is part of the Likhud lunatic
-jnge; and the Likhud is part of the lunatic fringe of
le Zionist movement,
but it is today dispensing
ower. Where does it stop? Do we not see that this
hain reaction has its roots in the Deir Yassin attack,
,r which Mr. Begin and his Irgun were at the time
enounced as part of the lunatic fringe of the Zionist
rovement?
5. Perhaps the description of Alan Goodman as
sing on the lunatic fringe and of Mr. Kahane as being
g-t of another lunatic fringe might be valid. If so,
,hat we are witnessing is that, in the whole structure of
re Zionist unfolding of its expansionist and aggresve plans, lunacy is becoming institutionalized
and a
tate pohcy. It is here that we have the dangerous
ynsequences and the threat to regional and interstional peace.
r. It is no use trying to absolve the criminal ab initio
* to individualize
and personalize a criminal act
:ainst one of the holiest places. What we are wit:ssing today is a chain reaction that lies in the very
,sence of the philosophy upon which Israel is predirted. Does it not express itself in the so-called Law
- Return, which allows anybody, whether from
altimore or Australia, to become part of the Israeli
med forces just because he is a Jew, while those
ilestinian people are denied the right to return to
eir homes because they are non-Jewish?

80. It is equally a fact that Jerusalem was illegally
annexed and declared the so-called eternal capital of
Israel. Yet that went unchecked, even though Jerusalem is not, and cannot be, anywhere but in the heartland of Palestine.
81. By annexing Jerusalem and deliberately defying
the whole international
community,
Israel felt that it
had licence to do at will whatever it wants, whenever
it wants. Then, defying and showing contempt for the
Council draft resolution [S/14943] which called upon
Israel, the occupying Power, to allow the mayors of
Halhoul and Hebron to return to their functions, Israel
thwarted its implementation.
A sequence of unimplemented resolutions demonstrates that contempt is an
integral part of Israeli policy and attitude towards the
United Nations.
82. Does the United Nations remain helpless? Are
we to remain hopeless before this staggering insult to
the international community?
83. Today we are being told that everybody must
calm down because on 25 April Israel might withdraw
from the Sinai. It is amazing that the intention is to
paralyse the other partners.to the Camp David accords.
If Israel commits a violent act the United States State
Department comes out and says: “We deplore violence
on all sides.” But why? One cannot equate violence as
a matter of plan, of conquest and of coercion with
violence as a reaction, as in the West Bank and Gaza,
where children of Palestine are defying the military
establishment of the occupying Power.

_ If any country in the world treated the Jews, in
rms of immigration,
in the same manner that Israel
:ats non-Jews, that country would be rightly conmned as anti-Semitic. I wonder how the members
the Council would describe institutionalized
disimination
against non-Jews coming back to their
smes in Palestine.

84. Moreover,
Israel wants to penalize our great
Arab brother Egypt for even making a statement in
favour of the PLO. Israel underestimates the inherent
national commitment
of Egypt to the Arab world’s
legitimate causes. Israel is utilizing the Camp David
accords to silence the other partners, but at least one of
the partners has a firm commitment to the aspirations
of the Arabs that will not for long be silenced.

. We are told that this individualized
act is not
>rthy of the time of the Council. Yet what this act
s detonated, in terms of our legitimate anger,
‘oughout the Arab and Muslim worlds must make us
begin to re-examine the functions of the Security
buncil. We are finding that this act has been made
ssible by the permissiveness produced by the
ercise two weeks ago of the veto of the draft resoion denouncing the Israeli authorities’ dismissal
elected mayors and calling on Israel to rescind its
cision disbanding the elected Municipal Council
Al-Bireh. That veto created an atmosphere whereby
‘ael felt that it had advance protection for subseent acts of aggression. For this policy not only made
)ossible for the Israeli army to allow one of its funcnaries to strike in a trigger-happy manner, but also
tated an atmosphere of permissiveness for acts
xinst those who merely wanted to say their prayers,
3 against the passive demonstrations of people in
‘Usalem and, today, in Gaza and, earlier, in Nablus,
,bron and other places. It accounts for the triggerspy behaviour of the Israeli occupation army and
: illegal settlers in the occupied territories.

85. Israel is trying to keep everybody off balance:
“If you do not allow us to create and proliferate more
settlements in the occupied territories, then southern
Lebanon is endangered.”
86. Then there is the utilization by the Israelis of
language reminiscent of the Holocaust: “Exterminate
the PLO”. The very utilization of the words “extermination”, “finishing off ‘, “removing”
and “uprooting”
creates a situation in which the Arab people’s patience
is being strained to the breaking point.
87. The Council has heard the statement by the
representative of Saudi Arabia and the statements by
the representative of Malaysia and others, who not
only have documented the arrogant attack against the
holy institutions of Islam in Jerusalem but have documented and described the legitimate anger. Israel wants
to keep us all off balance. If we do not accept its
11

occupation and annexation of the Golan, then it will
blackmail us in southern Lebanon. If we try to ensure
the full implementation
of the Council resolutions on
southern Lebanon, then Israel will proliferate illegal
settlements in the West Bank and Gaza. If the Egyptians object to what the Israelis are doing in Jerusalem
and in the West Bank, then the Israelis will threaten
that the postponement of withdrawal from Sinai might
be a credible option.

elsewhere. We heard from Mr. Naik that the tragil
event of last Sunday took place in the Al-Aqsa Mosque
Surely he must know that what he told the Counci
was untrue. Then he said that I had accused the Unite{
Nations of being a cesspool of lies. Surely he mus
know that this is another lie. I challenge him to provr
exactly when and where I used those words; I am per
fectly willing to interrupt my statement to enable bin
to come forward and to prove me wrong. He will no
do it because he knows that what he said was untrue,

88. What Israel wants to do is to keep everybody
hostage-to
keep the world community hostage-to
its
reckless policy and to its attempt to play havoc with
the future chances of peace and justice in the region.
So, today, this issue-this
attack and act of aggression against the Holy Places of Islam in Jerusalemis the focus of the interrelationship
of all the dimensions of the Palestinian question and the Israeli-Arab
conflict. That is why the time has perhaps come to take
the situation in hand: the United Nations-the
Security Council-must
go beyond condemnation;
it must
impose
a deterrent-a
credible
disincentive-to
Israel’s conducting any further acts of aggression and
expansion, and must make any subsequent aggression
costly for it. At stake is far more than what appears
on the surface. At stake is the legitimacy of the United
Nations or the success of Israel’s attempt to de-legitimize not only Palestinian rights and Arab territories
but also the sanctity of many of our spiritual and
moral values and imperatives,

93. But he was not the only bigot here, We haw
just heard the most recent sermon of Mr. Maksoud
I do not recall a statement by Mr. Maksoud when tht
Great Mosque in Makkah was taken over by severa
hundred raiders two and a half years ago. I do noi
recall Mr. Maksoud coming before the Council on thal
occasion to sermonize. And I do not recall the repre.
sentative of Saudi Arabia coming before the Counci;
on that occasion to ask for a condemnation
of hiz
country.
94. Then we also had of course the representativeof
Syria, who treated us to his characteristic lucidity
and profundity of thought. I felt he would want to
inform the Council about the shelling and destructionof
scores of mosques and churches in Syrian Lebanon by
his Government. Surprisingly, he made no reference
to those events.
95. So the representative of Jordan is in good cornpany. But one wonders how he could make the stat9
ments that he did make in the Council, willingly passing
over the simple fact that it was precisely on the same
spot where the tragic event of last Sunday occurred
that King Abdallah of Jordan was murdered in 1951.
Did he then come before the Council to ask for the
condemnation of Jordan?

89. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
ji-om French):
The representative
of Israel has asked to make a
statement in exercise of his right of reply, and I call
on him now.
90. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In my statement yesterday
I expressed the fear that this debate would be exploited
with a view to playing upon religious sentiments of
millions around the world. I appealed to the Council
not to permit the voice of intolerance and prejudice
to prevail here [2352?zd meefirzg, pwvr. 431.

96. Did anyone ask for a Security Council meeting
when Pope John Paul II was attacked last year? Did
anyone ask for a Council meeting when the “Pietl”
of Michelangelo was damaged by a deranged individual
several years ago?

91. It would seem that our appeal went unheeded,
The succession of statements that we have heard today
clearly bears out our worst fears. It is quite obvious
that the speakers who have been lined up here have
only one intention: to fan the flames of religious incitement and intolerance.
Amazingly,
some of these
speakers then become very upset when they are
accused of bigotry. In other words, it is perfectly permissible to act as bigots, but it is bad when bigotry
is pointed out.

97. So what is this if not bigotry? What is all this
exercise if not an attempt to play on the religious
sentiments of millions of people around the world?
Let me therefore repeat my appeal to the Council:
Do not permit the bigots to have their way. DO not
permit the voice of intolerance and prejudice to prevail
here.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

92. The representative of Pakistan stated here that
I had expressed disdain and contempt for Islam,
What is this if not bigotry, Mr, Naik? The Government of Israel, and I myself, have the highest regard
and respect for Islam, and indeed for any faith. More
than 600,000 of our citizens are Muslims. We have no
respect for bigots and for those who abuse religion,
like Mr. Naik, and who spread lies in the Council and

NOTES

I United Nations, Twcrty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, P- 287.
z General Assembly resolution 273 (III).
.1General Assembly resolution 217 A (III).

12

HOWTOOBTAINUNlTEDNATIONSPUBLlCATIONS
United
world.

Nations
Consult

publications
your bookstore

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section,
New York or Geneva.

COMMENTSEPROCURERLES

PUBLlCATlONSDESNA'llONSUNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Units
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprbs
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

KAK

OPl-AHN3AI~W.i

JfOKCi&iTh

M3,lJAHIIfI

et les agences
g : Nations

OD’I>E~~MHEHHhIX

dipositaires
du
Unies, Section

HAIlIHH

COMOCONSEGUlRPUBLlCACIONESDELASNACIONESUNlDAS
Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partcs del mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Unidas
estAn en venta en libren’as
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

oil300

y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn
de Ventas,

88-60989--June

19894.~50
