A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/42
31 December 1997

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 75
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/52/604)]
52/42.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious
or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/49 of 10 December 1996 and previous resolutions referring to the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,1
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption, on 10 October 1980, of the Convention, together with the
Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I),1 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)1 and the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol III),1 which entered into force on 2 December 1983,
Also recalling with satisfaction the adoption by the Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, on 13 October 1995 of the Protocol
on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV),2 and on 3 May 1996 of the amended Protocol on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II),3

1

See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 5: 1980 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII.

2

CCW/CONF.I/16 (Part I), annex A.

3

Ibid., annex B.

97-77749

/...

A/RES/52/42
Page 2

Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in the elaboration of the
Convention and the Procotols thereto,
Noting that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences may be convened to examine
amendments to the Convention or to any of the Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning
other categories of conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and
application of the Convention and the Protocols annexed thereto and to examine any proposed amendments
or additional protocols, and welcoming the decision adopted by the Review Conference in its Final
Declaration4 on 3 May 1996 to convene a Review Conference no later than the year 2001,

1. Welcomes the additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions5 to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,1 as well as the ratifications and acceptances of or
accessions5 to the amended Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and
Other Devices (Protocol II);3
2. Urgently calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to become parties, as
soon as possible, to the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and in particular to amended Protocol II, with
a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to this instrument at an early date, and calls upon successor
States to take appropriate measures so that ultimately adherence to these instruments will be universal;
3. Calls, in particular, upon the States parties to the Convention to express their consent to be bound
by the amended Protocol II with a view to its entry into force as soon as possible, and, pending its entry into
force, to respect and ensure respect for its substantive provisions to the fullest extent possible;
4. Commends the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV)2 to all States, with a view to
achieving the widest possible adherence to this instrument at an early date and calls, in particular, upon the
States parties to express their consent to be bound by the Protocol with a view to its entry into force as soon
as possible;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the Convention and the Protocols
annexed thereto, to continue to inform it periodically of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions to
the Convention and the Protocols, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session
the item entitled "Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects".
67th plenary meeting
9 December 1997

4

Ibid., annex C.

5

See A/52/227 and Corr.1 and 2.
