S/PV.8357

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8357

th meeting
Thursday, 20 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cohen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Amde
Mr. Michon
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 20 August 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/778)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-29334 (E)
*1829334*

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Monitoring Mechanism headquarters in Kadugli to
provide approval. Consequently, all patrols undertaken
by UNISFA since April have received approval
without delay.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 20 August 2018 from the
secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2018/778)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/778, which contains the text of a letter
dated 20 August from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
brief the Council on the continued support of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, specifically as per the Council’s request
to inform it on the progress made by the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan towards implementing
the benchmarks outlined in resolution 2412 (2018). I
would also like to briefly elaborate on the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations to reconfigure UNISFA, as
submitted in his letter of 20 August (S/2018/778).
With regard to the first benchmark, which is
facilitating the full freedom of movement, the Sudan
and South Sudan maintained standing clearance
for all UNISFA air and ground patrols within the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. Since March,
both countries have authorized their senior national
monitors based at the Joint Border Verification and
2/19

20/09/2018

On the second benchmark, which is finalizing the
agreement on the four Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism team sites, UNISFA continues
to operate a team site at Tishwin/Panakuac within the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, and efforts continued
within the reporting period to establish the other three
team sites. The ad hoc committee for the 14 Mile Area
met on 28 August, when the South Sudanese delegation
stated that it was unable to convince local leaders to
allow the establishment of the tweam sites in Safahah/
Kiir Adem and As Sumayah/Wierayen. As a result, the
committee recommended that the matter be referred
to the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. With
regard to the establishment of the fourth team site in the
Abu Qussa/Wunkur area, the decision remains with the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism to consider an
alternative location due to the presence of rebel entities.
Despite the efforts of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel to convene meetings of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism within the reporting
period — which is the third benchmark — the three
scheduled meetings were postponed by the parties.
The meeting to be held on 11 and 12 August and the
subsequent meeting scheduled for 6 and 7 September
were postponed to accommodate talks between the
South Sudanese parties in Khartoum and subsequent
consultations on the agreement reached on 30 August.
The meeting scheduled for 17 and 18 September was
postponed by the Sudan due to prior commitments
of the Government. The African Union High-level
Implementation Panel has scheduled the next meeting
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism for
23 September.
With regard to advancing the establishment of the
border-crossing corridors — which are the fourth and
fifth benchmarks — progress remains contingent on
parties undertaking sensitization exercises with their
border communities. Sensitization efforts are necessary
to allay the concerns of the border communities,
while emphasizing that in no way do the marking of
border-crossing corridors and Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism operations prejudice
the current or future legal status of the border. The
upcoming meeting of the Joint Political and Security
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mechanism is expected to address sensitization issues
with the border communities.
Lastly, the African Union Border Programme
convened the Joint Demarcation Committee — which
is the sixth benchmark — from 10 to 13 September,
in order to resume border demarcation discussions.
However the parties were unable to advance their
discussions on the boundary delimitation document,
which would guide the demarcation exercise. Progress
on that document stalled in 2017. The Joint Border
Commission is scheduled to meet in October.
Despite only partial completion of the conditions
contained in resolution 2412 (2018), the past few months
witnessed a number of other positive developments in
the relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan, not
least among them the efforts undertaken by the Sudan
in facilitating talks between the South Sudanese parties
in Khartoum. Building on this promising collaboration
between the parties, I call on the Council to consider
the reconfiguration recommendations outlined by the
Secretary-General in his letter of 20 August to adjust
UNISFA to the current realities so as to best support
both Governments in their efforts to implement
their agreements.
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism operations have markedly increased and
picked up momentum within the past year due to the
proactive push by the Security Council and UNISFA to
further activities, including the establishment of team
sites. The Border Monitoring Mechanism remains a vital
part of the framework that regulates the relationship
between the two countries and its normalization. It is
in this regard that I request the Council to consider the
recommendation in the Secretary-General’s letter and
allow for a modest adjustment in UNISFA’s mandate on
the Mechanism, within current resources. This would
provide the Mission with the ability to better support
border-demarcation efforts by the African Union border
programme, including the much-needed sensitization
of the border communities that I highlighted earlier.
The recommendations envisage the establishment of
two further sector headquarters and team sites within
the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, as required, to
provide more comprehensive coverage of the border
region. Troops would be transferred from the Abyei
area to achieve full operating capability for the Border
Monitoring Mechanism. This would harmonize the
diminishing military threat with the corresponding
reduction in military need for the Abyei area.

S/PV. 8357

With regard to the Abyei area, the military
component of the Mission would concentrate
its deployments along the borders of the area to
safeguard against armed incursions. With criminality
increasing in the Abyei area, the recommendations
call for the deployment of three formed police units
and additional specialized individual police officers
to enhance the Mission’s focus on maintaining law
and order and continue furthering peace between
the local communities. These proposed changes are
accommodated within the current uniformed personnel
ceiling of 4,550. Extensive consultations were
undertaken by the Secretariat with the parties and the
African Union to formulate these recommendations,
which endeavour to match the situation on the ground by
reducing troops from the Abyei area, introducing police
to manage law and order, and enhancing the Mission’s
mandate to seize and advance progress on the Border
Monitoring Mechanism, as well as to operationally
support the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel in its political efforts. The further engagement
of the Council with the parties is necessary to agree on
a mandate for UNISFA that would serve the parties as
well as their border communities.
In closing, let me reiterate that it is imperative that
all peacekeeping missions address the changing needs
on the ground and work towards achieving a political
resolution. In the case of UNISFA, the support to the
implementation of the 2012 cooperation agreements and
the resolution of the status of Abyei and of the border
needs to be reframed in such a way as to enable the
parties to make meaningful progress. The SecretaryGeneral’s letter outlines recommendations that aim to
achieve that goal.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council during its deliberations
on the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
I shall confine my remarks to the question of
progress in regard to negotiations between the Sudan
and South Sudan on the final status of Abyei. It is the
resolution of this issue above all else that would allow
for a timely exit by UNISFA from Abyei.
As Council members will recall, the African
Union High-level Panel, under the chairmanship of

18-293343/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

President Mbeki, has considered this question and, in
2013, formulated a proposal to resolve the question
of the status of Abyei by means of a referendum. Its
proposal, including modalities for such a referendum,
was considered and then adopted by the African Union
Peace and Security Council in 2013. The Sudan opposed
the proposal and no further action has been taken to this
day. Indeed, in 2014 the Abyei file in each country was
transferred to the offices of President Omar Al-Bashir
and President Salva Kiir. Since then, notwithstanding
occasional meetings between the Presidents over the
past five years, the invitation to include Abyei on the
agenda of such meetings has been consistently declined
by the two principals.
The eruption of civil conflict in South Sudan in
2013 and again in 2016 has seen the issue of Abyei
relegated to the sidelines. The two countries’ internal
predicaments have precluded a discussion on this
matter, not least because of the mutual recriminations
between them regarding allegations of their support for
the respective internal insurgencies in their countries.
South Sudan, in particular, was not in a position to
drive negotiations on this difficult topic, given the
imbalance of power between the two countries. The
prevailing tensions between the two countries impacted
down the chain of authority. The regularity and tone
of meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
intended to deal with the interim administration of the
Abyei box reflected this combative approach. The Juba
delegation insisted that the Oversight Committee was
not empowered to deal with matters relating to the joint
administration of the territory.
We now believe that there is good reason to hope
that the parties’ reluctance to deal with the final-status
issue and even the interim administration issues
will change. In the past few months, we have seen a
remarkable shift in the willingness of the States of
the Horn of Africa region to engage neighbours with
which they had long-held hostile relations or even
open conflict. The rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea has triggered if not the resolution of
disputes between the States of the region, then at least
a willingness to engage each other to seek solutions.
There is now pervasive peer pressure to deal with the
conflicts that beset the region, hold back its development
and economic integration, or exacerbate political
instability in the Horn of Africa. This shift is nowhere
better represented than by the efforts of Khatroum to
4/19

20/09/2018

mediate an agreement between the competing parties
in the civil conflict in South Sudan.
Sudan has insisted that it is acting in the interests
of peace in the region and the building of goodneighbourly relations with South Sudan. Its endeavours
have been publicly appreciated by Juba and the other
signatory parties of the revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan. There is no doubt that the successful
mediation by the Sudan of the outstanding issues in
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
peace process has contributed to reducing tensions
between Juba and Khartoum. It is notable that part of
the agreement is concerned with building a concrete
modality of cooperation between the two countries
specifically on the rehabilitation of oil fields in Unity
state. In my engagements with the Governments of the
Sudan and of South Sudan, I have encouraged them to
extend their cooperation in the oil sector to intensified
engagements in other fields of mutual benefit. It also
seems that the reduction in intensity of both countries’
internal civil conflicts, particularly in South Sudan,
may enable consideration of a solution to this question
as well as the other matters covered in the mutually
agreed cooperation agreements.
The new mood has enabled eminent personalities
concerned with Abyei, including former Foreign
Minister Francis Deng, to generate an informal series
of discussions in Khatroum. Their aim is to identify a
road map that would rejuvenate cooperation between the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya and and open a window
to discuss the final status of Abyei. It is the first time
since 2012, when the Presidents took responsibility
for handling the Abyei issue, that it has been possible
for the Abyei lobbyists in both countries to undertake
direct discussions on this sensitive matter.
The more positive posture between the two
countries has encouraged the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel to invite the two Foreign
Ministers, Deng Alor Kwol and Eldirdiri Mohamed
Ahmed, for discussions on Abyei’s final status next
week. That meeting was intended to take place on
the sidelines of an extraordinary session of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. I personally engaged
the two Ministers of Foreign Affairs to assess their
willingness to engage on this issue and to confirm that
the timing for such a discussion was appropriate. They
were positive while being clear not to overpromise on
a successful outcome. We have just heard that both
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Governments have now declined the offer to discuss it
on the margins of the Mechanism meeting scheduled
for 23 and 24 September, but this is most likely because
of the unavailability of the two Ministers of Foreign
Affairs, owing to their presence here in New York. I
remain hopeful, however, that such an engagement
will indeed take place. Even if it only serves to put the
issue of Abyei’s final status on the agenda, it would be
a positive move.
Against that backdrop, on two related issues, I can
confirm first that, in regard to the Secretary-General’s
proposal on UNISFA, I believe that the provision of
political depth to the UNISFA mission will enable it
to better manage the intercommunal relations in Abyei
and the adjacent border areas, pending a final solution.
Secondly, I can confirm that both the Sudan and South
Sudan acknowledge that UNISFA has indisputably
contributed to the maintenance of peace and stability in
the Area, including through intercommunal dialogue,
and that it has prevented a relapse into conflict in Abyei
and consequently between the two countries.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Allow me to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Nicholas
Haysom for their briefings. I also take this opportunity
to say how much we have appreciated Mr. Haysom’s
dedicated efforts and contributions on the issue of
Abyei over the past two years.
We are pleased to note once again that the
security situation in Abyei remains generally stable.
Indeed, Abyei has become a vibrant hub between the
Sudan and South Sudan and an area of sanctuary for
refugees coming from various communities. That is
a direct result of the stability created by the presence
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) in the area. It is a stark contrast to
the situation of six or seven years ago, and UNISFA
deserves to be commended for what it has been able to
accomplish — essentially, maintaining a peaceful and
stable situation in the Abyei Area.
That, however, should not lead us to let down
our guard. We can have no doubt that the continued
presence of UNISFA is absolutely critical to
maintaining that general stability. Without the presence
of UNISFA, there is still a very real risk of resumption

S/PV. 8357

of intercommunal violence. As the Secretary-General
has said, the success in keeping relative calm in Abyei
and along the border should not be taken as sign that the
issues have been resolved. They have not.
The Sudan and South Sudan may have made
significant progress towards activating the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM).
However, little has been done to implement the 20 June
2011 Agreement between the Government of Sudan and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area. That includes the failure to form the
joint interim institutions that were supposed to be put
in place pending the final resolution of the Abyei issue.
Given that reality, it makes sense to consider
reconfiguring the mission in order to increase its
ability to assist the parties in fully implementing their
agreements. That, after all, was the main reason for the
deployment of UNISFA in the first place. We appreciate
the Secretary-General for taking the initiative in
that regard. We share most of the assessments and
recommendations in his report.
We agree that the tasks of UNISFA along the border
should be aligned and complement what it does in the
Abyei box. We consider JBVMM to be intrinsic to the
mandate of UNISFA. Indeed, what UNISFA has been
able to achieve in maintaining peace and stability in
the Abyei Area has much to do with what it does in
preventing confrontation along the border through the
JBVMM. That should serve as a platform going forward.
Altering those arrangements would have serious
implications on the ground for wider regional stability.
We also concur with the Secretary-General that
the JBVMM remains a vital part of the framework that
regulates the relationship between the two countries.
There has not been a single confrontation between their
armies since the inclusion of the JBVMM as part of
UNISFA’s mandate in 2012. That is a clear testament to
the importance of the operation and functioning of the
Mechanism. We would therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for the Mechanism to be
deployed fully and for the 2012 agreements on security
arrangements and the border to be implemented.
However, we do not think that transferring troops
from the Abyei box to the JBVMM is the right approach
to making the Mechanism fully functional. Reducing the
troop levels in the box would have serious implications.
We strongly advise that the troop levels remain

18-293345/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

unchanged. Additionally, we find it difficult to support
the proposal to deploy police forces at the expense of
troop levels. Certainly, there is merit in the deployment
of police, especially in the absence of the envisaged
Abyei Police Service, but we believe that it is premature
to reduce troop levels in the box in the absence of the
full implementation of the 2012 agreements.
The proposed reinforcement and reconfiguration
of the civilian capacity of the mission are certainly
timely. The population has high expectations that
UNISFA can deliver humanitarian and development
assistance now that it has secured the stability of
the area. A strengthened civilian component could
relieve the troops from taking on additional civilian
responsibilities in the absence of basic administrative
structures. We strongly support the establishment of a
dedicated civilian programme and echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for donors to finance projects focusing
on reconciliation and development and tailored to the
needs of the two communities.
All of this, I must say, strongly underlines the
importance of continuing to engage fully with all
relevant stakeholders, particularly the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan. The consent of
concerned parties is a basic principle of peacekeeping,
and the agreement of both Governments is critical to
any adjustment of UNISFA’s mission concept. That
is all the more important given the unique nature of
UNISFA’s deployment.
I can say with confidence that UNISFA has become
one of our most effective peacekeeping missions. It has
made impressive and hard-won gains. Nevertheless, we
can all recognize the fragility of the relative stability
along the border and in the box. Whatever decisions we
take, we should ensure that they do not negate UNISFA’s
work. We must continue to develop and advance on the
basis of the progress already achieved.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and
South Sudan for their valuable briefings.
Today, I would like to discuss three matters
regarding the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA), namely. the role of the mission, the
renewal of its mandate and the nature of that mandate.
6/19

20/09/2018

First, on the role of the mission, we take note of
the proposals of the Secretary-General, contained in
his letter dated 20 August (S/2018/778). We recognize
the key role of the peacekeeping operation in achieving
relative stability in Abyei. We commend the major role
played by Ethiopian peacekeepers in bringing about and
maintaining stability. UNISFA has become one of the
best peacekeeping operations, and we thank Ethiopia
for its positive role in that regard. The priority of
political solutions must be the Security Council’s focus.
That can be achieved with the support of peacekeeping
operations and in coordination with the host countries.
Secondly, with regard to the renewal of the mission’s
mandate, we hope that this renewal would be in line
with the mission’s role and achievements, including the
continued work of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism which has led to considerably
improve the mission’s performance.
Pertaining to the technical issues, such as the
strength of the mission, the optimal performance of
each of its components and their work sites, these are
matters that can be discussed by the Security Council in
the upcoming weeks in accordance with developments
in Abyei.
Concerning bilateral relations between the Sudan
and South Sudan, there is positive and growing
cooperation, which has been welcomed by the
neighbouring countries, the League of Arab States, the
African Union and the Security Council.
Thirdly, with reference to the nature of the mandate,
having taken note this year of the strategic review of
the mission and following the adoption of resolution
2416 (2018), any amendment to the mission’s mandate
must take into account the agreements reached between
the two sides on Abyei. Since the approval of the parties
is one of the three principles of peacekeeping, and
since UNISFA was established on the basis of bilateral
understandings in 2011 and 2012, any further step must
be taken after consultations between the parties and
securing their consent, and not before.
In conclusion, we underscore our determination to
pursue consultations with the Sudan and South Sudan
in this regard.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his briefing on the situation in Abyei and the mandate
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). We also welcome the recommendations of
the Secretary-General for its reconfiguration.
We also wish to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan, for his briefing.
My delegation will comment on the security and
political situation; the implementation of UNISFA
support measures for the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), pursuant
to the provisions of resolution 2412 (2018); and the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
reconfiguration of UNISFA.
On the political front, Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret
the meagre progress made in the implementation of the
2012 cooperation agreements between the Sudan and
South Sudan. It is our view that, pending the settlement
of the final status of the Area and in order to enhance
stability and ensure the prosperity and development of
the Abyei region, joint institutions must be established
in accordance with agreements between the parties on
the region and their shared border.
Côte d’Ivoire recognizes the complexity of the
political, economic and security situation within each
of the two countries. In that regard, we welcome the
role played by the Sudanese President in resolving the
conflict in South Sudan. However, the stability of the
Abyei Area and peace between the two countries remain
dependent on the genuine political involvement of the
Sudanese and South Sudanese leaders, who should pay
due attention to the area given its significance.
On the security front, my country welcomes the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei to ensure security and stability in the
Area. My delegation also welcomes the efforts of the
Interim Force and various United Nations agencies to
promote dialogue as a means of resolving conflicts
between the various communities living in the area.
Nevertheless, as is rightly pointed out in the SecretaryGeneral’s letter (S/2018/778), the unstable situation in
the Area — which remains a source of concern for my
country — could deteriorate in the absence of a viable
political settlement on the final status of Abyei.
With regard to the implementation of the measures
contained in resolution 2412 (2018), Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the continued support by the Governments of
the Sudan and South Sudan for UNISFA air and ground

S/PV. 8357

patrols, thereby giving the Force greater freedom of
movement in carrying out its mission. My delegation
is also pleased to see the resumption of discussions to
address issues relating to the demarcation of the shared
border. We regret, however, the limited progress made
on the resolution of the political issues included in these
measures, notably the finalization of the agreement
on the three remaining three operating bases of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
and the holding of meetings of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism.
In this regard, Côte d’Ivoire shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view on the need to maintain the support
provided by UNISFA to the Mechanism, given
the stabilizing role it plays in Abyei. We therefore
encourage the authorities of both countries to take
advantage of this support and make further efforts
to implement the various agreements and measures
prescribed by resolution 2412 (2018) and other relevant
Security Council resolutions. My country also believes
that it is incumbent on the Security Council to urge all
parties to become more involved in the expeditious and
full implementation of the border agreements and the
full operationalization of the Mechanism.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the Government of
Ethiopia for its ongoing support in the stabilization
of Abyei, and the commitment of UNISFA, whose
importance in the area is well established. Its impact
in terms of stabilization is undeniable and it has
also contributed to the prevention of clashes among
local populations, as well as between the respective
Sudanese and South Sudanese armed forces for the
past seven years. However, it is important that the
mandate of UNISFA be adapted not only to reflect the
changing situation on the ground but also to enhance
its efficiency in implementing its obligations to protect
civilian populations.
My delegation therefore takes note of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for
the reconfiguration of the mission’s mandate and
welcomes his clarifications on the harmonization of
the roles to be played by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan and the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. We welcome
the recommendations for the implementation of specific
recovery and development programmes for the people
of the Area, in coordination with the United Nations
country team.

18-293347/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire will continue to lend
our full attention to these recommendations, which
will undoubtedly prove enlightening to Council
members in their discussions on the renewal of the
UNISFA mandate.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Special Envoy Haysom for their comprehensive updates
on the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) and for their efforts to support the Sudan and
South Sudan in settling the outstanding issues between
the two countries on Abyei.
My
delegation
welcomes
the
SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on the adjustment of
the UNISFA mandate and would like to share the
following observations.
Kazakhstan considers that long-term stability
and peace in Abyei can be achieved only through the
full implementation of the Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security
of the Abyei Area of June 2011 and the cooperation
agreement of September 2012. We note the importance
of the work carried out by the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel under the leadership of
President Mbeki to provide political support to advance
implementation of the agreements.
We are worried that, despite the stable security
situation, there has been insufficient progress on
the final status of Abyei. We therefore support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to enhance
the mission’s role in the settlement of border disputes
and the final status of Abyei, in close collaboration with
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel.
We commend UNISFA for successfully facilitating
stability and reconciliation between the two
communities and mitigating intercommunal violence
in Abyei. We underscore the important role of the
UNISFA police component in maintaining law and
order through community-based interactive patrols
and the capacity-building of community protection
committees. UNISFA should continue its negotiations
with both sides to establish community protection
committees in northern Abyei, as well as to support
joint peace committee meetings.
8/19

20/09/2018

Despite some delays in the operationalization of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(JBVMM), the two Governments have made important
steps towards the full functioning of the Mechanism.
We reiterate that the Mechanism plays a critical role
in maintaining stability in Abyei and in preventing
confrontations along the Sudan-South Sudan border.
We therefore generally support the Secretary-General’s
proposals to make several changes to the UNISFA
concept with regard to its military, police and civilian
components. At the same time, any decision on such a
reconfiguration should be made in discussion and by
agreement among the two countries.
We also underscore the importance of the suggestion
to foster the nexus between peace and development by
implementing programmes that would benefit both
communities, and we join the Secretary-General’s call
on donors to allocate funding for projects that focus
on development and reconciliation. We hope that those
recommendations will be accepted during the renewal
of the UNISFA mandate.
Finally, we would like to pay tribute to Special
Envoy Haysom and the Ethiopian military contingent
for their dedication to and laudable efforts in preserving
peace and stability in the Abyei Area, and we assure
them of Kazakhstan’s full support.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency of
the United States for convening today’s meeting in this
format. It has been a long time since we discussed this
topic in an open meeting.
We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for the
information that they have shared with the Security
Council today.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia agrees with the
Secretary-General that the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is one of the most
successful peacekeeping missions. We highlight the
commitment of its staff and the cooperation of the
Government of Ethiopia, which have led to the current
state of relative stability in Abyei and along the border
between the Sudan and South Sudan.
While we emphasize the stability of the Area, we
recognize that the political, humanitarian and security
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

situation continues to present challenges, to which
UNISFA is responding within its means, limited by
several factors beyond its control. It is clear to us
that it is the Governments of both countries that must
advance more in the development of measures to build
mutual trust, which would allow for the implementation
of the 2011 Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area and
for identifying the definitive status of the Area.
In that regard, we have taken note of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to adjust
the UNISFA mandate. We agree in principle that
its objective should be the implementation of the
cooperation agreements with respect to border issues,
security arrangements and the final status of Abyei,
in collaboration with the African Union Commission
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel. Similarly, we agree that it is necessary for
UNISFA to reinforce its support for the parties in the
implementation of the signed agreements.
We commend the good offices of UNISFA for
bringing the parties together and rekindling the political
process, as well as promoting understanding and
reconciliation between the Dinka Ngok and Misseriya
communities by promoting coexistence between them
through commercial activities and the creation of
community protection committees, helping to establish
bonds of trust that are critical to the inhabitants of the
area. In particular, we must continue working to further
reduce the tensions in the Amiet common market,
which, as we know, is the economic centre of the region
and allows for the meeting of both parties.
Another important point for my delegation is,
undoubtedly, maintaining UNISFA support for the
development of the operational capacity of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
is crucial to maintaining good relations between both
countries. Moreover, while emphasizing that UNISFA
cannot replace the role of the State, the cooperation of
both countries is necessary in consolidating institutions
that manage the area properly and can guarantee
basic services to the population of Abyei. Likewise,
international cooperation is critical to financing projects
that meet the needs of the communities of the area,
mainly in the areas of reconciliation and development.

S/PV. 8357

We wish to take advantage of the presence of the
representative of the Sudan to commend the role that
his country has played in the signing of the recent
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, and we understand that the
process may have delayed the meetings of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. While it is necessary
to take such variables into account, we encourage the
parties to hold meetings of the Mechanism that could
lead to concrete results.
Finally, we thank the Secretary-General for
the recommendations he has presented. Bolivia
supports the extension of the UNISFA mandate while
maintaining its operational capacity and support for
the Mechanism, as well as continuing to encourage the
parties to work together to establish specific measures,
as we did in resolution 2386 (2017). Any change to
the mission’s mandate must first be coordinated with
the countries involved and based on consultations
with troop-contributing countries and regional and
subregional organizations, and take the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations into account.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for
their informative briefings.
This meeting comes at an important time for the
Sudan and South Sudan. The situation on the ground
in Abyei is stable, there are significant improvements
in the relations between the two countries and the
signing of the peace agreement to revitalize the 2011
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan give rise to hope, even though
we are all aware that we should be cautious regarding
its implementation. On that point, we must be not only
proactive, but also clear-sighted and insistent.
In that regard, I wish to broach two points, first, on
the implementation of the requests made by the Security
Council concerning border demarcation, and, secondly,
on the Secretary-General’s proposals regarding the
evolution of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA).
In resolution 2416 (2018), the Council set out clear
objectives for the parties regarding border demarcation
and, in the light of the facts outlined by Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, our clear observation is that the progress made

18-293349/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

does not meet our expectations. There has been some
progress, in particular the issuance of authorizations
for UNISFA patrols and Saturday’s meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. However, the overall
outcome is disappointing, especially with regard to the
establishment of operating bases for the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism or the opening
of border-crossing corridors.
We are aware of the constraints on the parties. The
rainy season is making work difficult and peace efforts
in South Sudan have monopolized the mission’s efforts.
However, we strongly encourage the parties to do more,
faster, to make progress on border demarcation. In that
context, UNISFA must continue to play a vital role, but
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
must allow us to adapt it to the situation on the ground.
In that respect, I would like to underline four points.
First, the proposed choice to strengthen the
political posture of UNISFA must be supported. Indeed,
stabilizing Abyei and the border is essential; that has
been a major achievement for UNISFA. However, it
is also necessary for UNISFA to contribute more to
the political settlement of the Abyei issue and other
border disputes. Naturally, UNISFA is in no way a
substitute for the work of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel or the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, which we fully support.
Secondly, the proposed scaling up of the police
component would respond to the challenge of rising
crime in the region. That is a key issue, as we must
not allow a culture of impunity to develop, particularly
with regard to sexual assault.
Thirdly, the proposed redeployment and overall
reduction of the military component are also a move in
the right direction. That must be undertaken sensibly in
order to preserve the stability of Abyei and the border.
The balance that we wish to strike is of course to seek to
improve the effectiveness of the Force without running
the risk of weakening it or undermining the stability of
the region.
Finally, I would like to emphasize relations
with local stakeholders and populations. UNISFA
must support local initiatives that are useful to the
political process. It is important for the country team
to be encouraged to develop projects focused on
reconciliation and development, in the spirit of and in
accordance with the Secretary-General’s sustaining
peace initiative, which must guide all our actions.
10/19

20/09/2018

In conclusion, I congratulate and warmly thank the
Special Envoy for the excellent work he has done, and
wish him much success in his new position.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to first
extend our thanks to our briefers for their updates this
morning on the situation.
We welcome the fact that the security situation in
Abyei has remained relatively calm, while we are aware
that the situation still remains unpredictable and tense.
The situation could quickly deteriorate and, in that
case, have unacceptable consequences for civilians.
Also, considering the instability in nearby areas, we
very much agree with the Secretary-General that the
continued presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains crucial.
We commend the work of the mission and the
Ethiopian troops carrying out that important mandate.
Protecting civilians, securing access for humanitarian
assistance, mediating migration-based conflicts,
facilitating the return of displaced persons and
demilitarizing the border region are all tasks that are
vital to upholding stability in the Area.
Seven years after UNISFA’s creation, we are
regrettably no closer to a political solution. The
current impasse cannot be allowed to continue, and
we must step up efforts to find new ways forward.
UNISFA needs to remain part of the path towards
the normalization of relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan. United Nations efforts should always aim
at reaching political solutions, and its mission should be
calibrated to advance that objective. That is also true for
UNISFA. The implementation of the relevant chapters
of the cooperation agreement — namely, border issues
and security arrangements, and the settlement of the
final status of Abyei — is the end state that needs to
be achieved. We therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to give the mission an
augmented role in supporting the political process.
In that context, we also commend the work of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and UNISFA’s cooperation with the Panel must be
maintained and further synergies with the efforts of the
African Union should be sought.
We share the sense of frustration that the parties
have not built on the positive momentum of last spring
and carried through the actions that were expected of
them. Some efforts have been made and small positive
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

steps taken, but much more needs to be done to reach
a political settlement that addresses the underlying
issues. We hope that the recent positive developments
in the relations between the Sudan and South Sudan can
also contribute to reaching a political solution on the
future status of Abyei.
The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JVBMM) is a vital part of the framework
that regulates the relationship between the Sudan and
South Sudan, which also contributes to overall stability
in the border area. As stated in the Secretary-General’s
letter (S/2018/778), no single confrontation between the
parties’ forces has taken place since the inclusion of the
JBVMM in the mission’s mandate in 2012. We agree
that there is a need to push for further progress, rather
than risk the gains that have been made.
Furthermore, in the absence of the envisaged
temporary institutions, UNISFA has been carrying
out crucial tasks in areas that were not foreseen. We
particularly commend the work done in addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and children’s
rights. There is a serious governance vacuum, and the
mission must be equipped to appropriately address that.
It should, for example, have the tools to also support
mediation opportunities and address essential law and
order issues.
Let me conclude by extending our sincere thanks
to Special Envoy Haysom for his relentless engagement
and invaluable contribution to that work. His efforts
have contributed not only to the issue before us today,
but to the whole region. We will miss the clarity and
straightforwardness of his briefings, but we also look
forward to continuing to closely work with him in his
new important role in Somalia.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Special Envoy Haysom for their excellent briefings.
There are three issues that I will raise today that are
of key concern for the Kingdom of the Netherlands: first,
the progress on the implementation of the benchmarks,
and I was glad that the Under-Secretary-General was
so specific about those; secondly, the importance of
stability in the region; and thirdly, accountability and
the rule of law.
First, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
disappointed by the lack of progress on border
demarcation. The majority of the measures set out in

S/PV. 8357

resolution 2412 (2018) have not been implemented.
We welcome the clearances for patrols. Those are
important to facilitating the full freedom of movement
for the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) and the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM). But we are still
waiting for a number of important steps, and those
include the meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism that are supposed to breathe new life into
efforts to find a sustainable solution for the Abyei region.
The announcement that the Mechanism will convene
later this week is encouraging, but we reiterate the need
to see concrete progress on the implementation of the
benchmarks from resolution 2412 (2018). The Kingdom
of the Netherlands expresses appreciation for the recent
efforts of the region towards peace in South Sudan,
and we are hopeful that this will be a fundamental step
towards peace in the region. It thereby has the potential
to improve the enabling environment for the JBVMM.
Secondly, I want to emphasize that stability in the
region remains our primary objective. The letter of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/778) underlines once again
the essential role of UNISFA in guaranteeing stability
in the Abyei and border areas. The Security Council has
a long-standing commitment to peace and security in
that region, and it continues to play a role in preventing
violence from escalating further. We therefore support
the recommendations of the Secretary-General. In
particular, we believe that it is important to create a
political space as the next step forward. Adding a
civilian component to the mission would contribute to
that objective.
Thirdly and finally, I would like to stress the
importance of the rule of law and accountability for a
stable future in Abyei. We support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that the peace/development
nexus should be enhanced; in particular, justice and
accountability mechanisms need to be strengthened.
We see an important role for the United Nations
country teams to play in that respect. Criminality is
rising in the Abyei region in the absence of domestic
security forces. It is vital to build the rule-of-law
capacity in local communities. We therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to increase
the police component of the mission; in particular,
deploying female officers could serve a crucial role. We
encourage the Secretary-General to increase his efforts
to do so.

18-2933411/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, recent developments show a mixed
picture. On the one hand, there is disappointment over
the progress on the benchmarks, and on the other,
there have been encouraging developments towards
peace in the region. The Abyei border conflict remains
unresolved. In the coming weeks, the Council will
decide on the way forward for the mission. In doing
so, we should all work towards long-term stability in
the region.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank our briefers — Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Nicholas
Haysom — for the information they have shared with us
today. Since this is most probably the last time that we
are hearing from Special Envoy Haysom in the Council
in his current capacity, I would like to convey our
appreciation for his hard work and commitment, and
wish him all the best in his new assignment in Somalia.
Let me focus my intervention on two points: the
current situation in Abyei and the work of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
We take note of the relatively stable security
situation in Abyei at the moment, but at the same time
we recognize the challenges that remain on the political,
humanitarian and economic fronts. We note with regret
the lack of progress in the political process and the fact
that an administrative vacuum still exists in the Abyei
Area. The absence of effective formal authorities in
Abyei results in limited law enforcement and a lack of
good governance and the rule of law. It also hinders
the delivery of basic services to the population and
in particular affects access to safe drinking water,
education and health services.
I would like to emphasize that the primary
responsibility for the implementation of the 2011 and
2012 agreements lies with the Governments of both
countries. Poland believes that the Security Council
should remain unified in its messaging and encourage
the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan
to swiftly establish the joint mechanisms in their
full capabilities, normalize border arrangements
and — in the long-term perspective — elaborate a
political solution that will lead to lasting peace in Abyei.
Let me also stress the need to include women and youth
in the ongoing political process. There can be no doubt
that the current relative stability in Abyei is a result
of the role played by UNISFA. In that regard, Poland
12/19

20/09/2018

would like to commend the efforts of the Ethiopian
troops and all of the United Nations personnel in Abyei.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
recommendations on how to adjust UNISFA to the
current situation in Abyei and the needs of border
communities of the Sudan and of South Sudan. We
agree that the Interim Force has to be able to meet
the needs on the ground. Therefore, UNISFA should
stand ready to engage in achieving a political solution
in Abyei and to support the implementation of the
agreements between the Sudan and South Sudan, in
cooperation with the African Union Commission and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
We believe that the suggested reconfiguration of the
mission’s tasks should be taken into account by the
Council and that further consultations thereon should
be held with the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as with
the African Union.
Let me conclude by stressing that there can be no
other way for the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve
the question of Abyei than through dialogue, including
intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation, and a
genuine political process. UNISFA’s presence remains
crucial for the stability of Abyei, but it cannot substitute
for the role of the State. Poland believes that the Security
Council should remain united on this issue and support
all efforts aimed at achieving a lasting solution to the
status of Abyei.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, and the Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Haysom, for
their briefings.
The situation at present in the Abyei Area is
generally stable. There are obvious changes when
compared to what prevailed six years ago. China
appreciates the efforts of the Governments of the Sudan
and of South Sudan, the African Union (AU), the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
and the international community.
A few days ago, the parties in South Sudan officially
signed the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which laid
an important foundation for ending the conflict and
achieving peace in South Sudan. The Agreement also
created favourable conditions for further improving
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan and for
properly settling the Abyei issue. China continues to
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

believe that a political solution to the Abyei issue is the
only way out. The Security Council and the international
community should strengthen coordination and provide
constructive help.
First, it is important to fully respect the leadership
of the Sudan and of South Sudan on the Abyei issue.
Those are the countries concerned. Furthermore, the
issue cannot be resolved without their cooperation and
coordination. The international community should
maintain the enthusiasm of the two countries in
committing themselves to a political settlement of the
Abyei issue, help consolidate their good neighbourly
relations, enhance their mutual trust and deepen their
pragmatic cooperation in the Abyei Area. Actions
contrary to the consensus of the two countries must
be avoided.
Secondly, it is important to let the AU and other
regional organizations act as the main channel
of mediation. The African Union High-level
Implementation Panel has long overcome many
difficulties, actively carried out good offices and played
an important bridging role in achieving reconciliation
between the Sudan and South Sudan. The international
community should continue to provide the necessary
support for the AU to carry out its work.
Thirdly, it is important to support UNISFA’s
continued delivery of its mandate which, in accordance
with the mandate of the Council, has supported the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and has
played a key role in stabilizing the border of the Sudan
and South Sudan. China supports UNISFA’s continued
implementation of its mandate, for which China
hopes that the international community will provide
constructive help. China has noted that the SecretaryGeneral addressed a letter to the Security Council
(S/2018/778) a few days ago in which he proposed
reorganizing UNISFA and adjusting its mandate in
the light of the latest developments. Concerning the
relevant recommendations, we hope the SecretaryGeneral will further communicate and coordinate with
the Sudanese and South Sudanese Governments, the
AU and the relevant troop-contributing countries. We
also hope that he will fully heed their views in order
to bring into better play the role of the peacekeeping
forces and to help advance the proper settlement of the
Abyei issue.
China has always attached great importance to
peace and development in Africa and has always

S/PV. 8357

supported the solution of African issues by African
countries and with African methods. China is willing
to continue to work with African countries and the
international community to contribute to the promotion
of peace, stability and development in Africa.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Nicholas Haysom for
their important briefings.
First, we want to highlight the role that the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
plays in Abyei in maintaining relative security in
the Area and in allowing communities access to
humanitarian aid. We believe, however, that it is
imperative to revive the political process and fill the
governance and administrative vacuum in Abyei.
In the light of that, we wish to express our support
for the Secretary-General’s recommendations for a
reconfiguration of the UNISFA mandate. We trust
that a more active role for UNISFA in supporting the
implementation of the agreements between the Sudan
and South Sudan, and its coordination and cooperation
with the African Union Commission and the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, will enable the
final objective of the mission and guide Abyei towards
the consolidation of sustainable peace.
We deem it appropriate that UNISFA be able to
contribute to the resolution of border disputes and, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, that it be able
to concentrate its military component in the border
areas where security threats are greater. In that regard,
we must recognize the important role of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism to maintain
stable relations between the Sudan and South Sudan,
and express our concern about how little progress has
been made in implementing the measures established
by the Council in resolution 2412 (2018).
We hope that the recent developments in the Horn
of Africa subregion will provide the necessary impetus
to the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan
to move forward with concrete measures leading to the
resolution of the question of the status of Abyei and
the establishment of the common border. At the same
time, we think it desirable that UNISFA support the
strengthening of institutions that guarantee governance,
the rule of law and public order in Abyei. In that sense,
we value the recommendation to deploy police units in

18-2933413/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/09/2018

the main population centres and specialized agents in
all the bases of operations.

services. The two Governments should also cooperate
with UNISFA in that regard.

In line with the need to address the root causes of
the conflict, we hope that the measures recommended
by the Secretary-General, such as the creation of a
specific programme for the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities, will be taken into account to promote
development and reconciliation in Abyei.

It is important that the mission play a more active
and proactive role in support of a political solution
to resolve the final status of Abyei, including the
implementation by the Sudan and South Sudan of the
agreements concluded in 2011 on border issues and
security arrangements.

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Mr. Haysom, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and South Sudan, for their very
informative and enlightening briefings on the reality in
the Abyei Area. The inhabitants of Abyei have already
suffered for too long. That is why we believe that the
current stability in the Area must continue.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our
congratulations to all those that have facilitated the
progress in the Abyei Area that we mentioned today,
namely, the African Union, UNISFA and the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
have demonstrated commendable resolve in the pursuit
of peace and security in the border area. We urge them
to keep up the momentum and the spirit of commitment
required in order to implement the agreements to which
I referred.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the progress made in
fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We therefore
support its activities in the Area and consider it a
significant factor in ending the conflict that has brought
suffering to the inhabitants of Abyei. It is important
that the parties refrain from taking actions that could
complicate the situation.
However, we are concerned about the internal
political tensions, the continuing simmering disputes
and the fact that the parties have not made use of the
relative calm on their borders to properly address the
situation in order to resolve the outstanding issues.
In that regard, we would therefore like to encourage
the parties involved — the Sudan and South Sudan — to
act responsibly and to implement the measures adopted
concerning their borders. I am referring to the
Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of the
Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan signed in
September 2012, which has played a stabilizing role in
the Area. Without that step, it will be very difficult to
strengthen the desired peace in the Area.
Furthermore, in that context the Security Council
must play a constructive role in supporting the efforts of
UNISFA to fulfil its mandate. We wish to commend its
work in facilitating access to humanitarian assistance
and its delivery, since there continue to be significant
humanitarian needs, which could be exacerbated by the
tensions among the communities and the lack of basic
14/19

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his briefing. I would also like to thank Special Envoy
Mr. Nicholas Haysom both for his briefing and for his
excellent work during his tenure to support peace and
stability between South Sudan and the Sudan. We look
forward to working with him in his new role.
I would like to touch on three issues. First, I
would like to talk about the progress that has been
made by the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA), and particularly by the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM),
against the benchmarks set out in resolution 2412
(2018). The United Kingdom welcomes the maintenance
of standing clearance for all UNISFA air and ground
patrols, along with the support of both Governments
for the mission, particularly in ceasing to obstruct
the movements of the mission, as we saw in previous
reporting periods. However, as the representative of
the Netherlands said, the lack of progress against other
benchmarks has been disappointing. We urge both
Governments to devote their efforts to changing that.
Establishing the four remaining JBVMM team sites and
holding two meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism must be a priority.
While the efforts of both Governments are
essential to progress, we recognize, as Special Envoy
Haysom said, that the wider dynamics, including both
the commendable focus of the two Governments on the
South Sudan peace process and a lack of agreement
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

among the local communities for the JBVMM team
sites, have contributed to the delays. We therefore
believe that it is essential, as the representative of
France said, that UNISFA and the JBVMM engage
the local communities so that their concerns can be
considered and their support garnered.
Secondly, let me touch on the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for UNISFA, which, broadly
speaking, we welcome. We support the recommendation
to augment the civilian component of UNIFSA,
particularly through the deployment of community
liaison officers. We also acknowledge the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to deploy a civilian Deputy
Head of Mission. We commend UNIFSA for improving
the security situation in Abyei and for reducing the need
for a large military presence in the Area. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that the UNIFSA military component concentrate
its deployment along the borders of the Abyei Area
in the light of the finding that cross-border military
action is the most likely threat to security in the Area.
Despite the improvements to the security situation, like
many other speakers, we are concerned by reports of
increased criminality within the Abyei Area and about
the continued delays to establish the joint administrative
arrangements, including the Abyei police service. We
therefore fully support the recommendation to deploy
three formed police units to the three major population
centres in the Abyei Area.
Thirdly, and finally — again as other speakers
have said — only a political settlement can address the
underlying causes of the conflict and ensure that longterm stability for the people of Abyei is a reality. It is
therefore the responsibility of the Security Council to
ensure that the mission is resourced appropriately to
support that overarching aim. We very much welcome
Special Envoy Haysom’s sense of optimism, which
I detected, with regard to the fact that the Sudan and
South Sudan are now more willing and more able to
make progress on the political track. I look forward to
hearing from the representatives of both those countries
today as to how they intend to do that. Of course, they
will have our full support.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy
Nicholas Haysom for their substantive briefings.

S/PV. 8357

We believe that the continuation of the joint efforts
of the parties, including the political dialogue at the
highest level, are key to the successful progress of the
intra-Sudanese peace process. The basis for cooperation
between Khartoum and Juba exists, namely, the
bilateral agreements concluded in September 2012
in Addis Ababa, as well as the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We welcome the improvement recently noted in
the relations between the two Sudans. We pay tribute
to the effective participation of Khartoum in the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to revitalize the South Sudanese
Peace Agreement.
We note the efforts of the African Union and its
High-level Implementation Panel under the leadership of
Mr. Thabo Mbeki. We hope that the Panel will continue
to be an important mechanism for promoting the
normalization of relations between the two countries.
We note with satisfaction the generally stable
situation in Abyei, as well as the constructive relations
of the personnel of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNIFSA) with the local inhabitants
and the measures taken by UNIFSA to prevent
intercommunal clashes.
Among the positive aspects, we would also like
to highlight the periodic holding of meetings of peace
committees with representatives of the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya communities. We welcome the fact that
law enforcement and economic matters are addressed
at such events. It is important that the Amiet common
market is slowly becoming the economic hub not
only for Abyei but for the region as a whole. We are
convinced that it has contributed to strengthening trust
and reconciliation between the two communities.
We regret that not all of the provisions of the
inter-Sudanese Agreement of 20 June 2011 are being
implemented. A power vacuum remains in the Area.
The demilitarized status of Abyei and the buffer zone
along the inter-Sudanese border is being violated. We
would like to see increased regular contact between the
leaders of the Sudan and South Sudan.
With regard to the enhanced Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), we
welcome the progress made by the parties in fulfilling
their obligations to make it fully operational. We believe
that the JBVMM is an important element in preventing

18-2933415/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/09/2018

incidents between the two parties. We continue to
believe that scaling back UNISFA support for the
Mechanism could completely paralyse the structure
and have a negative impact on the prospects for a full
resolution to the situation in Abyei. Guided by that, we
supported the adoption of resolution 2412 (2018), which
extended the UNISFA mandate by six months. We will
be ready to support a similar extension in October.

to strengthen ties, resolve disputes and increase peace
and security have greatly contributed to the general
calm in the contested Area between the Sudan and
South Sudan. It is now time to ensure that we can
reconfigure the mission to reflect the new realities on
the ground and better address its existing security and
administrative concerns, as the Council unanimously
endorsed in the recent mandate renewal.

We took note of the letter of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/778), which includes proposals on
reconfiguring UNISFA. We believe that the issue must
be carefully addressed and examined. We understand
that there is little progress being made in resolving the
Abyei dispute. We note that a whole range of factors has
prevented Khartoum and Juba from demonstrating the
flexibility required to resolve the final status of Abyei.
In that regard, UNISFA plays a very important role
in maintaining stability in the region. Once again, we
would like to recall that UNISFA is operating within
the confines of traditional peacekeeping, in which
the parties to the conflict are States. When making
decisions on reconfiguring the Mission, it is important
to be guided by the basic principles of peacekeeping.
We believe that the changes proposed by the Secretariat
with regard to strengthening the civilian component
and changing the mandate and personnel ceiling of the
mission must first be supported by both Khartoum and
Juba. We must also take into account the views of the
troop-contributing countries. If not, the effect of the
reconfiguration could be the exact opposite of what
is intended.

Our
analysis
of
the
Secretary-General’s
reconfiguration recommendations is that they are
a good start to align UNISFA with realities on the
ground, but they do not go far enough. We believe that
significant security gains in recent years warrant a
reduction in the overall number of uniformed personnel
in the mission. The improved security situation in the
Abyei Area and other border areas no longer demands
the current level of military personnel. Thanks to the
firm benchmarks established by the Council, there has
been some progress in the past year to operationalize the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(JBVMM). However, the parties have not met all of the
benchmarks outlined by the Council, as other speakers
have pointed out.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing and for the explanation of the recommendations
for the reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). I also thank
Special Envoy Haysom for his briefing. Let me take
this opportunity to express our gratitude for all of
his contributions as Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and South Sudan. We are sorry
to lose his skills and knowledge on the portfolio but
we wish him the best of luck in his next role with the
United Nations in Somalia.
The United States appreciates UNISFA’s successful
work to stabilize Abyei, and specifically commends
Ethiopia for its contributions. The mission’s efforts to
stabilize the Area and to work with local communities
16/19

More than half a decade since its creation, the
JBVMM has still not realized its full potential. We
regret the fact that the parties have not convened a
Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting and
that progress on other benchmarks appear stalled. We
urge the parties to take steps to meet the benchmarks
laid out in resolution 2412 (2018) before the deadline of
15 October. The Security Council should not, and the
United States will not, indefinitely support a Mechanism
that remains underutilized and is not making progress
on resolving the political issues at the root of UNISFA’s
JBVMM support mandate, especially if the parties are
unwilling to fully commit to the political process and
disregard Security Council benchmarks.
We agree with the Secretary-General that a
reorientation towards a police-style mission is
necessary in order to solidify the peace and stability
that the Ethiopian peacekeepers have worked so hard
to secure. The establishment of the Abyei police
service and the provision of a full-spectrum police
service remain essential steps in maintaining stability,
while also enabling UNISFA’s eventual withdrawal.
We agree with the Secretary-General that a strong
civilian component is necessary for UNISFA to operate
effectively and create the space to resolve underlying
political issues. The civilian component would assist
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

both sides and all communities in maintaining stability,
preventing intercommunal conflict and implementing
past agreements. We appreciate the role of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel in facilitating
the settlement of the Abyei dispute. We urge the Panel
to continue its mediation efforts to reach an agreement
on Abyei’s final status and to continue encouraging the
parties to implement past agreements.
In missions that generally work well, such as
UNISFA, we must give credit where it is due. Therefore,
I thank Ethiopia and others that provide personnel
and resources to the mission. However, we must
think critically about efficiently managing our scarce
resources and applying them appropriately to the tasks
at hand. We must also question whether or not all of those
tasks remain appropriate and necessary. Peacekeeping
missions, even ones that generally work well, must have
exit strategies and adapt to the changing circumstances
and realities of the situation on the ground. For
UNISFA, it means a reconfiguration towards realistic
police and troop allocations, a strong civilian presence
and renewed commitment by the parties to finding a
permanent solution to the outstanding issues.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): We are delighted
to report to the Security Council for the second time
under your presidency, Sir. We would like to recognize
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy
Haysom for their briefings. We would also like to wish
Mr. Haysom the best of luck in his new assignment.
On behalf of our Government, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s letter regarding the reconfiguration
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) and the situation in the Abyei Area
(S/2018/778). The proposals the Secretary-General is
recommending have been well received by the Dinka
Ngok. I hope that the Council was able to read the
letter of the Ngok Dinka chiefdoms, which we sent to
it yesterday.
While we welcome the proposals and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, we would
like to express our concerns regarding the proposed
migration police liaising with the resident Misseriya
community in the Abyei Area, because, in the long
run, that practice may legitimize illegal residency and

S/PV. 8357

further occupation of Dinka lands, which continue
to discourage the return of Ngok Dinka internally
displaced persons to their rightful lands.
Regarding the benchmarks, our Government is still
committed to engaging the Government of the Sudan
to work together with it to achieve the benchmarks.
However, as the Council may know, for technical
reasons, the two sides have not been able to meet
regularly, especially while the region was preoccupied
with the revitalized Peace Agreement negotiations. But
we are now reliably informed, that a meeting of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism is scheduled to
take place on 23 and 24 September in Addis Ababa.
With regard to resolution 2416 (2018), my delegation
would like to propose a way of implementing paragraph
6. Members may recall that paragraph 6 instructs the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel to
update the Security Council on progress made by the
parties on the implementation of the Agreement on
Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and
Security of the Abyei Area and on progress made on
the settlement of the final status and two other issues.
Since the parties have not been meeting consistently,
we would like to propose that the parties directly update
the Security Council, jointly or individually.
In conclusion, if it seems that there has been relative
peace in the Abyei areas in recent years, it is because,
to quote from the letter of the Dinka Ngok chiefs,
“We fully agree that UNISFA has performed quite
well over the past seven years of its presence in
the Abyei Area. It has practically averted further
confrontation between the Sudan and South Sudan,
particularly over Abyei. Furthermore, we believe
that the proposed adjustments to the UNISFA
mandate will add more dimensions to a sustainable
peace across borders and between communities
interacting within the Abyei box”.
Therefore, to enhance the current UNISFA force level
with the proposed police element would be a prudent
and wise decision on the part of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I also wish to congratulate your predecessor, the
Representative of the United Kingdom, on her efforts

18-2933417/19

S/PV.8357

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

while assuming the presidency of the Council last month.
I want as well to assure you of the full cooperation of
my country’s delegation with you.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of my country to cooperate with the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
so that it can fulfil its mandate pursuant to resolution
1990 (2011). I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report to the Security Council (S/2018/778), as well as
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I
also would like to wish Special Envoy Haysom every
success in his new post.
We should not forget the positive, and even
the ideal, circumstances that made it possible to
successfully conclude an agreement in July 2011 on
the final status of Abyei. That was a direct result of
the full commitment to the right to self-determination
of South Sudan, which was the basis of the 2005
comprehensive Peace Agreement. That Agreement was
an international negotiated one that led to a commitment
to strengthening the points of convergence among
the two sisterly countries and to avoid the use of any
non-peaceful means.
We agreed at the time that we are one people in
two States. We believe in the moral obligation as
well as the legal commitment to respect the Abyei
Agreement, which also addresses the final status of
this integral part of the Sudanese territory. I would like
to underscore that the stability and security currently
prevailing in Abyei and the significant progress being
made in terms of coexistence between Misseriya
and Ngok Dinka communities, as documented in the
report recently presented to the Council, are the direct
outcome of efforts deployed by the Government and
the communities, as well as the positive role played by
UNISFA since its establishment.
Wisdom dictates the need for cooperation among
all partners to further consolidate security and stability.
It likewise requires that the parties distance themselves
from any actions or decisions that could undermine
that stability before the final legal status of Abyei is
determined. Until then, Abyei is an integral part of
Sudanese territory, and the Sudanese Government
exercises full sovereignty over that territory.
I wish to recall what the members of the Security
Council asserted last year, namely, that achieving
security and stability in Abyei is a feat in itself, and
that should be preserved and further strengthened.
18/19

20/09/2018

The Government of the Sudan took note of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, and expressed its reservations on
some of them because they are in contravention of
the 20 June 2011 Agreement between the Government
of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) on Temporary Arrangements for
the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area,
which is the basis of all arrangements regarding Abyei,
including the deployment of UNISFA. Indeed, the two
parties to the Agreement — that is, the Government
of the Sudan and the People’s Liberation Movement of
Sudan, which later became the Government of South
Sudan — remain bound by that Agreement until the
final status of Abyei is determined.
I wish to quote from article 41:
“This Agreement and the Abyei Protocol (except
as modified by the terms herein) shall continue to
apply until such time as the final status of Abyei
has been resolved.”
I would also like to recall article 29 of the same
Agreement, which links any amendment in the
UNISFA mandate to the consent of both parties to the
Agreement. That Article reads as follows:
“The Government of Sudan and the SPLM will
request the United Nations Security Council to
approve the deployment and mandate of the ISFA,
with the understanding that the mandate referred
to in paragraph 27 of this Agreement shall not be
changed without agreement of the Government of
Sudan, the SPLM and the Government of Ethiopia.”
My country’s Government underscores its
commitment to implementing all the agreements
reached with the Republic of South Sudan, beginning
with the 2004 Protocol on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Abyei Area, the Agreement on Provisional
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area and the 27 September 2012 agreement
on bilateral cooperation. We call on our brothers and
sisters in the Government of South Sudan to cooperate
meaningfully with the Government of the Sudan and
the African Union in order to accelerate the setting up
of institutions in Abyei pursuant to the Agreement of
June 2011. That would make it possible to resolve the
final status of Abyei. Those institutions include a joint
administration in Abyei, a joint legislative council and a
joint police service. We all agree that those institutions
are essential and indispensable for administering the
18-29334

20/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Area and establishing peace, providing basic services
to the population, strengthening coexistence among
the various communities and creating the appropriate,
required and necessary conditions towards resolving
Abyei’s final status, so as to meet the aspirations of all
stakeholders within a setting that is acceptable to all.
Allow me to reiterate the need to consider the
issue of Abyei as part of the overall relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan, taking into account the
developments in the internal situations of the two
countries. My country’s delegation hopes that the
latest developments will make it possible to strengthen
bilateral relations and address the pending issues, at
the top of which is the issue of Abyei, especially given
that the Sudan has hosted peace negotiations between
the South Sudanese parties and exerted tireless efforts,
with the recognition of the Security Council, which on

S/PV. 8357

12 September led to the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
In conclusion, allow me once again to thank all our
partners who have endeavoured to facilitate the work of
UNISFA, in particular the Government of the sisterly
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the African
Union Peace and Security Council, the African Union
Commission, the High-level Implementation Panel, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan and the staff of UNISFA, along with
the Secretariat. I also reiterate the Sudan’s commitment
to continue working with UNISFA in order to allow it
to carry out all its tasks. I support what Mr. Lacroix
and certain members of the Council have said, namely,
about the importance of holding more consultations in
order to strengthen the existing positive situation and
promote our collective determination on the issue.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

18-2933419/19
