UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/34
19 June 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3790th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 June 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations", the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
"The Security Council has considered the matter of protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations and
has given careful consideration to the views expressed in the debate on the
matter at its 3778th meeting on 21 May 1997.
"The Security Council notes that massive displacement of civilian
populations in conflict situations may pose a serious challenge to
international peace and security. The Council, in seeking protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations,
underlines the importance of pursuing a coordinated and comprehensive
approach in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the recent
increase in attacks or use of force in conflict situations against refugees
and other civilians, in violation of the relevant rules of international
law, including those of international humanitarian law. The Council
reiterates its condemnation of such acts and once again calls upon all
those concerned to comply strictly with the relevant rules of international
law. In particular, it calls upon all parties concerned to ensure the
safety of refugees, displaced persons and other civilians, and guarantee
the unimpeded and safe access of United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel to those in need.
"The Security Council also expresses its grave concern at all attacks
or use of force against United Nations and other personnel associated with
United Nations operations as well as personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in violation of the relevant rules of international law,
including those of international humanitarian law. In this context, the
Council recalls its resolution 868 (1993) and the statement by its
President of 12 March 1997 (S/PRST/1997/13). It also recalls the

97-16620 (E)

190697

/...

S/PRST/1997/34
English
Page 2

Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel adopted
by the General Assembly on 9 December 1994. In this context, it calls upon
all parties concerned to ensure the safety and security of these personnel
as well as personnel of humanitarian organizations, and encourages all
States to consider ways and means to strengthen the protection of such
personnel.
"The Security Council reminds all States and others concerned of the
need to bring to justice those who violate international humanitarian law.
In this context, it recalls the resolution on the establishment of an
international criminal court adopted by the General Assembly on
17 December 1996 (A/RES/51/207).
"The Security Council supports further exploration of ways and means
by which the international community may enhance the compliance by parties
concerned with the relevant rules of international law, including those of
international humanitarian law.
"The Security Council encourages States to consider acceding to the
relevant international conventions designed to address the problems of
refugees.
"The Security Council underlines the importance of ensuring clear,
appropriate and realistic mandates to be implemented in an impartial manner
as well as adequate resources for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In this context, the Council, in establishing or authorizing an operation
to protect humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations, reaffirms the principles of full respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the States concerned. The
Council also underlines the importance of ensuring the proper discharge of
the mandates conferred upon peacekeeping operations.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of ensuring closer
coordination between the relevant United Nations bodies and other
international agencies, acting in accordance with their own mandates and
status, with a view to effectively providing or protecting humanitarian
assistance to those in need. In this context, the Council encourages an
enhanced role for the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in
coordination to this end.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of the activities of the
relevant United Nations bodies, agencies and other international
humanitarian organizations and the need for these activities to continue to
be carried out in accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality of humanitarian assistance.
"The Security Council also stresses the importance of crisis
prevention, including by addressing the root causes of such crises. It
therefore encourages the Secretary-General and all States to look further
into practical ways to enhance the United Nations capacity and capability
in this regard.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to study
further how to improve the protection for humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations."
-----
