A /76/PV.43

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

43rd plenary meeting

Thursday, 2 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 12
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Draft resolution (A/76/L.13)
The President: For millenniums, humankind has
recognized that sports can represent something beyond
recreation. Sports is a unifying force. It brings together
people of every religion, race, ethnicity and political
background to celebrate humankind’s athletic prowess
and potential. It diverts energies from hostility and
conflict towards friendly competition. It promotes an
active lifestyle and supports our mental and physical
well-being. These truths were known and celebrated in
antiquity during the ancient Greek Olympics, and they
remain relevant today. I personally vouch for the mental
and physical benefits of sports. Since entering public
office and public life, I have done a lot of running. Yes,
some of that running has been for political office, but
some of it has also been on the track and on sports fields.
Sports can be a vehicle for both global peace and
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
It can promote inclusive, gender-equal communities by
opening the doors for everyone, regardless of background
or gender, to pursue their athletic aspirations. It can
instil the spirit of camaraderie, solidarity and teamwork,
thereby reducing tensions and building bridges where
conflict may otherwise take root. It can support quality
education by promoting healthier bodies and minds,

thereby improving academic performance. Sports can
relieve the psychological stress of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, which has taken a big toll on our
collective psyche and left us so weary.
We are all keen to rebuild a better world, and sports
can help us do that. We must look towards the 2022
Winter Olympics with that sentiment in mind. As many
countries prepare to gather in Beijing next year, let us
acknowledge the key lesson that we have learned from
the pandemic — all of humankind shares a common
destiny. As we watch athletes representing every flag,
every colour and every background compete in the
Olympics, let us celebrate our common humanity. Let
us acknowledge our obligations to each another and our
planet. Let us reflect on the pointlessness of conflict
and aspire for peace.
In that spirit, I heartily support Olympic Truce draft
resolution A/76/L.13, entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”,
which the General Assembly is preparing to adopt.
The draft resolution, proposed and co-sponsored by
China and many other Member States, urges Members
to observe the Olympic Truce, individually and
collectively. I call on all Member States to support the
efforts of the International Olympic Committee and the
International Paralympic Committee and use sports as
a tool to promote peace, dialogue and reconciliation. I
hope that the games will nurture friendship and be held
in the spirit of camaraderie that we need to rebuild a
better world, a hopeful world, a peaceful world and a
world aligned with the principles and the values of the
Charter of the United Nations.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-36478 (E)

*2136478*

A/76/PV.43

02/12/2021

I now give the floor to the representative of China
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.13.

by fostering an atmosphere of peace, development,
resilience tolerance and understanding

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
sincerely thank you, Sir, for your introductory remarks.
I am very honoured, on behalf of China, to introduce
draft resolution A/76/L.13, entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.

Throughout the consultation process, we saw the
active participation of all delegations and received
many constructive suggestions from them. The draft
resolution currently enjoys the sponsorship of 173
Members. On behalf of the Chinese Government, I
thank all those Member States that have demonstrated
their interest in, and support for, the draft resolution.
We look forward to its adoption by consensus by the
General Assembly. I also take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the International Olympic Committee and its
President, Mr. Thomas Bach, the International Olympic
Truce Foundation and the International Olympic Truce
Centre. I thank them for their strong support for the
Beijing Winter Olympics.

The time-honoured Olympic Truce carries with it
humankind’s aspiration for peace and mutual support.
The peaceful ideal of the Olympics is in line with the
founding mission of the United Nations, which is to
safeguard international peace and security. Since 1993,
the General Assembly has adopted by consensus the
Olympic Truce resolution 13 times in a row, calling
on Member States to promote peace, dialogue and
reconciliation through sport and cease hostilities from
seven days before until seven days after the Olympic
Games. As the host country of the XXIV Olympic
Winter Games, China has kept with tradition and is
introducing the draft resolution on the Olympic Truce
at the current session of the General Assembly.
Building on its previous iterations, the draft
resolution adds the Beijing 2022 visions and ideals for
the Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games and sends
a powerful message of solidarity and cooperation in
overcoming the pandemic. The draft resolution recalls
the important role of sports in promoting peace and
sustainable development, notes that the vision of the
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games Beijing 2022,
namely, the “Joyful rendezvous upon pure ice and snow
uniting the passion of hundreds of millions for winter
sports”, is to inspire youth with the Olympic spirit,
encourage millions to embrace winter sports, promote
social progress and create a harmonious, peaceful
and better world. The draft resolution recognizes that
Beijing 2022 aims to ensure the delivery of Olympic
Games that are green, inclusive, open and clean.
In the context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the draft resolution focuses
on the Olympic Truce spirit and recognizes the role
of sport as a tool in building global resilience to
overcome the impacts of COVID-19 and the fact that
the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games Beijing
2022 will be an opportunity to demonstrate the value of
solidarity, resilience and international cooperation. It
also expresses the expectation that the Olympic Winter
Games Beijing 2022 will be a meaningful opportunity
to harness the power of sport to advance the world
2/22

Today marks China’s second time introducing the
Olympic Truce draft resolution at the General Assembly
since 2007, demonstrating our unflagging commitment
to peace, to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and to true multilateralism. We
have been deeply engaged in and supported the United
Nations in all its efforts, consistently doing our part for
world peace and development.
China holds fast to the Olympic ideal and advocates
the spirit of the Olympic Truce. We played an active
part in the previous Summer and Winter Olympics and
supported the previous Olympic Truce resolutions.
Our success in hosting the Youth Olympic Games and
other major international sporting events speaks to
China’s strength in promoting world peace, common
development and friendship through sports.
In order to achieve the Olympic Truce, we need
political will and, more important, concrete actions
guided by the theme of creating a harmonious world
of better mutual understanding. The Truce segment in
preparing for the Beijing Winter Olympics involves
raising the awareness of the Olympic Truce concept,
knowledge of the Olympics at the community level and
publishing books, online videos and other publicity
content. We are focusing in particular on young people.
Olympic education is carried out in primary and
secondary schools nationwide to sow the seeds of peace
and friendship in the hearts of the younger generations.
During the Winter Olympics, a Truce mural entitled
“Light of Peace” will be installed in the Beijing Winter
Olympic Village as a symbol of support for the concept
of peace and truce.
21-36478

02/12/2021

In July, the century-old Olympic motto was updated
for the first time in history, with the word “together”
added. That new motto, combining sportspersonship
with the spirit of humanity, shows the steely
determination of the countries of the world to join hands
in tackling global challenges and, more important, the
aspiration of all peoples to build a community of shared
future for humankind together.
The Olympic Games serve as a platform for
athletes to shine. It is also a global event to unite all
minds and hearts, where people from all countries,
races and religions can compete and assist one
another in becoming faster, going higher and getting
stronger together.
The Olympic Charter has long affirmed the
principle of political neutrality in sports. We shall join
all peoples around the world in rejecting all wrongful
words and actions that run counter to the Olympic
spirit and are detrimental to the development of the
Olympic movement. We call on all countries to take the
Beijing Winter Olympics as an opportunity to resolve
differences through dialogue, replace confrontation
with cooperation, enhance mutual understanding and
maintain world peace and development.
In 64 days, the Olympic flame will be rekindled in
the Beijing National Stadium, the iconic Bird’s Nest,
making Beijing the world’s first city to host both the
Summer and Winter Olympics. The Chinese Government
attaches great importance to preparations for the
Winter Olympics and Paralympics. Thanks to strong
support from the International Olympic Committee
and countries around the world, our preparations on all
fronts have been making steady progress.
China has the confidence and competence to
present the world with a simple, safe and splendid
Olympic gathering. We are following a safety-first
approach in hosting the Olympics. In its coronavirus
disease response, the Chinese Government has been
putting the well-being of the people front and centre
without fail. We are making the lives and health of the
Chinese public, as well as of each and every athlete and
participant, our top priority. Every effort is being made
to guarantee their safety.
Pandemic control is at the top of our agenda,
supported by science-based policies and targeted
measures. China and the International Olympic
Committee have issued the first edition of a pandemic
prevention manual and will take the necessary

A/76/PV.43

measures, such as remote prevention and control,
closed-loop management and vaccination, to ensure the
safety of all parties. At same time. we will do our utmost
to provide considerate and caring services to deliver a
most pleasant event experience for all participants.
We are also following a green approach in hosting
the Olympics. Committed to achieving carbon neutrality,
the Beijing Winter Olympics will set many records. It
will be the first Games to comprehensively advance
the International Olympic Committee’s sustainability
policy in social, economic and environmental spheres.
It will be the first Games in Olympic history where
all venues, without exception, will be powered by
green energy and where carbon dioxide refrigeration
technology will be used on a larger scale, resulting in
carbon emissions close to zero. Moreover, 85 per cent
of the vehicles used for the events will be powered by
clean energy.
We are also following an inclusive approach to
hosting the Olympics. With respect to ice events,
the National Speed Skating Oval, the Ice Ribbon, is
the only new venue. The rest are repurposed venues
originally built for the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics.
In other words, all venues can be used for both summer
and winter sporting events. After the relocation of
Beijing Shougang, the steel company’s former complex
was renovated into a ski jump platform for the Winter
Olympics. Post-Olympic plans are also in place for the
venues so that they can benefit local people and the
Olympic movement in the long term. The vision of the
Beijing Winter Olympics is to encourage 300 million
Chinese citizens to engage in ice and snow sports is
gradually becoming a reality.
We are following an open approach in hosting
the Olympics. During our preparations, we have
maintained close communication with other countries
and international sports organizations on venue
construction and event organization, inter alia.
From October to December, China hosted 10
international trials and three international training
weeks in Beijing, where we expect the participation of
2,000 overseas athletes and staff as a litmus test of our
preparedness for the Beijing Winter Olympics.
We are also following a clean approach in hosting
the Olympics. Since the start of the bidding process, the
Chinese Government has maintained strict budgetary
control over costs, cracking down on corruption
and advocating integrity with enhanced oversight of

21-364783/22

A/76/PV.43

the entire process. In addition, we adopted a zerotolerance approach to doping and acts in breach of
sportspersonship to make the upcoming Olympics in
Beijing as clean and pure as ice and snow.
“Together for a Shared Future”: that is the motto
of the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympic and Paralympic
Games. It is also China’s action plan to practise the new
Olympic motto. Together, let us look forward to the
rekindling of the Olympic flame and the performance
of our athletes at their best. Let us join hands and stand
shoulder to shoulder to uphold the Olympic spirit, ignite
the flame of hope for humankind and march towards a
brighter and more peaceful future.
In February 2022, the Beijing Winter Olympics
will welcome everyone.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by paying tribute to Mr. Jacques Rogge,
the eighth President of the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) and Honorary President until his
passing away after the events of the thirty-second
Olympic Games in Tokyo. As a high-level athlete and
world sailing champion, he represented his country,
Belgium, three times in sailing at the Olympic Games.
His passion for sport and the values that it embodies and
promotes led him to preside over the IOC from 2001 to
2013 and to initiate important reforms. While the Youth
Olympic Games will remain his legacy, I would equally
like to recall that Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon also
entrusted the role of Special Envoy for Youth Refugees
and Sport to him in 2014. Like all those who had the
privilege of working with him, I will remember him as
a man who was determined to promote the fundamental
principles of Olympism, focused on others and driven
by a strong team spirit.
Today we once again celebrate the Olympic ideal
and call for the Olympic Truce to be observed. Let us
also remember that the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the purpose of Olympism are
aligned in their pursuit of the harmonious development
of humankind and the promotion of a peaceful and
better world.
As the pandemic continues to take its toll, the
motto of the Tokyo 2020 Games, “United by emotion”,
could not be more relevant. Holding those Games, even
if delayed for a year, was important to the athletes and
the public because it brought hope and achieved success
despite the inevitable restrictions. Next February, the
4/22

02/12/2021

Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games will open in
Beijing under the motto “Together for a shared future”.
As draft resolution A/76/L.13, which we are about
to adopt, states, those Games must show the value
of unity, resilience and international cooperation in
overcoming the pandemic. Those are the values that we
must strive to uphold together in all our decisions in
this iconic General Assembly Hall.
The global impact of the Olympic and Paralympic
Games is a showcase for the host country, but it must
also be a symbol of hope and friendship among peoples
beyond the competitors. We therefore wish success and
shared joy in the Olympic spirit to the thousands of
committed athletes, as well as to all those who work
every day to ensure the enjoyment of the rights and
freedoms enshrined in the Olympic Charter.
Let us take this opportunity to reaffirm the values
of Olympism, which are excellence, friendship and
respect. Through that solidarity and team spirit, we
must ensure a collective response to the challenges
facing us in the service of the peoples we represent.
In sport, as in multilateralism, we win together and
we lose together. With that conviction, we endorse the
message of the President of the International Olympic
Committee that we are always stronger together.
In that regard, I would like to mention the
Olympism 365 strategy, endorsed by the IOC Executive
Board. The strategy particularly seeks to strengthen the
role of sport in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Its impact in relation to 10 SDGs will
be a major contribution of sport to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Improving access to
sport, including for disadvantaged communities, the
sense of belonging to safe, inclusive and fair sport
communities, the benefits of sport for physical and
mental well-being and the partnerships built under the
auspices of that strategy are very important. The IOC’s
stewardship role is well established, and the allocation
of 90 per cent of its revenues to the Olympic movement,
representing more than $3 million per day, is invaluable
in many contexts.
I would also like to highlight the role of sport in
the area of climate action. The recent meeting on sport
at the session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change held in Glasgow, entitled “Sports for Climate
Action — On the Race to Net Zero”, is a good example.
Several sports organizations have also joined the United
21-36478

02/12/2021

Nations Race to Zero campaign. On that occasion, His
Serene Highness Prince Albert II, who is also Chair of
the IOC Sustainability and Legacy Commission, said:
“It is not an exaggeration to say that the climate
crisis conditions the future of our planet. ... This
crisis is a call to action for everyone, also for all of
us in the world of sport.”
As the world looks towards Beijing, let us
continue our work to ensure that girls, women,
people with disabilities, children and the elderly have
unimpeded access to sport and physical activity. To
be truly universal, that must be open to all, without
discrimination of any kind and safely. Sport and
physical activity have a role to play in the inclusive
and sustainable recovery from the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Their importance has been demonstrated
more than ever during this difficult time by their direct
contribution to physical and mental health.
Sport is an essential enabler in developing peaceful
and sustainable societies. It has a direct impact on
the lives of people in all countries and in all areas of
society, in particular education, health, empowerment,
employability, inclusion, mutual understanding
and peace. Through this draft resolution, which my
delegation co-sponsored, the General Assembly
therefore once again reaffirms its commitment to
the power of sport in building a peaceful and better
world. Let us make the Olympic motto “Faster, Higher,
Stronger — Together” our own.
Mr. Latheef (Maldives): The Maldives believes
in the importance of sport as an enabler of sustainable
development and a promoter of peace, tolerance and
respect. In that regard, we are pleased to join in the
adoption of today’s draft resolution A/76/L.13. We
also congratulate Japan on a successful and thrilling
Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games. The Games were a rare
moment of light in the global darkness wrought by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, and they provided an
inspiring example of the resilience and determination
of the human spirit in overcoming adversity.
The Olympics continue to symbolize the benefits
of international cooperation, peace and understanding.
However, the circumstances of this year’s Games were
also emblematic of the immense value of sport as a
unifying force. It was the Games that brought people
across the world together at a moment when we spent
much of our time apart. Sport is a forum in which we
rise above the fray, put differences aside and engage

A/76/PV.43

with each other in a spirit of friendship and healthy
competition. By its nature, sport demands cooperation,
mutual understanding, collegiality and tolerance. Those
are also lessons that we can bring to our multilateral
engagements in order to advance our progress on
pressing global issues.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
rightly links sport to sustainable development. We
particularly see that in relation to improving the lives
of the vulnerable and the disadvantaged. In 2019, with
assistance from the World Bank, the Maldives ran a
pilot workshop that used female-led soccer training
sessions to empower and inspire self-confidence in
girls. The aim was to use sport to help girls break
societal barriers, pursue education and enter areas of
employment that are male-dominated. The workshop
yielded incredible results. After the sessions, the girls
were less tolerant towards gender stereotypes and
had changed their opinions about the suitability of
girls undertaking jobs traditionally held by men. The
Maldives also established Paralympic and Special
Olympic Committees in 2019 to promote the inclusion
of all in sport and remove barriers. In 2020, the Maldives
participated in the Paralympic Games for the first time.
The Government of Maldives has prioritized sport
to promote education, inclusivity and health. The
Maldives continues to make significant investments
in sports infrastructure to enhance our communities’
enjoyment of sport. We are currently on-track to
open our first Olympic-size swimming pool by 2023.
It is crucial that sport infrastructure and policies be
inclusive and promote opportunities for all, including
all vulnerable groups. Our Government intends to
modify at least 80 per cent of sports facilities by 2023
to provide access to people with disabilities, as well as
to provide equal opportunities for women and girls to
participate more fully in national sports programmes.
The Maldives has also made it a policy to designate
a sports councillor in every island. The main role of
sports councillors is to help create interest in sports
and motivation within the community to initiate and
enhance participation in programmes for healthy
lifestyles. In addition, the Maldives is working towards
achieving the target of women making up at least 33 per
cent of the executive boards of all national associations
by 2023. And I am pleased to note that we have already
achieved the target of equal allowances for men and
women on all national sports teams.

21-364785/22

A/76/PV.43

Investment in sports is an investment in our society.
Encouraging greater participation by youth in athletic
activities promotes the development of leadership and
cooperation skills, ensuring that they become positive
role models in their communities and contributing
to economic and social progress. In that way, sport
programmes implemented at national and local levels
remain key to facilitating sustainable development and
peaceful coexistence.
Like in many other areas of our lives and economies,
the coronavirus disease has had a disruptive impact on
sport. The closure of stadiums and facilities and the
cancellation of events have had a significant effect
on athletes, businesses and the community at large.
It has also had a profound effect on our nation, as we
deeply regret the need to withdraw from hosting the
2023 Indian Ocean Island Games, owing to the difficult
challenges caused by the pandemic.
Despite those setbacks, sport must remain a key
instrument in improving our resilience and cooperation
as we build back better from the pandemic. Sport is a
social activity like no other in the way in which it unites
people from differing backgrounds for a common
cause. It also promotes determination, dedication
and teamwork — all necessary attributes to confront
the broader challenges that we face. By continuing
to recognize and promote the important social role
played by sports in our lives, we will continue to profit
from its ability to engender progress towards all of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to participate in this important meeting.
We are pleased that the State of Qatar has joined the
States sponsoring draft resolution A/76/L.13, entitled,
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal”. In that context, we are proud of
China’s hosting the Winter Olympics next year.
My country, the State of Qatar, attaches great
importance to sports because we firmly believe that
all kinds of sports can help to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, as well as the desired goals in the
areas of physical and mental health, education, social
integration and promoting the values of peace and
understanding among all peoples.
Over the past decade, as part of Qatar’s National
Vision 2030, my country has invested in sports
by building and developing sporting facilities and
infrastructure according to international standards.
6/22

02/12/2021

We have therefore been qualified to host international
major sports events. We are pleased today to announce
that the countdown for the State of Qatar’s hosting of
the 2022 World Cup of the Fédération Internationale
de Football Association (FIFA), to be held for the first
time in the Middle East and Arab region, started on
21 November. Last week, we were proudly honoured to
celebrate the opening of Al Bayt Stadium, which is the
most recent of eight stadiums to host the competition in
less than one year.
In the context of today’s debate on agenda item 12,
it is my honour to inform the members of the General
Assembly that, under this item, the State of Qatar will
present at the current session a draft resolution on the
FIFA World Cup competition to be hosted by the State
of Qatar in 2022. We have always wanted the draft
resolution to be in line with the three pillars of the United
Nations, namely, peace, sustainable development and
human rights, as well as the world recognition of the
role and contribution of sports, particularly football, in
promoting development and peace.
The draft resolution will also contain a paragraph
welcoming the Healthy 2022 World Cup initiative,
creating a legacy for sports and health. It is a multi-year
joint project among the State of Qatar, the World Health
Organization and FIFA to make the 2022 World Cup a
beacon for the promotion of physical and mental health
and an example in organizing healthy and safe major
sporting events in the future knowing that this football
world cup competition will be the first to take place
during the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We look forward to the initiation of informal
consultations on the draft resolution during the second
half of January 2022, to be adopted by the General
Assembly on 6 April 2022, which coincides with the
International Day of Sport for Development and Peace.
We look forward to the constructive participation of
Member States leading to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
State of Qatar is prepared to host sports teams and
supporters from all over the world from 21 November to
18 December 2022 to celebrate the football competition
in an exceptional and unique atmosphere. We want the
FIFA World Cup 2022 to be a leading example that
creates a permanent legacy, contributing to a better
future for my country, the State of Qatar, our region
and the entire world.
21-36478

02/12/2021

Mr. Tan (Singapore): I would like to begin by
commending all the athletes who participated in the
Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games earlier this year.
We thank them for their determination, competitive
spirit and inspiring performances, which uplifted us all.
My delegation congratulates Japan on the successful
hosting of the Games in spite of the challenges posed
by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We look forward
to the 2022 Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games in
Beijing. We wish China a successful Games.
Sport inspires us to challenge ourselves and
to pursue excellence through hard work and selfdiscipline, and gives us the determination to go faster,
higher and stronger. Active participation in exercise
and sport also helps develop agile minds and healthy
bodies. It nurtures capable individuals and builds
vibrant communities. The values inculcated through
sport can be transferred to an individual’s personal and
professional life. That the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development recognizes the important role of sport
only strengthens the conviction that sport must be an
important part of all our lives.
The ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic has
upended all our lives. Things that we took for granted,
such as the ability to participate in team sports and
attend live sporting events, have become complex
affairs. It is in these trying times that the value of
sport becomes more apparent as something that we
can rally around. The Olympics, as a global mass
sporting event, provides a platform for countries and
athletes to come together in a spirit of friendship and
friendly competition that resonates beyond sport. It
brings people of different origins, creeds, cultures and
nationalities together, enhancing mutual understanding
through a spirit of fair play, and promotes tolerance,
social inclusion, peace and cooperation.
Sport can also contribute to the deepening of ties
and cooperation among countries. Singapore has been
active in promoting the shared values of fair play and
integrity, as well as regional cooperation in sport. In
October, Singapore chaired the sixth Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Ministerial Meeting
on Sports, which adopted the ASEAN Workplan on
Sports for 2021 to 2025. The Workplan will chart
the regional and bilateral sports programmes to be
undertaken by the States members of ASEAN in the
next five years. In addition, Singapore was actively
involved in the conceptualization and drafting of a

A/76/PV.43

memorandum of understanding between ASEAN and
the World Anti-Doping Agency to combat doping in
sport and further strengthen anti-doping capabilities in
our region.
Singapore recognizes the importance of sport. As
we transition to learning to live with the coronavirus
disease, we must continue to find ways to allow people
to participate in sport and large-scale spectator sporting
events in a safe manner. To allow those to resume,
Singapore has piloted hybrid and in-person events. That
will be an important step towards finding a balance
between keeping people safe and reinvigorating the
sports scene and economy.
Equally important for the success of sport is the
environment in which people participate. It must be
a respectful and equitable space, free from all forms
of harassment and abuse. In 2021, Sports Singapore
launched the Safe Sport Programme to address abuse
and harassment in sport, based on the fundamental
belief that no person should feel unsafe as they train,
compete or play any role in sport. At the heart of the
Programme is the Safe Sport Unified Code, which sets
clear definitions of sexual, psychological and physical
abuse. The Safe Sport Programme also contributes to
the ongoing conversations on women’s development
in Singapore by facilitating an enabling sporting
environment that protects women and girls.
Singapore is committed to providing a safe and
inclusive space for everyone to participate in sport.
Through its tangible and intangible benefits, sport is
a force for positive change. Such benefits transcend
national boundaries and help to promote ties among
people from all over the world. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development has recognized the role of
sport in the development of peace, the promotion of
tolerance and respect and the empowerment of women
and young people, as well as its contributions to health,
education and our goals of social inclusion. Let us
continue to uphold the spirit of sport and aim to build
a sustainable, inclusive and prosperous future for all.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): For the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, the development and support of
policies to promote and enable widespread participation
in sport on a national scale is an essential component of
its development plans and represents a major pillar in
the ongoing pursuit of peace, dialogue, solidarity and

21-364787/22

A/76/PV.43

social inclusion, as well as being a key element in the
promotion and protection of human rights.
Given the uncertainty and the devastating
consequences of the pandemic on all aspects of life,
sport represents a beacon of hope, since it encourages
people of all ages to strengthen their spirits through
discipline, recreation and mental and physical
development in an ideal environment of harmony and
progress. It is therefore an urgent responsibility of
States to encourage sporting practices in their societies,
including high-performance sports, which have proved
to promote collective health, sustainable development,
conflict prevention and a culture of peace.
Even amid the complex context of the current
pandemic and the historical inequalities between
countries of the North and the South, Venezuela
continues to move forward in promoting its sports
policies, broadening their scope, encouraging various
activities and making them accessible as a way to
bring both amateur and professional athletes together.
Together with the determined effort and passion of
sportspersons and athletes, that has contributed to the
country’s sustained growth over the past five years.
An outstanding example of that can be found in
the Venezuelan delegation at the Olympic Games in
Tokyo last summer, comprising 43 athletes and led
by the two-time karate world champion Antonio Díaz
and the Pan-American judo medallist Karen León,
who competed in 14 disciplines and achieved the most
prominent participation in our country’s history at the
Olympic Games.
The entire Venezuelan people joyfully celebrated
the silver medals won by Keydomar Vallenilla and Julio
Mayora in weightlifting, the silver medal of Daniel
Dhers in BMX freestyle and the gold medal of our
top athlete and national sports heroine Yulimar Rojas
Rodríguez, who also broke the Olympic and world
records in the triple jump. She also won six Olympic
diplomas in karate, judo, weightlifting and pole vaulting
in historic days for Venezuelan sport.
All our Olympic athletes are a source of pride and
inspiration for children, young people and adults. We
thank and pay tribute to them for the joy and hope that
they brought to Venezuela, and we aspire to replicating
their example in the years to come.
Given the importance of sport as a promoter of
development and peace, the Bolivarian Republic of
8/22

02/12/2021

Venezuela has had the honour to co-sponsor draft
resolution A/76/L.13, “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal”, as part of its
ongoing international commitment to developing sport,
exchanges and cooperation with sport organizations and
federations, as well as the Olympic ideal as the supreme
expression of coexistence and peace amid differences.
Venezuela recognizes and congratulates the historic
work done by the International Olympic Committee
and the International Paralympic Committee and calls
on them to continue their role in developing sport at the
highest level, especially in developing countries.
We also support the continuation of, and respect
for, the Olympic Truce, or ekecheiria, as a sacred space
for guaranteeing coexistence and ensuring the smooth
holding of the Games and its successful results for the
promotion and maintenance of peaceful coexistence.
For its part, Venezuela would also like to express
its most heartfelt wishes for the success of the XXIV
Olympic Winter Games and the XIII Paralympic Winter
Games, to be held in Beijing in February and March
2022. We are confident of the great organizational,
technological and sporting capabilities that have always
characterized that sister nation. It can count on our
country’s support for those two Games.
Similarly, Venezuela expresses its appreciation to
the organizers of the Tokyo Olympic Games, held in
a difficult context due to the pandemic. We also wish
the greatest success to the Olympic and Paralympic
Games to be held in Paris in 2024 and to the Olympic
and Paralympic Winter Games in Milan and Cortina
in 2026.
In conclusion, Venezuela reaffirms its strongest
commitment to continuing to promote sport in all its
forms as an agent for development and peace, convinced
that the complex challenges facing our troubled world
today, including the crisis of values, the need for social
inclusion and justice and the fight against discrimination
and poverty, find in sport policies, physical education
and the spirit of fair play and healthy competition one
of the most noble expressions of human greatness,
which the United Nations must continue to tirelessly
promote as part of its purposes and principles and the
spirit enshrined in its founding Charter.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): I would like to begin by
extending my delegation’s congratulations to the
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China
21-36478

02/12/2021

for initiating and facilitating draft resolution A/76/L.13,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”. My delegation is pleased
to co-sponsor the draft resolution, and we welcome its
upcoming adoption.
Sport means to everyone sport for life or life for
sport and is embedded in their daily activities. Sport
provides an opportunity to meet new people, as well as
having fun and making friends. Sport helps to build a
person through its unique way to keep a person active.
Sport contributes to improving physical, mental and
emotional health.
Sport continues to contribute to a better world and
sustainable development. Its alignment with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development could be further
developed to achieve recovery from the coronavirus
disease and beyond. In that regard, the work of the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) is a critical
component of the strengthening and improvement of
sport. We believe that coordination among the host
country, the IOC and Member States, inter alia, are
vital to promoting the Olympic spirit. While the host
country maintains a legacy in realizing its mission
in delivering a fantastic, extraordinary and excellent
outcome, Cambodia wishes the 2022 Olympic Winter
Games in Beijing great success ahead.
Last but not least, Cambodia will proudly host
the 32nd Southeast Asian Games in 2023, with a total
of 41 sports to be considered, comprising the two
mandatory sports of athletics and aquatics, 29 Olympic
or Asian games and another 10 more regional sports.
We are confident that that biennial Southeast Asian
Games will further promote friendly relations among
the participating countries of the region. Cambodia
will continue to further promote sport to advance its
contributions to global peace and development.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this annual debate on agenda item
12, entitled “Sport development and peace”. I would
also like to thank the People’s Republic of China
for introducing draft resolution A/76/L.13, entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal”. The Kingdom of Morocco is
a sponsor of this very important draft resolution, and
we already welcome its adoption at the end of this
debate, hopefully by consensus. Allow me to also
thank the Permanent Representatives of Monaco and

A/76/PV.43

Qatar, co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Sport for
Development and Peace. We join other speakers in
commending the role of sport not only in advancing
development, peace and social progress, but also in
providing vital support to physical and, above all,
mental health.
We welcome the recognition of sport as an important
factor for sustainable development. which contributes
in particular to the empowerment of women, young
people and people with disabilities. Sport is also a
vehicle for peace, tolerance and mutual respect.
Today sport as a vehicle for humanistic values,
such as tolerance, coexistence, accepting each another
and understanding among peoples, is an indispensable
element and an ongoing school for life that we must
continue to cultivate to promote peace and solidarity at
the international level. It is also a fundamental factor
in protecting young people from certain ills that plague
various societies, including violence, extremism and
drug use.
During this difficult period of the coronavirus
disease, many people turned to sport to overcome
the difficulties caused by the uncertainty of the
pandemic, which had led to the closure of many sports
and recreational facilities. However, the celebration
of the International Day of Sport for Development
and Peace in April 2020 amid the lockdown allowed
all stakeholders to innovate and act to promote sport
and its contribution to people’s development and wellbeing. As a result, we have witnessed a change in the
definition of sport that goes beyond the competitions
and sporting events to include creating social bonds.
The social and universal dimensions of sport have
been repeatedly emphasized by His Majesty the King
Mohammed VI, who has always sought to provide
the sports sector with the appropriate conditions to
cope with the various challenges and excel in major
events. Moreover, sport is not only about training
champions, but it also requires setting up the necessary
infrastructure and passing the relevant laws. In line
with the guidelines of His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, sport is therefore not only a tool for entertainment,
well-being, enjoyment and participation in regional,
continental and international competitions, but it also
depends on construction sites and major structural
development projects. It is a contributor to the
socioeconomic development of Morocco.

21-364789/22

A/76/PV.43

The multidimensional role of sport is at the heart
of the King’s letter addressed to the participants at
the National Conference on Sport, held in Bouznika
on 24 October 2008, which emphasizes the need to
broaden access to sport for men and women from all
sectors of society, describing sport as a strong lever for
human development, inclusion, social cohesion and the
fight against poverty, exclusion and marginalization.
The 2011 Constitution has given new impetus to
the momentum set in motion by the King’s guidelines
by endorsing sport as a right to which access must
be ensured for citizens by the authorities, thereby
providing a new benchmark for the national strategy to
promote of practice of sport.
Given the importance that Morocco attaches to
sport, an annual open race, entitled “10 km for peace”,
has been held every 6 April since 2007 in celebration
of the International Day of Sport for Development
and Peace.
At the global and continental levels, Morocco
has successfully organized a large number of sports
activities. I would like to point out that Morocco
organized the largest sporting event in Africa, namely,
the 12th African Games in 2019, by establishing the
most modern sports facilities and infrastructure, in line
with international standards, to meet the expectations
of the athletes of our continent.
Moreover, the drive to educate and protect young
people so that they can contribute to building a better
and peaceful world is a noble objective to which the
Kingdom of Morocco has always been committed by
co-sponsoring the various draft resolutions on the topic.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Government and the people of China. After hosting
the Summer Olympic Games in 2008, they are now
preparing to hold the Winter Olympic Games in 2022,
which will make Beijing the first city to have hosted
both the Summer and the Winter Olympic Games. My
delegation is convinced that the Olympic and Paralympic
Winter Games to be held in China, a great country with
a civilization that has existed for millenniums, will be a
success and will provide an opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to the Olympic values and spirit and will
unquestionably contribute to their revival.
I would also like to congratulate Japan for its great
success in hosting the Olympic Games last summer. I
also take the opportunity to wish every success to the
10/22

02/12/2021

State of Qatar, the upcoming host of the Fédération
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) World
Cup in 2022, which will be the first of its kind in the
Middle East and in the Arab world. The great success
that the 2021 FIFA Arab Cup is currently seeing,
with the warm welcome of the host country, Qatar, its
magnificent stadiums and high-level of infrastructure,
are a prelude to a very high-level 2022 World Cup that
will be historic.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Dating back to the eighth
century B.C.E., the ancient Olympic Games were a
force for peace, stability and solidarity among Greek
city-States. The ideal of the Olympic Truce was also of
great importance for the revival of the Olympic Games
in the modern era, in Athens, in 1896, as an invaluable
tool to advance international cooperation and promote
world peace.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The Olympic Truce is an integral part of the values
and principles of Olympism, which celebrates noble
competition and the peaceful meeting through sport of
all peoples and cultures. Aiming to inspire humankind
and create a much-needed window of opportunity for
dialogue and the peaceful resolution of conflict, the
Olympic Truce is a vital part of the spiritual dimension
of the Games. In 1992, the International Olympic
Committee renewed this tradition by reintroducing the
Olympic Truce to protect the interest of athletes and
sport and to pursue peaceful and democratic solutions
to resolve global conflicts.
The General Assembly has repeatedly expressed
its support for the International Olympic Committee
by unanimously adopting, every two years, one year
before the opening of the Olympic Games, a resolution
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”. Through the resolution,
the United Nations invites its Member States to observe
the Olympic Truce and to seek the settling of all
international conflicts through peaceful and diplomatic
means, recognizing the importance of the International
Olympic Committee initiatives for human well-being
and international understanding.
Although the idea of the Olympic Truce was born
in the eighth century B.C.E., nowadays it is becoming
more and more relevant. The Olympic Truce may sow the
seed and instil the conviction that only peaceful nations
can prosper and thrive. We strongly hope that the young
21-36478

02/12/2021

athletes who will make their honest and ethical efforts
during the Games will be heralds of the Truce notion
worldwide and spread the message of tolerance, good
will and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In 2022, China will host the Winter Olympic
Games, and Beijing will become the first dual Olympic
City, the first city in the world to host both the Summer
and Winter Olympic Games. We take this opportunity
to congratulate and wish China every success. Let us
all find inspiration in Beijing’s Winter Olympic Games
and reflect on how sports can be a tool to reduce
tensions and build bridges and provide fertile ground for
dialogue against civilizations. It is our task to observe
the Olympic Truce, thereby making international
cooperation and peace an attainable vision.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus welcomes the upcoming adoption
of draft resolution A/76/L.13, which was introduced by
the delegation of China and negotiated with Member
States through an inclusive and transparent process.
The national Olympic team of Belarus is looking
forward to the start of the Winter Olympic Games in
Beijing and to competing for Olympic medals in fair
competition. We are convinced that, thanks to the
exceptional hard work, dedication and perseverance of
the Chinese people, the Beijing Olympics will be held
at the highest level and China will reaffirm its status as
a great sports Power.
We consider the calls to boycott the Olympic
Games unacceptable. Attempts by certain politicians
to stage a show and spread demagogy in the context
of an upcoming major sporting event are totally
unacceptable. All of this fundamentally contradicts
the principles of Olympism and erodes the unity and
solidarity of peoples within the Olympic movement.
Sport is an ambassador for peace, friendship and
the unity of nations. In today’s context of international
instability and division, sport is one of the only
resources that promotes the ideals of peace, friendship
and mutual understanding. Politics must stay out of
sports — that message is at the heart of the Olympic
Charter. But, alas, that tenet is increasingly being
violated by contemporary politicians.
Sport is referred to as the people’s diplomacy. It is
even said that athletes and sports teams sometimes do
more for their countries with their victories than some
politicians and diplomats. But the influence of politics

A/76/PV.43

on sport is unacceptable, and the politicization of sport is
not in line with the philosophy of sporting competitions.
Unfortunately, this year, Belarus has witnessed how
the political intrigues of various political figures have
trampled upon sports ideals. Our country, which has
repeatedly and successfully hosted global and regional
sports competitions, was deprived the right to host the
Ice Hockey World Championships this year for political
reasons. For the same reasons, the MAZ-SPORTauto
team was unexpectedly barred from participating in
the Dakar Rally 2022, 33 days before its start; and that
is a competition where the Belarusian racing team has
often been a prize winner. These dangerous precedents
are prime examples of how easily sporting events that
are meant to unite countries and peoples become an
instrument of discord, pressure and political intrigue in
the hands of unscrupulous politicians.
Sport as a form of public diplomacy opens up
broad avenues for rapprochement among peoples
and countries. And our country is committed to the
development of international sports cooperation and
the strengthening of friendly relations among peoples
on the basis of the humanistic ideals and principles
of Olympism.
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the
outset, I would like to thank China for its successful
efforts in coordinating draft resolution A/76/L.13,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”. As one of the co-sponsors
of the draft resolution, the Vietnamese delegation
takes this opportunity to wish China every success
in hosting the XXIV Olympic Winter Games and
the XIII Paralympic Winter Games, which will take
place in February and March 2022 in Beijing. In that
connection, we congratulate Japan for organizing the
Tokyo Olympics 2020 in an amazing manner, despite
the tremendous challenges presented by the pandemic.
Viet Nam attaches special importance to sport,
in the belief that it can create positive social change
that enhances peace and development. Sport is also
an important factor in social development and human
progress. The Olympics are among the most remarkable
global events through which peace and development
can be promoted. The Olympic spirit is the common
aspiration of people around the world, as it fosters
friendship, peace and exchanges among countries, the
integration of civilizations and harmonious coexistence.

21-3647811/22

A/76/PV.43

The Olympics unites people from all around the world,
regardless of culture, religions or ethnicity.
In our region, Viet Nam is proud to be hosting the
thirty-first Southeast Asian Games in 2022, one year
before Cambodia. We are confident that the Southeast
Asian Games will promote solidarity and friendship
among the peoples in the South-East Asian region.
Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize that
the promotion of sport for development and peace needs
support from all stakeholders, be they Governments,
organizations or individuals worldwide.
Once again, we congratulate China and reaffirm our
steady support for the success of the coming Olympics.
We wish our athletes around the world all the best. We
know that they will make us all proud.
Mr. Fernández De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to greet the President
of the International Olympic Committee, Mr. Thomas
Bach, and my countryman and friend Mr. Luis Alberto
Moreno, who are joining us today at this meeting. I
thank them for their continued efforts in promoting the
Olympic ideal.
Barely a week ago, the Secretary-General visited
Colombia on the fifth anniversary of the signing of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, which brought hope to
the Colombian people. Draft resolution A/76/L.13,
on the Olympic Truce, reflects the hope that many
peoples currently in situations of conflict harbour
to live in peace, even if it is during the Olympic and
Paralympic Games.
The idea of exchanging war fighting for sporting
competitions was the idea that, 28 centuries ago in
ancient Greece, led to the fundamental concept of
Olympism, which we promote today as the Olympic
Truce. As a long-standing co-sponsor of this draft
resolution, Colombia is a firm believer in the power
of sport to promote development and peace. The
Government of Colombia sees sport an ideal tool
to contribute to the healthy coexistence and social
reintegration of Colombians and to strengthen the
skills of children, adolescents and young people in
vulnerable situations.
Sport as a driver of peace in Colombia has
benefited approximately 4 million people in almost
all of the 170 municipalities prioritized in the
implementation of the agreement that are part of the
12/22

02/12/2021

development programmes with a territorial focus. In
2021 alone, close to $55 million has been invested in 43
of those municipalities, improving and adapting sports
infrastructure. Indeed, sports infrastructure is one of
the ways in which we can best understand the close
link between sports and peace and development. In that
regard, I would like to acknowledge the valuable efforts
of the International Olympic Committee to take steps
to enable the Olympic and Paralympic Games to reap
lasting benefits for host communities.
Finally, Colombia reaffirms its conviction in sport
as a means to advance towards peace and development
and wishes China every success in organizing the
upcoming Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.
For all those reasons, it was a great honour for my
country to become a co-sponsor of the draft resolution
that we will adopt today.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): My delegation is pleased to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/76/L.13, entitled “Sport
for development and peace: building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”. We
congratulate China for the overwhelming support for
the draft resolution.
As mentioned in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, sport is an enabler in achieving
development and peace. It is a linchpin in reaching
important Sustainable Development Goals and targets,
such as on health, education, gender, equality and
social inclusion. Sports have a unique capacity to bring
people together from different societies, cultures and
backgrounds. Sports gatherings such as the Olympic
and Paralympic Games are important for recognizing
the hard work and achievements of athletes. Pakistan
attaches great importance to sports and recognizes
their valuable contribution in promoting education,
health, peace, cooperation, solidarity and sustainable
development.
My country is committed to promoting sports
among youth and has launched youth-centred
initiatives such as the Kamyab Jawan Sports Drive
to make its youth physically and mentally healthy.
The programme also attaches great importance to the
participation of women and girls in sports. Therefore,
we strongly believe that we should utilize a maximum
potential of sport in making a positive contribution to
the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and of peace.
21-36478

02/12/2021

We also look forward to the XXIV Olympic Winter
Games and the XII Paralympic Winter Games, which
are scheduled to take place in 2022. We wish the host
country, China, all the best for a successful sports
event, like the 2008 Summer Olympics, which were
also hosted by China.
Ms. Alhosani (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I am pleased to take part in this important
debate on sport for development and peace, which
comes after a period of isolation for humankind due
to the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The pandemic has had adverse effects on physical and
psychological well-being. Sport plays a pivotal role
in promoting the values of respect and tolerance at a
time when we need to intensify activities for cultural
exchange and promote positive values to advance
development and peace.
Based on its conviction that sport is important as a
powerful and effective tool to promote understanding
and solidarity among societies and achieve the goals
of sustainable development and peace, the leadership
of the United Arab Emirates — since its establishment
in 1971 — has devoted its attention to sport of all
kinds. We have institutionalized and developed sport
as part of an integrated sport strategy until 2032. The
strategy focuses on encouraging community-based and
competitive sports among diverse societal, religious
and ethnic groups, as the United Arab Emirates
hosts nationals from more than 200 countries living
in peace. Last month, we organized the Dubai Run
2021, the largest competitive running event in the
world, with the participation of more than 140,000
individuals — citizens, residents and visitors alike.
My country’s efforts in that regard are not only
domestic. We have also been very active in organizing
regional and international sports competitions. For
example, in November we hosted the Abu Dhabi
World Professional Jiu-Jitsu Championship, with the
participation of more than 2,000 athletes from 65
countries, making it the largest Jiu Jitsu event since the
start of the pandemic.
The United Arab Emirates believes that sport can
help empower and integrate many groups in society,
including people with disabilities or, as we call them in
the United Arab Emirates, “people of great courage”.
My country therefore attaches special importance to
sporting events for persons with disabilities. In 2018,
we hosted the largest sports and humanitarian event

A/76/PV.43

of its kind, with the participation of more than 7,000
athletes with disabilities from over 190 countries, and
we will continue our efforts in that direction.
Recognizing the important role of women in
achieving development goals and promoting peace and
security, the United Arab Emirates has promoted the
active participation of women and girls in sports. In
that regard, we have made major progress at the local,
regional and international levels. We have organized
many sporting tournaments for women. For example,
the Fatima bint Mubarak International Sports Award in
2022 will honour a number of women from around the
world for their achievements in the field of sports. My
country urges a comprehensive approach to empower
women to enhance sports. All societies would benefit
from such an endeavour.
My country is currently hosting the Expo 2020, a
platform for organizing many sporting events. Athletes
from more than 190 countries will promote their
country booths, resulting in increased investment in
sports, which in turn will enhance solidarity among
cultures and help achieve development sustainable.
In conclusion, we in the United Arab Emirates
believe that sport is one of the most effective and least
expensive tools for promoting the values of the United
Nations, achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
and spreading a culture of peace and tolerance. We call
for international consensus and a clear vision among
Member States with regard to enhancing the role of
sports in the global recovery from the pandemic in
order to ensure the rebuilding of a better and safer
world for future generations.
Mr. Sharma (India): We welcome the General
Assembly’s emphasis on sport as an agent of peace and
development. Under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the international community has
aptly recognized sport as an important enabler of
sustainable development. We firmly believe that sport
is an inalienable part of the educational process and
a factor for promoting peace, friendship, cooperation
and understanding among peoples. In fact, it is hard to
imagine a more powerful medium than sport to inspire
and bring people together for a common purpose.
Swami Vivekananda, the great philosopher from
India, when approached by a young man to explain
the meaning of the Bhagavad Gita, is reported to have
looked at his physique and advised him to first go play
football. “Develop your body and mind,” Swamiji told

21-3647813/22

A/76/PV.43

this young man “and then you will be better fit to study
and understand the Gita.” Swamiji was clear that a
healthy body and mind are fundamental in our quest
for peace. Sport indeed plays a critical role to that end.
Ever since the dawn of human civilization, the
intrinsic link between sport and the human pursuit
of excellence has been recognized. India has a long
tradition of sport and physical education. Ancient Indian
scriptures and literature describe the important place of
sport in education. A mastery of sport was considered
as important as the knowledge of scriptures. In Indian
tradition, exercise, which is at the heart of sport, is
considered an inseparable part of good health. There is
an old proverb in Sanskrit that says that exercise results
in good health, long life, strength and happiness. Good
health is the greatest blessing. Health is the means
to everything.
The education system in modern India continues
that heritage and instils respect for sport and physical
education. Sport development is a national priority
in India. It promotes an active lifestyle, child and
youth development, social inclusiveness, employment
opportunities, peace and development and, above all, a
sense of belonging and national pride.
The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports provides
the policy framework and institutional support for sportrelated activities. The Sports Authority of India was
established by the Government in 1984 to achieve the
twin objectives of broad-basing of sport and nurturing
talent in children of different age groups by providing
them with the necessary infrastructure, equipment,
coaching and other facilities.
The Khelo India National Programme for
Development of Sports scheme, launched in 2017,
is being implemented across the country in order to
promote sporting culture and encourage sport all over
the country. The scheme has one major vertical — sport
for peace and development. Under that vertical, sporting
activities and competitions are organized at village,
block and district level in various states. Particular
emphasis has been placed on women’s development
through sport by including it as a special vertical in the
Khelo India scheme. Various tournaments have been
organized to promote the participation of girls and
women in sport.
The Government has also undertaken special
activities to promote traditional sports such as
Mallakhamb, Thang-Ta, Kho-Kho and Kabaddi, among
14/22

02/12/2021

others. The Government of India launched the FIT India
Movement in August 2019 in order to encourage people
to remain healthy and fit by including physical activities
and sport in their daily lives. Under that movement, the
Government organizes various programmes throughout
the country with an aim of bringing about behavioural
changes and move towards a more physically active
lifestyle. Associating sporting personalities with the
United Nations, with the objective of creating public
awareness about education, health and development
issues and promoting tolerance, understanding and
peace within and between communities and cultures,
is praiseworthy. Several Indian sporting personalities
have associated themselves with United Nations entities
in order to promote peace and protect the environment.
India firmly believes that sporting activity is
integral to the overall development of the human
personality. We support efforts by the United Nations
system to generate awareness among youth through
such initiatives. It must be our collective endeavour to
promote sport and a culture of sport in our countries.
That can only contribute to promoting development,
peace, friendship, cooperation and understanding
among peoples.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): Cyprus maintains
strong links with the Olympic ideal, formed through
my country’s participation in the Olympic Games since
their inception in antiquity. I would like to thank China
for bringing forward the draft resolution (A/76/L.13)
on the Olympic ideal this year. We wish China every
success in hosting the 2022 Winter Olympic Games.
Cyprus once again co-sponsored this year’s annual
draft resolution, thereby reaffirming our commitment
to the principles and ideals it stands for.
While lauding the core values and principles of
Olympism — excellence, fair game, friendship, respect
and solidarity — on a global scale, we need to single out
the one hallowed principle most relevant to us here at
the United Nations: the sacred tradition of the Olympic
Truce. The cessation of hostilities before, during and
after the Games in order to ensure the safe passage of
athletes was underpinned by the superiority of pursuits
that bring people together. Attaining peace through the
creation of a peaceful environment in the service of
collective values and goals that transcend individuals
and nations is a paradigm that the United Nations can
learn from.
21-36478

02/12/2021

Beyond the peace and security pillar, sport can
teach us a lot about equality at a time when inequalities
are growing both within and among nations. The
Olympic arena is the great equalizer, where success
is based only on hard work and personal sacrifice, not
race, gender, wealth or disability. We must extrapolate
that to create a similar level playing field in our
societies as well and among our nations. We can start
by granting our young people full and equal access to
sport. Sport is unique in its capacity to bring people
together. Due to its universal appeal, its convening
power and its sheer force to unite people and overcome
barriers, sport is a tool whose social potential is largely
untapped. Mainstreaming sportsmanship into culture
and education, well beyond allegiance to specific
teams, can help promote Olympism as a philosophy and
a way of life, shaping the ethos of each of our nations.
Fully cognizant of that, Cyprus has long been
organizing an Olympic education programme aimed at
encouraging children’s participation in sport in order to
foster a positive attitude towards physical activity, while
educating them about the Olympic ideal and derivative
values. Furthermore, Cyprus has developed the Pierre
De Coubertin programme to advance Olympic values,
focusing on the promotion of peace through sport.
Cyprus also implemented a code of conduct for its
national sport federations that aims to promote good
governance in sport, the fundamental principles and
values of Olympism, transparency, social responsibility,
gender equality and the development of a healthy and
safe environment in sport so as to contribute to the
social and professional future of athletes and to address
social inequalities. In addition, our long-running
national Sports For All programme provides access for
all to every sport, irrespective of age, gender, income
or disability. Cyprus remains committed to developing
even more policies and programmes in our efforts to
promote peace and conflict resolution through sport,
education, culture, sustainable development and wider
public engagement.
In conclusion, I wish to call our attention to what
the ancient Greeks themselves saw in the Olympic
Games — special potential for the promotion of peace
among their often-warring city-States, one that can
advance international understanding and the cause of
world peace.
Mr. Senbeta (Ethiopia): Let me start by expressing
our appreciation to the People’s Republic of China

A/76/PV.43

for its initiative and effective coordination, and to
all delegations for the work leading up to impending
adoption of draft resolution A/76/L.13.
The Olympics are an embodiment of the power of
sports to bring people together in a joyous atmosphere
in order to reach the goal we all strive towards — peace.
Through the principles of Olympism, we celebrate
human dignity, social responsibility, joy in effort, the
harmonious development of humankind and the creation
of a peaceful society. References to the Olympic Truce
are additional reminders that the Olympic Games mean
much more than sports competitions.
With its long and decorated history of participation
in the Olympics Games, Ethiopia stands as a witness
to the values of Olympism. From Melbourne in 1956 to
Tokyo in 2021, Ethiopians peered into the global event
with great passion and enthusiasm. Our athletes have
proudly hoisted the Ethiopian flag and made not only
their country but also their continent proud.
The Olympics are a true convention that brings
societies together from all corners of the world. It
represents the potential of humankind and, at several
junctures in history, they have awakened us to faulty
divides we created based on race, religion, class and
ideology. That is why we are particularly pleased to
be part of adopting draft resolution A/76/L.13, which
captures the ideals of the Olympics.
Finally, I wish to conclude by congratulating China
for the magnificent preparations it is making prior
to hosting the Winter Olympics in 2022. As it marks
the first time China has hosted the Winter Olympics,
we convey our best wishes for safe, festive and
peaceful Games.
Mr. Kuzmenkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Sport is a paramount achievement of
human civilization, a universal language of human
communication. The well-known expression “sport is an
ambassador of peace” acquires particular significance
when it is sanctified by the noble traditions of the
Olympic truce. The need to raise future generations
in the spirit of a culture of peace, tolerance, mutual
respect and recognition and non-violence proves once
again that Olympic ideals are far from being outdated.
Indeed, they are as relevant as ever.
International cooperation in sport contributes to
overcoming ethnic and religious hatred, fosters mutual
understanding and strengthens intercivilizational

21-3647815/22

A/76/PV.43

dialogue and harmony. We are convinced that support
for sport, including at the State level, is an important
factor that brings the global community together and
advances the ideals of sports movements throughout the
world. We attach great importance to the International
Olympic Committee’s call for an Olympic truce in order
to achieve reconciliation in regional conflicts during
and after the Games.
We express deep gratitude to our Chinese partners
for the preparation of this timely and important draft
resolution to be adopted today (A/76/L.13). The Russian
Federation is traditionally a sponsor of this draft
resolution and fully supports it. We would particularly
like to emphasize the idea of the independence and
autonomy of sport as well as the mission of the
International Olympic Committee in leading the
Olympic movement. We call on everyone to observe the
Olympic truce.
The development of cooperation through sport
occupies an important place in the Russian Federation’s
system of foreign-policy priorities. It is the subject
of ongoing attention by our leaders. The mission of
promoting physical activity and sport in our country
is to provide comprehensive spiritual and physical
development for our citizens, instil the culture and
values of an active lifestyle as the basis for sustainable
development, and bolster the authority of our State in
the international arena.

02/12/2021

We believe that only intergovernmental entities
have the right to monitor States’ efforts to combat
doping. We oppose granting such powers to technical
bodies and categorizing States as good and bad, with the
introduction of sanctions against the latter. Attempts to
use sport as an instrument of pressure in international
politics are unacceptable.
Under the pretext of alleged human rights
violations, some countries are calling for boycotting
international sports forums and are promoting the
unacceptable principle of the collective punishment of
athletes. Interference in the activities of international
independent sports organizations is also unacceptable.
We believe that the upcoming Winter Olympic
Games in Beijing will become a truly global celebration
of sport, delighting fans with new major sporting
achievements and bringing light and joy to every home
on the planet.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic supports the draft
resolution on the Olympic truce resolution entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal” (A/76/PV.13), as it represents
a call for justice to all countries. We are glad to be
one of the sponsors of this draft resolution, and we
wish the Beijing Winter Olympics and Paralympics a
complete success.

We attach the utmost importance to involving as
much of the population as possible in sports. It is a
powerful tool for educating young people in a spirit of
mutual respect, tolerance and rejection of xenophobia.
It can shield youth from destructive forces that provoke
negative phenomena, including terrorism.

Beijing will be the first city in the world to host
both the Summer and Winter Olympic Games. We are
glad to see that important progress has been made in
stadium and infrastructure construction and that event
organization and services have been carried out in an
orderly manner.

We believe that sport should be independent of the
political context and not become a tool of intrigue or
blackmail. We oppose doping in sports and intend to
fight it by all available means. We are open to honest,
professional dialogue with interested and competent
sports authorities.

We believe that the Beijing Winter Olympics and
Paralympics will be a grand gathering for countries
and a fair stage for athletes from all over the world
to compete. We also believe that the Olympic Games
should be free from political interference. We call
on all countries to demonstrate together the Olympic
spirit and show the value of unity, resilience and
international cooperation.

Much is done in our country to support the national
and international Olympic and Paralympic movements
and ensure the broad participation of national athletes
in major international competitions. We are developing
cooperation with international and regional sports
federations and clubs. This provides additional
momentum for the development of sport in our country.
16/22

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a privilege for me on behalf of Ecuador to sponsor
the draft resolution entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”
(A/76/L.13).
21-36478

02/12/2021

Ecuador does not have a tradition in winter sports,
but it will probably be present next year in Beijing
with a small delegation, which will allow us to share
the passion of hundreds of millions of people around
the world. And even if this were not the case, even
if we were not present with athletes in Beijing, we
would still urge respect for the truce proposed in the
draft resolution under consideration by this General
Assembly, with a view to seeing the orderly holding
of the twenty-fourth Winter Olympic Games and the
thirteenth edition of the Winter Paralympic Games,
to be held in February and March, respectively. In
this context, we thank the Permanent Mission of the
People’s Republic of China for its leadership during the
negotiations of the draft resolution.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
acknowledges the contribution of sport to the promotion
of education to sustainable development, peace
cooperation and solidarity, to equity, social inclusion
and health — and all of this at the local, regional and
international levels. Sport sows tolerance and respect. It
is a catalyst for important key issues on the international
agenda, for the empowerment of women and of people
with special abilities, and for the protection of human
rights.
For this reason, we stress the importance of
cooperation among States to collectively, as an
international community, implement the values of
the ekecheiria, that spirit which, as the Permanent
Representative of Greece reminded us, dates back
centuries. We also emphasize the transcendental
role that the International Olympic Committee, the
International Paralympic Committee and the United
Nations system as a whole play in this joint endeavour.
The Government of Ecuador is co-sponsoring the
draft resolution because it is in full agreement with the
principle of the Olympic truce, which outlaws interfering
with travel to and from the site of the Olympic Games,
in the broad scope and sense proposed by this draft
resolution that the General Assembly is preparing to
adopt — a scope that has been clearly expressed by the
representative of the People’s Republic of China.
Mr. Jiménez Echegoyen (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua is proud to co-sponsor the draft
resolution submitted by China (A/76/L.13), which
emphasizes the contributions of sport in promoting
education, sustainable development, peace, cooperation,
solidarity, gender equity, social inclusion and health

A/76/PV.43

in all societies of the world, at the local, regional
and international levels. We also congratulate China,
which will host the twenty-fourth Winter Olympic
Games from 4 to 20 February 2022, and the thirteenth
Winter Paralympic Games from 4 to 13 March 2022,
respectively, in Beijing.
We join in the wish that the holding of the
Olympic Games in Beijing will provide a meaningful
opportunity to harness the power of sport to bring
about positive developments in our international
community by promoting an atmosphere of peace,
development, resilience, tolerance and understanding.
We emphasize that sport is the United Nations, that
it is a universal language that does not discriminate
and that promotes love, solidarity, cooperation, unity,
friendship, education, health and tolerance, which are
indispensable requirements for a more humane world.
Nicaragua recognizes the role that sport plays in
the lives of our young people, in the prevention of the
crime that brings radical and criminal behaviour to our
societies, and in our Government. Sport is also a State
policy that allows us to have a healthier, more active
and more secure population.
Mr. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My country’s
delegation emphasizes the importance of sports in
achieving sustainable development, strengthening the
abilities and capabilities of youth and promoting the
values of mutual understanding and communication
among peoples. These concepts are increasingly
important in the context of the extreme challenges our
world is currently facing.
Egypt is pleased to join the list of sponsors of the
draft resolution submitted by China entitled “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic
ideal” (A/76/L.13). We congratulate China on hosting
both the upcoming Olympic and Paralympic Winter
Games. We also value the constructive consultations
on the draft resolution and hope that it will be adopt by
the General Assembly.
International sporting events are an important
opportunity to promote solidarity and international
interdependence. Egypt’s hosting of the world
championship of table tennis in June was the first grand
championship tournament to be held since the start of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, which demonstrated
the world’s ability to show solidarity through a sporting
event and triumph over current challenges.

21-3647817/22

A/76/PV.43

In conclusion, my delegation expresses its wish for a
successful holding of the 2022 Olympic and Paralympic
Games in Beijing.
Mr. Changara (Zimbabwe): I thank the President
for affording me the opportunity to contribute to
the debate on the Olympic Truce resolution entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal” (A/76/L.13), which the General
Assembly considers every two years, ahead of the
Summer and Winter Olympic Games.
Sport is an important vehicle that unites people
from diverse backgrounds around a common goal. It
transcends cultural, religious and language barriers
and has the potential to change the world for the better.
It also provides societies and communities with a
platform to forge cooperation, develop friendships and
help people focus more on their commonalities than on
their differences.
It is clear that sport promotes, inter alia, good
health, teamwork, friendly competition, fair play, and
a healthy mindset. In that context, it is important that
we harness the power that sport possesses as a force
for good.
Considering that the coronavirus disease pandemic
affected major sporting events, the holding of the
twenty-fourth Olympic Winter Games and the thirteenth
Paralympic Winter Games, scheduled to take place
in Beijing from 4 to 20 February 2022 and from 4 to
13 March 2022, respectively, could not have come at a
better time. The games will present an opportunity for
us to demonstrate the importance of unity, resilience
and the power of international cooperation to overcome
global challenges, including the pandemic.
In conclusion, given the great power of sport to build
a peaceful and better world, Zimbabwe co-sponsored
and fully supports the adoption of the draft resolution
that is before us. We wish the Government and the
people of the People’s Republic of China every success
in organizing the Games. We have confidence in
the organizational prowess of our Chinese brothers
and sisters.
Ms. Alalaiwat (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me thank the President for convening this
important debate on sport for development and peace.
Linking sport with development and peace sends a
noble international message to make them a key part
in the promotion of development and peace. That has
18/22

02/12/2021

been deeply entrenched in many of the Kingdom’s
policies and initiatives with regard to the international
community and has led to the Kingdom’s promotion
of a very active sporting programme. We have hosted
many sporting events, including for youth.
In order to achieve peace and development in the
world through sport, the Kingdom of Bahrain supports
all United Nations initiatives to achieve lasting peace
through sport. We believe that sport is an effective
means to strengthen social ties and the lofty ideals
of peace, brotherhood, solidarity and tolerance. We
therefore thank the Permanent Mission of China for
introducing draft resolution A/76/L.13. We stress
the importance of sport and its role in promoting
cooperation and solidarity. It encourages tolerance,
respect and the empowerment of women and youth and
contributes to the areas of health, education and social
integration, particularly in the context of the current
coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, we reiterate that we will continue to
shoulder our responsibility vis-à-vis the international
community to strengthen the link connecting sport
with peace and development, as well as promote peace,
peaceful coexistence and development throughout the
world
Ms. Motte (France) (spoke in French): In Paris
in 2024, France will be the next country to host the
Olympic Games. The Paris Olympic Games will be
centred on three key pillars — engagement, celebration
and legacy. We believe that sport is a vector for peace,
development and solidarity. We sincerely hope that the
pandemic will be behind us in 2024. France wishes
China every success in organizing the 2022 Winter
Olympic Games.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 64/3, of 19 October 2009, I now give the floor
to the observer of the International Olympic Committee.
Mr. Moreno (International Olympic Committee):
Please let me convey to the General Assembly the
greetings and best wishes of the President of the
International Olympic Committee (OIC), Mr. Thomas
Bach. He would have loved to have been here today;
however, the pandemic situation prevented him
from coming. President Bach asked me to deliver his
statement on his behalf, which I am honoured to do.
“Please let me express my heartfelt thanks and
gratitude to the States Members of the General
21-36478

02/12/2021

Assembly for supporting the Olympic Truce draft
resolution (A/76/L.13). In particular, I would like
to thank the President. My thanks also go to the
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
China for submitting the text in the tradition of
previous Olympic Truce resolutions. I would also
like to thank the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends
of Sport for Sustainable Development — Qatar and
Monaco — as well as the many Member States that
have supported the draft resolution as co-sponsors.
The President returned to the Chair.
“By adopting the draft resolution, the Assembly
will be supporting the mission of the Olympic Games
to unite the best winter-sport athletes of the entire
world, without any discrimination whatsoever, in
a peaceful and respectful competition. That bond
of our shared humanity is even more relevant in
our polarized world today. We can accomplish that
mission only if the Olympic Games stand above and
beyond all political, cultural and other differences.
That will be possible only if the Olympic Games
are politically neutral and do not become a tool to
achieve political goals.
“The ancient Greeks understood that
already 3,000 years ago. They established the
ekecheiria — a sacred truce — which enabled the
participation of all athletes and spectators from
Greek city-States, which were otherwise almost
constantly engaged in conflict with one another. In
that way, there was born from the very beginning
an inseparable link between the Olympic Games
and peace, which allowed the ancient Olympic
Games to take place for approximately 1,000 years.
Just a couple of weeks ago, the original parties to
the ekecheiria — the cities of Olympia, Ilida and
Sparta — solemnly renewed their pledge to uphold
their Olympic Truce declaration. I hope that that
meaningful initiative is an encouragement for all
Member States.
“History also shows us what happens if the
political neutrality of the Olympic Games is not
respected. The ancient Olympic Games came to
an end when the Roman Emperor Theodosius I
effectively abolished them for political reasons.
It took almost 2,000 years before the Olympic
Games could be revived by our founder, Pierre de
Coubertin. I very much hope that we all take that
history lesson to heart.

A/76/PV.43

“Members may ask why that lesson continues
to matter today. The answer is that the Olympic
athletes demonstrate to the entire world that,
yes, it is possible to be fierce rivals and engage
in intense competition, while at the same time
living peacefully and respectfully together. In the
Olympic Village, the athletes from every corner
of the world are living together in harmony. In the
Olympic Games, we are all equal, irrespective of
social background, gender, race, sexual orientation
or political belief. In the Olympic Games, everyone
respects the same rules, which are set by the IOC
and the Olympic Charter.
“In that spirit, the Olympic Winter Games
Beijing 2022 will be an important moment. They
will be the start of a new era of global winter
sport, with 300 million Chinese people engaging
with sport on snow and ice. Global participation
in winter sports will be taken to new levels.
Already, engaging in sports is greatly contributing
to physical and mental health in China. Beijing
2022 will also show the way forward, with all
Olympic venues being powered by renewable
energy. Most venues in Beijing are a legacy of the
Olympic Games Beijing 2008. The millions of new
winter-sports enthusiasts will ensure the use of the
Olympic venues for the future.
“The 2022 Winter Olympic Games will also
be a great demonstration of the safe organization
of such a global event in the context of the zerocoronavirus disease strategy, which has proven
to be very successful for China. In that regard, I
would like to express my gratitude to the Beijing
2022 Organizing Committee, which is preparing
the 2022 Winter Olympic Games with such a great
degree of efficiency and dynamism.
“All the recent test events have highlighted the
outstanding state of preparations. In that regard,
we greatly appreciate the excellent cooperation
with the Organizing Committee in line with the
Olympic Charter and the host city contract.
“The efforts of the IOC to strengthen sport
as an important enabler for the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) do not end there. In
our Olympic Agenda 2020+5 strategic road map,
we highlight how we will fulfil the enabling role
that United Member States have assigned to sport.
With the Olympic Truce resolution, Members

21-3647819/22

A/76/PV.43

02/12/2021

recognize the contribution of sport to peace, health
and many other SDGs. Please let me highlight just
one: climate action.
“The IOC is already a carbon-neutral
organization, and we are even committed to
becoming climate positive by 2024. We are
partnering with the United Nations to plant
an Olympic forest in sub-Saran Africa to
overcompensate for our emissions and improve lives
and livelihoods in 90 villages in the region. The
pandemic, the Sustainable Development Goals and
all of the challenges that we are facing today have
taught us one lesson: We can go faster, we can aim
higher, and we can become stronger, only if we work
together. That is why we have amended our Olympic
motto to, “Faster, Higher, Stronger — Together”.
The word “together” tells us that we need more
solidarity — more solidarity within societies and
more solidarity among societies — because there is
no peace without solidarity.
“In this Olympic spirit, I invite members to
join hands by adopting draft resolution A/76/L.13,
as we work together to accomplish the mission of
the Olympic Games to unite the world in peaceful
and respectful competition.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.13, entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors of
draft resolution A/76/L.13: Albania, Andorra, Austria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Iceland, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya,
Kuwait, Latvia, Libya, Lichtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
20/22

Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Poland,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Samoa,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Vanuatu
and Zambia.
The President: May I take it that it the General
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.13?
Draft resolution
(resolution 76/13).

A/76/L.13

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Mr. Messenger (United States of America): The
United States believes that sport should transcend all
perceived barriers among race, ethnicity, age, gender,
identity, sexual orientation, religion and ability and can
be a valuable means to strengthen cultural relations
among all nations. For those reasons, the United States
Government has long supported international athletic
competitions. Sport should remind us of our common
humanity and provides a universal language that
contributes to building on universal values of respect,
diversity, inclusivity, tolerance and fairness. Those are
the highest ideals of Olympic competition, although not
every Olympic Games achieves them.
In joining the consensus on resolution 76/13, we
understand that the host country has the prerogative
to choose the themes and goals of a specific Olympic
Games, but do not consider the inclusion of the language
in preambular paragraphs 12 and 15 as precedential
or intergovernmentally agreed language. As such, we
must dissociate from those paragraphs.
More broadly, we wish to underscore operative
paragraph 6, which recognizes the important role that
sport and the Olympic and Paralympic Games play
to promote human rights and strengthen universal
respect for such rights worldwide. In that context, we
remind the host country and all Member States of the
need to comply with their human rights obligations
and commitments, including those enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and use the
Olympic and Paralympic Games to take steps to build a
peaceful and better world.
21-36478

02/12/2021

A/76/PV.43

The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.

Particle Physics, as well as science academies around
the world.

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda 12.

We are sure that the International Year will further
encourage Governments to promote campaigns,
activities and practices in favour of achieving those
objectives. In addition, the support of other parties, such
as the media, private companies and the general public,
could enable an acceleration in its preservation and good
use. The final outcome that we are introducing for the
General Assembly’s consideration today demonstrates
the commitment of all delegations to promoting basic
sciences for humankind and to strengthen the teaching
of basic sciences to achieve sustainable development
and improve quality of life for people all around
the world.

Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/76/L.12)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Honduras to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.12.
Ms. Cerrato (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): Under
agenda item 15 and with the support of a vast number
of co-sponsors, Honduras is pleased to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.12, entitled “International Year of
Basic Sciences for Sustainable Development, 2022”.
The draft resolution was prepared pursuant to the
mandate of the UNESCO General Conference, which, at
its fortieth session on 25 November 2019, unanimously
adopted a resolution proposed by its Executive Board in
favour of declaring the year 2022 as the International
Year of Basic Sciences for Sustainable Development by
the United Nations General Assembly.
The ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic
dramatically demonstrates the need for society to
develop the necessary scientific knowledge to tackle
similar emergencies and to assist Governments and
Parliaments in taking difficult decisions. The need for
humankind to both maintain and develop high levels
of interest and participation in basic sciences calls for
regular initiatives to avoid a decreased awareness of
basic sciences.
In that connection, now is the time to hold an
international interdisciplinary year for basic sciences
for sustainable development. Declaring the International
Year has made it possible to identify interested partners
and parties, including the scientific community and
political leaders, to develop synergies and initiate joint
action in line with the vision and objectives of the plan
of action, as well as civil society, particularly national
and international non-governmental organizations and
the private sector. Moreover, the initiative has been
spearheaded by a tenacious coalition of scientists and
partners, including the International Union of Pure
and Applied Physics and the European Laboratory for

We are grateful for the constructive contributions
of those who supported us in crafting a robust draft
resolution to highlight the importance of expanding
activities related to the promotion of basic sciences. We
are further thankful for the guidance provided during
the process by those countries supporting us through
co-sponsorship of the draft resolution. We further thank
UNESCO and the steering committee established to
promote the International Year.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.12.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Téllez Alonso (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
Cuban delegation takes the floor to make a general
statement on draft resolution A/76/L.12, entitled
“International Year of Basic Sciences for Sustainable
Development, 2022”.
The year 2022 will be declared by the United
Nations as the International Year of Basic Sciences
for Sustainable Development today, 2 December.
We are thereby recognizing the utility of science in
the development of society in general. However, it
is relevant that that vision receive more robust and
unanimous support from multilateral bodies. We
applaud the fact that more than 100 organizations from
around the world — including science academies,
scientific societies and institutions for international
cooperation — as well as UNESCO, the World
Academy of Science and the International Council

21-3647821/22

A/76/PV.43

02/12/2021

for Science have all endorsed the proposal that we are
putting forward today.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
presented an unprecedented global health, economic and
social challenge. It has made blatantly clear the need for
solidarity international cooperation and multilateralism
as the only way to tackle the common challenges facing
humankind and our planet. We have also borne witness
once again to our capacity to respond to those common
challenges through the sharing of knowledge and more
advanced resources. However, this is all the more
evident when those benefits are not shared between all
of us as a consequence of the unequal and asymmetric
yet interconnected and interdependent world in which
we live.
In that context, ensuring that multinationalism and
the role of the United Nations in promoting science for
sustainable development is more relevant than ever. The
year 2022 will therefore constitute the ideal opportunity
to promote and foster basic sciences and the crucial role
they play in terms of sustainable development, with a
focus on training future generations of scientists and
citizens. We therefore call on all people to seek to gain
awareness and work for the sustainability of the planet.
In Cuba, significant progress has been made in
various sectors, including biotechnology and genetics.
Those advances have enabled the development of
three vaccines and two candidate vaccines against
COVID-19. That is also the result of our Government’s
political will, as illustrated through the development
achieved in basic sciences.
In that connection, and as a member of the
international committee established to hold the event,
Cuba supports and welcomes the declaration of
2022 as the International Year of Basic Sciences for
Sustainable Development.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.12, entitled “International Year of
Basic Sciences for Sustainable Development, 2022”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce

22/22

that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/76/L.12: Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina
Faso, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Malawi,
Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar,
the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Spain,
Thailand and Ukraine.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.12?
Draft resolution
(resolution 76/14).

A/76/L.12

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Programme of work
The President: Before adjourning, and in reference
to my letter dated 30 November 2021, I would like to
draw the attention of members to the date of recess of
the current session. Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 17 September (see A/76/PV.2),
the General Assembly decided that the seventy-sixth
session would recess on Monday, 13 December 2021
and that the Fifth Committee would complete its work
by Friday, 10 December.
However, I have been informed by the Chair of
the Fifth Committee that the Committee requests
an extension of its work to Thursday, 23 December.
Such an extension would facilitate a comprehensive
consideration of the important agenda items before it.
In that connection, and in view of the work that
remains to be completed for this part of the session,
may I take it that the Assembly agrees to postpone the
date of recess to Thursday, 23 December 2021?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that the General
Assembly agrees to extend the work of the Fifth
Committee until Thursday, 23 December 2021?
It was so decided (decision 76/505).
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

21-36478
