S/PRST/2011/10*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 May 2011
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6532nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 May 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at the continued
instability in Somalia which has led to a multitude of problems, including
terrorism, acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia,
hostage taking and a dire humanitarian situation, and reiterates the need for a
comprehensive strategy to encourage the establishment of peace and stability
in Somalia through the collaborative efforts of all stakeholders.
“The Security Council reiterates its respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia. It reaffirms its support
for the Djibouti Agreement and peace process as the basis for the resolution of
the conflict in Somalia. It reiterates the importance of political outreach and
reconciliation in Somalia, and stresses the importance of broad-based,
representative institutions reached through a political process ultimately
inclusive of all.
“The Security Council expresses its support for the work of
Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
(SRSG), the United Nations and the African Union to promote peace and
reconciliation in Somalia.
“The Security Council notes that the transitional period will end in
August 2011. It commends the work of the SRSG to facilitate the consultative
process among Somalis in their efforts to reach an agreement on
post-transitional arrangements, in consultation with the international
community and within the framework of the Djibouti Agreement. In this
regard, it welcomes the High-Level Consultative meeting held in Nairobi on
12 and 13 April 2011. The Security Council welcomes the participation of a
wide range of Somali stakeholders and partners. It deeply regrets the failure by
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to participate in this consultative
meeting and urges the TFG to engage fully, constructively and without further
delay in the consultative process facilitated by the SRSG, and to support his
efforts to move the peace process forward.
* Reissued for technical reasons on 13 May 2011.

11-33366* (E) 130511

*1133366*

S/PRST/2011/10

“The Security Council welcomes the upcoming consultative meeting to
be held in Mogadishu, which will further the debate generated at the
High-Level Consultative Meeting in Nairobi. The Council urges all Somali
stakeholders to participate in this meeting and play a role in finalising
arrangements for ending the transition in August 2011. It calls upon the
international community, the UN and international organisations to fully
support this meeting.
“The Security Council reiterates the primary responsibility of Somali’s to
achieve peace, security and reconciliation in Somalia. It regrets the decisions
taken by the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) to extend their mandates
unilaterally and urges them to refrain from further unilateral action. The
Security Council urges the TFIs to focus on implementing reforms to build
their legitimacy, representativeness and credibility, and to reach agreement as
soon as possible on the holding of elections for the positions of President and
Speaker of Parliament, without which there can be no extension.
“The Security Council expresses concern at the discord between the TFIs
and its impact on the political process and the security situation. It calls upon
the TFIs to ensure cohesion, unity, and focus on the completion of the
transitional tasks set out by the Djibouti Agreement and the Transitional
Charter. It stresses the importance of cooperation and collective leadership by
the President and Speaker.
“The Security Council notes with concern that many core transitional
tasks remain outstanding and urges the TFIs to demonstrate tangible results on
the completion of these tasks before the end of the transition, prioritising
progress on reconciliation, the constitution and facilitating the delivery of
basic services. It notes its intention to keep the situation under review, and
notes that its future support to the TFIs will be contingent upon the delivery of
tangible results.
“The Security Council strongly commends the progress made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali Security Forces
in consolidating security and stability in Mogadishu and recognises the
significant sacrifices made by these forces. It calls on the TFG to take
advantage of these tactical gains by demonstrating progress on facilitating the
delivery of basic services, the integration of military objectives into a clear
political strategy in line with the Djibouti Agreement, and all the other
benchmarks spelled out in OP 3 of resolution 1964. It calls for an increased
UN presence in Mogadishu and other parts of Somalia, and calls on the UN to
work in a coordinated manner.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to AMISOM and
expresses its continued appreciation for the commitment of troops by the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda. It stresses the importance of predictable,
reliable and timely resources for AMISOM in order for it to better fulfil its
mandate. The Security Council calls upon the international community to
make contributions urgently to AMISOM, without caveats. It notes the
recommendations on Somalia of the African Union Peace and Security Council
of 15 October 2010 and underlines its intension to keep the situation under
review.

2

11-33366

S/PRST/2011/10

“The Security Council calls upon all states, particularly in the region, to
fully implement the Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes. The Security
Council condemns attacks, including terrorist attacks, on the TFG, AMISOM,
and the civilian population by armed opposition groups and foreign fighters,
particularly Al Shabaab. It calls upon all opposition groups to lay down their
arms and join the peace process.”

11-33366

3
