S/PV.9424

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9424th meeting

Tuesday, 26 September 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Hamamoto
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-27820 (E)
*2327820*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Dirk Pohlmann, journalist; and Mr. Jimmy Dore,
political commentator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pohlmann.
Mr. Pohlmann: My name is Dirk Pohlmann. I
have been an investigative journalist and documentary
filmmaker for 37 years and have written and directed
more than 20 documentaries, mostly about intelligence
operations of the Cold War and aired on television in
approximately 30 countries. I am independent, I am
a freelancer, and I am not on any payroll. I reported
repeatedly about the Nord Stream sabotage and have
contacted and interviewed many researchers on
this subject.
One year after that severe act of terrorism, we know
astonishingly little. For example, we do not know how
many explosions destroyed the alleged four damaged
sites. We have seismic data for only two explosions: at
12.03 a.m. and 5.04 p.m., Universal Time Coordinated
(UTC). We do not know who did it. I omit the baseless
Western-sponsored conspiracy theory of Russia as the
culprit. I think it is fair to say the authorities in Germany,
Denmark, Sweden and other Western countries know
enough to know that they do not want to know more.
The truth would open a Pandora’s box for NATO.
The version pushed in Germany via the media by
the State, which itself is completely silent because of
the “well-being of the State”, which can be translated
to “national security”, and because of the “thirdparty rule” on intelligence cooperation, is that it was
probably a Ukrainian operation, using a sail boat with
six people on board, including four divers, but without
the knowledge of the Ukrainian Government. I trust
this version as far as I can throw a washing machine.
But there is actually new evidence, which I want
to present here. Professor Emeritus Ola Tunander,
2/15

26/09/2023

formerly of the Peace Research Institute Oslo, wrote
to me upon request, stressing that the location of the
sabotage was at a very deep position of the pipeline,
at 80 metres depth. In some distance to each side, the
depth would have been 30 to 40 metres. Why was the
deep location picked? Remember this information for
later. Tunander wrote to me:
“The explosives were deployed in the Bornholm
Basin at a depth of 75 to 80 metres. Such deep dives
require a decompression chamber. The story about
a small sailing boat is impossible. It cannot bring
the necessary decompression chamber. The depth
indicates professional or military divers.
“Norwegian seismological station NORSAR
states a magnitude 2.1 to 2.3 of the explosion,
which corresponds to 650 to 900 kg of TNT.
GEOFON Potsdam claimed that the magnitude was
higher — 3.1 — which would correspond to several
tons of TNT. This operation would be impossible to
run from a small sailing boat.
“Each section of the pipeline of steel and
concrete is 12 metres long and has a weight of 24
tons. About 250 metres of the pipeline Nord Stream
string A and string B have been blown away. It was
a huge blast run by a State agency.
“When you do a huge professional operation,
you first need a cover for the deployment of the
bombs, and secondly, you need to disconnect the
deployment from the triggering of the bombs.
Otherwise, people would easily find out who
the perpetrators are. The obvious cover was the
BALTOPS 22 exercise in June 2022, with 45 ships
from various NATO countries. They exercised mine
warfare with divers and unmanned underwater
vehicles. United States ships like the small aircraft
carrier USS Kearsarge, 257 metres, and USS
Gunston Hall, 190 metres, were both capable of
bringing a midget submarine, which could have
been useful for the deployment of explosives at
such a depth.”
The two ships can transport and deploy
minisubmarines and load them back into the hull on
high seas.
“One witness as well as Seymour Hersh have
both claimed that United States Navy divers with
deep diving equipment from Panama City, Florida,
were present. They had nothing to do with the
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

exercise. They had very likely been used to deploy
the bombs.
“Seymour Hersh claims that they had dropped
a sonar buoy from a P-8A Poseidon aircraft.
The buoy had sent a coded signal that triggered
the timers of the bombs. This is an easy and
practical way to do it. Seymour Hersh’s sources,
supposedly from the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA), also told him that the United States had
used a Norwegian Poseidon to pull the trigger.
Americans like ‘plausible deniability’, but there
is something we have to add. It might have been
the United States plan, but such an operation did
not fit with traditional Norwegian security policy.
So the Norwegians at a higher level seem to have
backed out, contrary to the information Seymour
Hersh got.”
What happened instead is the following — and
everything I quote here is new:
“On 21 September, a United States Poseidon
flew from Sigonella, Italy, up to the Nordholz navy
airfield in Germany and flew for three nights back
and forth over Bornholm from 22 to 25 September
and then on 26 September back to Sigonella. It
could easily have dropped a sonar buoy over the
sea close to Bornholm. If Hersh was right that the
Norwegians were supposed to drop the sonar buoy,
the Americans at Sigonella would have to fetch it
from Norway. On 14 September, a United States
Hercules flew seven hours up from Sigonella to
Andenes, northern Norway, and then back to
Sigonella over Keflavik. We have reason to believe
that the Hercules fetched something very important
in Norway — a specific sonar buoy — and brought
it to Sigonella.”
It also should be noted that the Norwegians had
bought P-8s, and they are in the process of training
the crews, especially the electronic warfare and
anti-submarine worker crews. So this involves a mix
of people. It is not on the record in Norway, but it can
be used by Norway, or it could be used by the United
States. That is background information.
“Two hours before the first explosion at 12.03
a.m. UTC, a United States Poseidon left Keflavik,
Iceland, for the waters east of Bornholm. It arrived
at Bornholm one hour after the first explosion. At
the same time as the explosion, strangely enough, at
exactly the minute when the United States Poseidon
3/15

26/09/2023

was south-west of Norway, a United States tanker
aircraft left the United States Spangdahlem air base
in Germany for Poland to refuel the Poseidon so it
would be able to patrol the waters east of Bornholm
for the upcoming four hours. It turned off its
transponder at 3.10 a.m. UTC and turned it on again
three hours later, still east of Bornholm. At 7 a.m.,
the Poseidon flew over the site of the explosion for
the last time, then climbed to an altitude of 10,000
metres and returned to Keflavik.”
I also asked Mr. Hans Benjamin Braun, an eminent
Swiss physicist with many publications in top journals
who has been teaching as a professor at some leading
universities. He stated the following:
“So far, the official reports all agreed on the fact
that the pipelines were destroyed with an explosive
charge equivalent to a few hundred kilograms of
conventional explosive, TNT equivalent. These
reports are not only mutually contradictory, but
also contradict basic physical considerations,
thus invalidating the hypothesis of the use of a
conventional explosive. In contrast, several solid
pieces of geophysical evidence — namely, seismic
waveforms, placement of explosives, aerosol cloud
after explosion, underwater currents, temperature
increase on ocean floor with concomitant reduced
biomass production and gamma-ray detection in
Poland — point towards the use of an explosive
charge at least a thousand times of what has been
reported previously.”
Those results were presented in a detailed report
initially submitted to the Swiss Government on
4 January 2023 by Mr. Braun and to its representation
on the United Nations Security Council.
“Without going into details, I demonstrate here
that the hypothesis of the use of a conventional
explosive of moderate strength is already
invalidated by a close inspection of the official
reports. In order to appreciate those contradictions,
it should be noted that the mathematical relation
between seismic magnitude on the Richter scale and
explosive charge is a logarithmic one: a magnitude
increase by one corresponds to a 10-fold increase in
seismic amplitude.”
If we go from two to three, it is not linear — it is
10 times as much.
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

26/09/2023

“For underwater explosions, it corresponds to a
35-fold increase in explosive mass.

of the explosion site in the shadow of Bornholm, so
to speak.”

“The official reports on the magnitude of the
larger explosion that destroyed Nord Stream 1 on
Swedish territory go back to an original report by
Norway’s NORSAR, as Mr. Tunander stated, which
reported an event of a 2.1 magnitude on the Richter
scale. That corresponds to approximately 700
kilograms of TNT equivalent. However, that data
was presented without units on the graph” — that
is very rare in a scientific publication, to have no
units on the graph — “and lacked scientific basis.
Despite that serious shortcoming, an explosive
charge of that magnitude or less has been quoted in
the media ever since.”

So the readings we have are from the back of
Bornholm and are thus lower.

That is what we hear all the time: 500 to
900 kilograms.
“In contrast, the official entry into the
seismic GEOFON database is a magnitude of
3.1 and thus 35 times larger than the previous
estimate, corresponding to roughly 25 tons of TNT
equivalent. As a much smaller explosive charge
would have been sufficient to destroy the pipeline,
that raises considerable doubts about the nature of
the explosive charge used.
“That considerable amount of explosive charge
has been placed on Nord Stream 1 at a location such
that the elliptically-shaped Swedish coastline acted
as a focusing mirror for the emitted shockwave.
Also, it was placed so that there was a direct and
unobstructed connection between the site and the
Kaliningrad coast through a submarine canyon.”
So there is something like a bowl in the ocean with
a canyon in the direction of Kaliningrad.
“If you recall Mr. Tunander’s question as to
why the sabotage was done in great depth, such a
direct connection would not have been possible a
few kilometres up or downstream along the Nord
Stream pipeline. The location of the explosion site
was designed to generate a shockwave directed
at Kaliningrad.”
I would remark that it was probably a message to the
Russian Government. Again, according to Mr. Braun:
“This effect was missed in the official reports,
which were restricted to seismic stations to the west
4/15

“In fact, a thorough evaluation of several
seismic stations around the Baltic Sea yields a
Richter magnitude of 4, suggesting the use of at
least 150 tons of TNT. This raises serious concerns
about the nature of the explosive charge being used
in the attack.
“These large seismic signals have been
attempted to be explained by the thrust of methane
gas exiting from the destroyed pipeline. With the
reported pressure, the speed of the resulting shock
is significantly lower than the speed of sound in
water, which is 1.5 kilometres per second. As a
result, the exiting methane cannot explain the
observed magnitudes in the Baltic Sea.
“There are reports of technogenic craters
with a depth of 3 to 5 metres. Several independent
reports have related crater size to explosive weight,
including nuclear underwater explosions. Also,
a rough estimate of explosive charge yields at
least 20 to 150 tons of TNT, again invalidating
the hypothesis of a small amount of conventional
explosive. These facts about the explosion that
destroyed Nord Stream 1, together with independent
geophysical observations, are inconsistent with
the reported use of a conventional explosive of
a few hundred kilograms. The observations are
rather consistent with an explosive charge of 1 to 4
kilotons of TNT equivalent.”
In an earlier report from 31 December 2022,
Mr. Braun elaborated on a total of seven independent
geophysical observations that are at variance with the
reported use of a moderate explosive. The quantitative
estimates place a strict lower bound on the explosive
charge of 150 tons of TNT, which is at least 400 times
the value of the official reports.
The current findings are of high importance, as
reflected by the statement by one of the reviewers: “The
scientific results are relevant for current international
affairs and warrant urgent reporting.”
In view of the seriousness of the matter, it is
important that independent and objective evidence is
secured, which requires the authority of the United
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

Nations Security Council. An absence of action puts
humankind at large at risk.
Mr. Braun said that, for further details of his
analysis, he refers to his recent presentations and his
report, which was already forwarded to the Swiss
Government and its representation to the United Nations
Security Council on 4 January 2023. Mr. Braun has
offered to present his in-depth analysis in detail to the
Security Council and offers again to do so through me.
I now wish to make some remarks of my own.
The Baltic seabed is packed with hydrophones. The
Western navies have been able to identify every vessel
in and on the surface of the Baltic since the late 1970s.
The propellers create something like a fingerprint. A
German television crew filming a 30-minute report
with the allegedly used Andromeda sailing yacht with
an ominous soundtrack should have recorded the sound
of the Andromeda’s motor and propeller, which were
allegedly used at the sabotage site. The motor must
have been used to keep the ship’s position. The crew
should then have asked the NATO navies to check
whether Andromeda was there at the right time at the
site of the explosion.
I would also like to remark that Soviet pipelines
have been a source for Western intelligence operations
before. Enrico Mattei, the most successful Italian oil
manager and head of Eni, was killed when his private
jet crashed in 1962. He was hated by the United States
mineral oil industry for his immense business success
in North African countries. In a memo to the CIA,
the United States mineral oil industry called him “an
even greater villain than the Soviet Union” when he
arranged what was then the biggest business deal in
Italy with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics — a
barter agreement to build pipelines to Italy for Soviet
oil. In 1997, it was proven that the crash was not due to
bad weather, as previously thought, as there were metal
splinters found in his exhumed bones — the effect of a
bomb in the jet.
In 1982, the CIA destroyed the Yamal pipeline
with malfunctioning chips infiltrated into the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in an elaborate
intelligence operation. The former Secretary of the
Air Force Thomas Reed told me in an interview how
he witnessed, as member of the United States National
Security Council, the message that a 3-kiloton burst was
recorded in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and
a CIA official told them that the biggest conventional
5/15

26/09/2023

explosion ever was the result of a CIA operation, not
a nuclear warhead of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. It was just one of a string of operations
against the Yamal-Europe pipeline.
When the former Social Democratic German
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt insisted on the gas pipeline
deal in the early 1980s to secure cheap Soviet gas
for Europe, although former United States President
Reagan told him to stop the contract in a one-on-one
meeting, with Schmidt looking out the window while
Reagan spoke to him, it meant he fell from grace. The
Conservative Helmut Kohl became the new Chancellor
of Germany without an election by an allegedly United
States’ assisted vote of no confidence in Germany in
the Parliament.
Lately, when it comes to Russian gas, the United
States has no allies but only hostages. On top of that,
some hostages suffer from Stockholm syndrome, such
as the current Swedish and German Governments.
The President: I thank Mr. Pohlmann for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dore.
Mr. Dore: I am here to speak today about the attack
on the Nord Stream pipeline that took place one year
ago on 26 September 2022. Four explosions ruptured
the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines that carried natural
gas from Russia to Europe. It was the biggest act of
industrial sabotage in human history, severing the main
artery for energy from Russia to Germany — cheap
energy that was critical to maintaining Germany’s
industrial base.
We have heard every cockamamie and ridiculous
theory on how that happened. One does not need to
be a genius investigative reporter to figure out who is
the culprit of the Nord Stream attack. Incredibly, most
Western news outlets ignore the fact that the President
of the United States Joe Biden himself announced on
9 February 2022 that he would in fact attack the Nord
Stream 2 pipeline saying,
“If Russia invades Ukraine, tanks crossing the
border again, there will no longer be a Nordstream
2 pipeline, we will bring an end to it… I promise
you we will be able to do it.”
Even with that pre-admission of guilt from the President
of the United States, most of the Western press remained
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

baffled as to who could have pulled off the greatest act
of ecoterrorism in history.
Luckily we do not have to rely on my interpretation
of President Biden’s clear threat to attack the pipelines,
we actually have Seymour Hersch, a genius investigative
reporter with an impeccable reputation and credentials,
who reported that in June 2022, United States Navy
divers, operating under the cover of a widely publicized
summer NATO Baltic Operations 2022 exercise known
as BALTOPS 22, planted the remotely triggered
explosives which, three months later, destroyed three of
the four Nord Stream pipelines, according to a source
with direct knowledge of the operational planning.
And like all criminals, the perpetrators could
not contain their elation over committing the crime.
Shortly after the attack many high-ranking United
States officials could not help but brag about their
achievement, and expressed multiple times how they
were proud of being able to put an end to the pipelines.
Undersecretary of State Victoria Nuland said,
“I am, and I think the administration is, very
gratified to know that Nord Stream 2 is now, as
you like to say, a hunk of metal at the bottom of
the sea.”
The United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken
called it a tremendous opportunity to once and for all
remove the dependence on Russian energy.
One has to be a paid liar to not acknowledge the
hand of the United States in carrying out those attacks.
Not only did President Biden declare he would do that,
but high-ranking United States Government officials
have said similar things for years. We can look to
2014 when former Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice
stated that,
“Over the long run, you simply want to change the
structure of energy dependence. You want to depend
more on the North America energy platform.”
That is what this is really all about, an economic
war between the West and Russia in order to fill the
pockets of rapacious capitalists who actually pull the
strings of the United States Government and dictate
foreign policy.
Let us pull back and take a look at the context in
which that pipeline bombing occurred, shall we? It is
all happening under the guise of defending Ukraine
from an unprovoked Russian invasion. But of course
6/15

26/09/2023

that is only true if you start the story of the Ukraine
war somewhere near the end of the story instead of the
beginning, which would indict Ukraine, the United
States and NATO.
The United States and NATO are to blame, which is
why the Western media always leaves the origin of the
conflict out of their coverage and leaves most people in
the dark with a false version of the cause of the conflict.
Most Americans believe that Vladimir Putin woke
upon one day and decided, for no particular reason, to
invade Ukraine and start a war completely out of the
blue. That is what supporters of Ukraine in this war
actually believe because that is the only narrative they
hear from their news media which is funded by the
people who profit off this war: the military industrial
complex, the fossil fuel companies in the West and, of
course, Wall Street.
A crude analogy of the Western media’s coverage
of the Russian invasion is the following. Let us say
Vladimir Putin was standing at a bus stop, and there
was an old lady standing in the street, and a bus was
heading straight for her. Vladimir Putin pushes the old
lady out of the way of the oncoming bus and down onto
the concrete sidewalk. The Western corporate media
would start that story near the end by saying, “Russian
President pushes old lady down onto the concrete”.
The same goes for the entirety of the Ukraine/
Russia war. The Western media starts the story of the
war at 24 February 2022, which is definitely not when
the conflict started. They leave out the 2014 coup d’état
of the democratically elected Ukraine Government
orchestrated by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
in conjunction with Ukrainian Nazis. They leave out
the fact that the Russian-speaking ethnic population in
the eastern part of Ukraine known as the Donbas did
not want to go along with the CIA/Nazi Government of
the coup and so the right-wing Ukrainian Government,
which had just taken power via the coup, started
shelling the citizens of the Donbas via their henchmen
known as the Nazi Azov Battalion which ended up
killing approximately 18,000 civilians in the Donbas.
They leave out also the fact that there was a peace
agreement that was reached to end the shelling by the
Ukraine Government and the Nazi Azov Battalion
known as the Minsk accords because the party that
broke that peace agreement was not Russia but the
Ukrainian Government and the Nazis. They leave out
the fact that there was already an overall peaceful way
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

to avoid war and the slaughter of hundreds of thousands
of precious Ukrainians, which was recently admitted to
by the Secretary General of NATO. He admitted that it
was the expansion of NATO onto Russia’s border that
was the real provocation and the fact that the United
States and NATO refused to stop their expansion onto
Russia’s border.
All that amnesia is necessary for the continued
aggression and warmongering of the United States
and NATO to be accepted by the citizens of the United
States and Europe. Well, I am here to cure them of their
amnesia and remind them of the true cause of not only
the Nord Stream bombing, but of the entire Ukraine war
and the destabilization of the Middle East, including
Libya, Iraq, Afghanistan and Syria. The reason for that
is the imperialistic lust of the United States empire. The
United States now has over 800 military bases around
the world without being able to cite an actual threat
to its sovereignty. The United States is now ending its
empire the way all empires end, by overextending itself
militarily, while it starves its own people at home.
The real threat is the threat to the United States’
economic interests. The United States has for decades
feared German engineering and capital joining Russia’s
natural resources and manpower. As elucidated very
clearly by the founder of the United States intelligence
firm Stratfor, George Friedman, in his 2010 book says:
“Russia does not threaten America’s global
position, but the mere possibility that it might
collaborate with Europe and particularly Germany
opens up the most significant threat in the decade,
a long-term threat that needs to be nipped in the
bud.” (The Next Decade: Empire and Republic in a
Changing World, p. 141)
Therefore, maintaining a powerful wedge between
Germany and Russia is of overwhelming interest to the
United States. For the United States, Friedman added
in 2015, the primordial fear is German technology
and German capital combining with Russian natural
resources and Russian manpower to form the only
combination that has for centuries scared the hell out of
the United States. In this showdown, the United States
aims to control the line from the Baltics to the Black
Sea. Russia, by contrast, must have at least a neutral
Ukraine, not a pro-Western Ukraine, because a neutral
Ukraine would impede the primordial United States
goal of a Russia-German fissure. The United States has
opted for a proxy war instead.
7/15

26/09/2023

Western Governments are silent — even as the
United States says, through anonymous sources, that
Ukraine is responsible for the Nord Stream attack, but
they will not blame Ukraine publicly. So the United
States continues to arm Ukraine to the teeth in hopes
of extending the war and avoiding peace. The Germans
say it is Ukraine, but will not release their official
investigation and will not make an announcement.
The final obscenity is that people in the West who
claim to be environmentalists and claim to care about
climate change and the environment say nothing about
the worst release of methane gas in human history.
Their actions reveal that they do not actually care about
climate change and continue to support this war and its
ecoterrorism. In a bizarre twist, even Greta Thunberg
travelled to Ukraine to meet with Zelenskyy after the
Nord Stream bombing.
I thank the Council for allowing me to speak.
The President: I thank Mr. Dore for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Dirk Pohlmann and Jimmy Dore
for their briefings, which once again demonstrated
to the Security Council that the citizens of Western
countries also have a great deal of questions for their
Governments amid the numerous inconsistencies in
the narrative promoted by Washington and its allies in
connection with the bombing of the Nord Stream gas
pipelines in September 2022.
Exactly a year has passed since the sabotage in
the Baltic Sea. Nearly the same amount of time has
passed since the first Council meeting on this topic (see
S/PV.9144). Over the past 12 months, we have heard a
great deal about how the national investigations carried
out by Germany, Denmark and Sweden are on the verge
of finding the perpetrators of this crime. However,
to date there have been no results, despite the seven
Council meetings — both open and closed — held on
this topic.
At the same time, more and more evidence is
emerging in the expert community showing that the
Nord Stream explosion is the work of Washington,
which stooped to committing this outrageous crime,
guided by a narrow selfish desire to consolidate its
dominance in Europe, which is in dire need of Russian
energy resources.
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

Today’s sad anniversary is an excellent opportunity
to briefly recall the timeline of events. Let me remind
the Council of the key points.
As early as 28 September, immediately after
the sabotage, the Prosecutor General’s Office of the
Russian Federation opened a criminal case under the
article relating to acts of international terrorism. On
29 September, in their letter to the Security Council,
Denmark and Sweden indicated that the Nord Streams
were destroyed by explosive devices. This seems to
have been the only specific conclusion we have heard
in all this time. However, the German Prosecutor
General’s Office began its official investigation only
on 10 October.
In October 2022, communiqués were sent from
the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, Mikhail
Mishustin, to Berlin, Copenhagen and Stockholm on
the need to conduct a comprehensive investigation into
the incident, with the participation of representatives
of the Russian authorities and the Gazprom company.
There have been no responses to those letters over the
past year.
In November, the Prosecutor General’s Office of
the Russian Federation sent requests to the competent
German, Danish and Swedish authorities to provide
legal assistance and form joint investigative teams. In
response, we received only boilerplate non-responses.
The members of the Council had the opportunity to see
that with their own eyes when, in March, we distributed
copies of our correspondence with the authorities of
those countries (S/2023/193 and S/2023/223).
Against the backdrop of that unacceptable situation,
the Russian Federation submitted a draft resolution to
the Security Council asking the Secretary-General to
present proposals for the creation of an independent
international commission to investigate the act of
sabotage. Tomorrow marks exactly six months since
the vote on that draft resolution (see S/PV.9295). Its
text was absolutely depoliticized. It took into account
all the specific comments and proposals made by
Council members during informal consultations that
lasted an entire month. However, the draft resolution
was not accepted. Let me note that the main argument
made by the colleagues who abstained on the voting
was their so-called “full confidence” in the national
investigations being carried out by the authorities of
Germany, Denmark and Sweden. Well, another six
months have elapsed, but there are still no results.
8/15

26/09/2023

And this despite the fact that concern about the lack
of any kind of intelligible news for such a long time
from Berlin, Copenhagen and Stockholm, has been
expressed not only by Russia, China and Brazil, which
called for an international investigation in March, but
also by a number of other Council members.
Moreover, in a clear show of disrespect for the
Council, Germany, Denmark and Sweden ignored the
request to speak at the 11 July Security Council meeting
(see S/PV.9373), limiting themselves to circulating yet
another letter. Said letter very openly acknowledged
that the ongoing investigations may not lead to any
results at all. I would like to ask our colleagues who so
zealously support those national investigations — what
is the point of holding back the collective efforts of
Council members if those countries themselves have
doubts about the effectiveness of the work they are
undertaking? All this looks very much like an imitation
of vigorous activity and an attempt to deprive Council
members of access to information directly related to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I would like to remind the Council that we are not
talking about some hooligan prank. We are talking
about a terrorist attack that targeted international
pipeline infrastructure and led to severe economic and
environmental consequences for a number of States. No
one denies that it was committed using an explosive
device. Therefore, there is every reason to believe
that it falls under the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, of 15 December
1997, to which Germany, Denmark and Sweden are
party. This international legal instrument explicitly
states the obligations of its parties to investigate
relevant crimes, to extradite or prosecute perpetrators
and to provide each other with maximum assistance
in connection with investigations, prosecutions or
extradition proceedings. The authorities of the three
mentioned States continue to ignore those obligations.
The words of German Chancellor Olaf Scholz about
his intention to see the matter through are strikingly
at odds with the matter itself, given the total lack of
relevant information.
Moreover, there are increasing signs that instead of
efforts to identify the circumstances of what occurred,
we are actually observing an attempt to conceal those
circumstances. A coordinated campaign to promote
completely ridiculous versions of events is gaining
ground in Western media. What have we not heard over
the past year? We heard that Russia itself blew up a
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

gas pipeline that was functioning in its interests. We
heard that it was carried out by tourists on a sailing
yacht, who, according to one version, acted practically
on their own initiative, without any State support,
and, according to another, acted on the orders of the
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine,
Mr. Zaluzhny, but in total secret from his immediate
leader — President Zelenskyy. Even more ridiculous
are reports published in some European media about
Western intelligence services, including those of
the United States, supposedly being aware of the
Ukrainians’ plans and even attempting to dissuade the
latter from implementing said plans, but with no luck.
Yet when we look at the rejection of the peace treaty
with Russia in March 2022, it is clear that the Kyiv
authorities cannot go against the will of their Western
backers on such a serious issue.
It is hard not to notice what all those versions have
in common. Each denies Washington’s involvement in
the commission of this crime. And they all began to
sprout like mushrooms after a spring rain soon after a
major investigation by American journalist and Pulitzer
Prize-winner Seymour Hersh was published earlier this
year, which briefers already mentioned today. That
investigation provided many facts indicating that the
explosive charges on the Nord Stream pipelines were
placed by American divers during the NATO BALTOPS
exercise in the summer of 2022. Incidentally, he
published today new material supporting that version,
which shows that the bombing was carefully planned
over several months and demonstrates how thought
was given to covering their tracks after the attack. I
recommend that all Council members familiarize
themselves with his findings.
We all also remember President Biden’s comment
that “there will be no longer a Nord Stream 2; we will
bring an end to it”, which was made at a press conference
with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz on 7 February
2022; the overt joy of Under-Secretary of State Victoria
Nuland that the pipeline was, as she said, “a hunk
of metal at the bottom of the sea”, at the 26 January
Senate meeting; and the gratitude expressed to the
United States for bombing the Nord Stream pipelines
tweeted by former Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs
Radosław Sikorski. And let us not forget how some of
the Western members of the Council, unable to contain
their emotions, stated openly at Council meetings that
the Nord Stream explosions were a response to Russia’s
actions in Ukraine. Such candid confessions would have
9/15

26/09/2023

enabled even a novice investigator to easily solve the
case. However, since Germany, Denmark and Sweden
have been tasked with covering up the involvement of
their big brother from across the ocean, the investigators
have had their hands tied and eyes blindfolded.
Therefore, as Seymour Hersh told us, following
the meeting between Joe Biden and Olaf Scholz, the
American and German intelligence services were
instructed to come up with an alternative version
of events and gradually leak it to the media. That is
exactly what they are doing now, but their fabrications
are extremely implausible. And leaks about the actual
circumstances of the tragedy do not make it any easier for
Western storytellers. In particular, we recall the letter
dated 7 October 2022 from State Secretary Graichen at
the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate
Action to Bundestag Left Party member Nastić, which
was made available to the public, making it clear
that even before the beginning of the investigation,
German authorities had received some intelligence, the
disclosure of which allegedly could have harmed the
national interests of Germany. I wonder what kind of
information could have harmed the party, which, one
would think has been the victim alongside Russia?
Whatever it may be confirms yet again the fact that
Western investigators are not interested in the truth,
which on the contrary gets in their way.
What are we left with then, one year after the
terrorist attack? We have threats from the highest level
of the United States leadership involving the operations
of a cross-border, undersea gas pipeline; its subsequent
bombing, which was an act of international terrorism,
with dangerous consequences for international peace
and security, the economy, the environment and
navigation in the Baltic Sea; the transparent delight
of high-ranking representatives of the American
and pro-American establishment; the resistance of
Western countries to the idea of launching impartial
and inclusive international investigations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General; and the glaring
ineffectiveness of the German, Swedish and Danish
national investigations. At the same time, information
is being force-fed to the media in order to shift
responsibility to anyone other than the United States
in an attempt to counter every objective fact. In such
a situation, I would not even bother to use the cliché
“you can draw your own conclusions”. If there are still
any illusions, a year later, it is probably time to let go
of them.
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

I have no doubt that today we will once again hear
from our Western colleagues that Russia is allegedly
diverting the Council‘s attention from more serious
problems by insisting on discussing the terrorist attack
on the Nord Stream pipelines. Their tactics are simple
and clear, namely, to drag things on for as long as they
can, ideally for another one, two or three years and then to
state the impossibility of carrying out the investigation,
owing to the statute of limitations. We would advise
them not to waste their time and energy on such tactics.
All such attempts are doomed to failure beforehand.
Our country will continue to seek to objectively and
thoroughly establish all the circumstances behind
the events, with the due involvement of Russian
investigative agencies and all parties concerned, and to
bring to justice those who ordered and carried out that
act of sabotage. We will use all means at our disposal to
that end, including in the Security Council.
As part of that work, my country intends to submit a
draft presidential statement on this matter — the text of
which will be presented in the coming days. We believe
that the Security Council should speak out clearly on the
terrorist attack and insist on the need for an objective
investigation and punishment for those responsible. We
count on the support of all those who realize that to do
otherwise would mean that any country could become
the victim of such an attack committed by a State drunk
on the idea of its own impunity. The Security Council
must send a clear message that crimes targeting crossborder pipeline infrastructure are unacceptable and
that it is impossible to avoid responsibility for them.
That is the only way to prevent their recurrence.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): I thank the briefers for
their remarks.
Energy is one of the cornerstones of modern life, and
the reliable supply of natural gas is crucial. Given the
heightened fragility of the global energy landscape, acts
that endanger critical infrastructure pose a significant
risk to many. Against that backdrop, Japan is acutely
alarmed by the incident involving the Nord Stream
pipelines and its long-term environmental implications.
We are following carefully the investigations led by
the Governments of Germany, Sweden and Denmark. We
are confident that they will be executed with the utmost
fairness. We trust that the outcomes of the national
investigations will be made public in a transparent
manner and will be reported expeditiously to the
Security Council. The Council bears the responsibility
10/15

26/09/2023

for addressing issues that affect international peace and
security. In order to fulfil that function, the Council
must have the facts before it. Japan looks forward to
seeing the results of the investigations conducted by the
national authorities.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the
presidency for convening this meeting on an important
pending issue.
The explosions involving the Nord Stream 1 and 2
gas pipelines have caused enormous economic losses,
contributed to aggravating international tensions and
heightened geopolitical uncertainty in the region. Any
attack on massive energy infrastructure is bound to
have a profound impact on how international actors
perceive the security of their own critical assets. It is
also disconcerting to witness the insufficient attention
being paid to the environmental impacts of the
explosions. That stands in stark contrast to the readiness
of many nations to assign blame when incidents occur
in other regions of the globe.
It is important and urgent to determine the causes
of the incident. Brazil has expressed on numerous
occasions its confidence in the investigations
conducted by the national authorities of Denmark,
Germany and Sweden. We do so again today, and we
reiterate our support for the conduct of the procedures,
without external interference. At the same time, we
believe that the seriousness of the episode — a clear
threat to international peace and security — requires
the transparent and timely disclosure of at least the
preliminary conclusions of those investigations.
The lack of reliable information leaves ample room
for speculation and accusations, including those related
to the war in Ukraine. It only feeds the already very high
tensions. We certainly do not need to aggravate them.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): We are once
again meeting today on the issue of the sabotage of the
Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines off the Baltic Sea
on 26 and 27 September 2022. Those were malicious
acts against energy infrastructure that sparked Council
members’ outrage and condemnation. The extent of the
material damage, the environmental repercussions of
the underwater explosions, the short-term economic
losses resulting from interim navigation and overflight
conservation measures, as well as the long-term losses
resulting from the fact that the installations were
rendered inoperable, are considerable and have created
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

legitimately high expectations that we will see the
investigations that have been done produce conclusions.
The Security Council is still waiting for the report
of the joint investigation, which we are all expecting
will shed light on the true circumstances of these acts
and on their perpetrators. One year after the events
occurred, the lack of progress on the matter is fuelling
all kinds of suspicions and speculation that could
call into question the desire of the parties to bring
the investigations to a successful conclusion. In that
regard, my country urges all the parties to engage in
an inclusive, transparent and non-politicized way. It
goes without saying that any obstruction or opacity in
the progress of the investigations would be detrimental
to its credibility and trustworthiness in the current
context. It is important to ensure that cooperation
and the exchange of information prevail over all other
considerations, with a view to encouraging the truth
to emerge.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
have listened carefully to the speakers. As we mark the
year that has passed since the explosions that occurred
in the Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines in the Baltic
Sea, and as it is clear that they were acts of sabotage,
I want to reiterate my delegation’s condemnation of
the incident. There can be no justification for attacks
on essential civil infrastructure, including energy
infrastructure, and we deplore the fact that they put the
safety of maritime and air navigation at risk. We have
also repeatedly deplored their environmental impact,
with incalculable consequences for the contamination
of marine life, as well as potentially for the climate
through the release of hundreds of millions of cubic
metres of gas into the atmosphere. On top of that, we
have also emphasized our concern about the fact that
acts such as these, in an extremely complex global
geopolitical situation, exacerbate tensions and could
have unpredictable consequences, which is why we
have continued to urge States to avoid speculation and
act with maximum restraint.
Ecuador will continue to be guided by the
information that has been provided to the Council
in the past by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, who has called for avoiding disruptive
actions that could affect or obstruct the quest for the
truth. The information provided by Sweden, Germany
and Denmark in document S/2023/517, which was
circulated a little over two months ago, reflects the
complex nature of the national investigations, which
11/15

26/09/2023

involve technical, scientific and logistical aspects,
among others. I would therefore like to reiterate that it
is appropriate to continue the ongoing investigations in
line with the fundamental principles of the rule of law.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
have taken note of the statements by Mr. Pohlmann
and Mr. Dore. Our assessment remained unchanged.
As my delegation has said in the past, Switzerland
is concerned about the alleged sabotage of the Nord
Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines that led to gas leaks last
September. Switzerland condemns all acts of sabotage
against critical infrastructure, including energy
infrastructure, which can have harmful consequences
for the supply to populations as well as for the economy
and the environment.
With regard to the investigations carried out by
national authorities, we welcomed the information
provided in the joint letter from Denmark, Germany
and Sweden dated 10 July (S/2023/517). As the letter
indicated, their various national investigations are
ongoing in order to shed light on the facts, and we await
their conclusions.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Today marks the first anniversary of the explosion
of the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines. The incident
has continued to be a major focus of attention from
the international community since it happened, and
many Security Council members, including China,
have repeatedly called for an objective, impartial and
professional investigation aimed at finding out the
truth as soon as possible. Regrettably, there is so far
still no clear and authoritative conclusion on the matter.
The Nord Stream explosion has implications for the
safety of transnational infrastructure and has had a
negative impact on the global energy supply, the marine
environment and the safety of maritime shipping.
The countries concerned in the national
investigations have been conducting them for some
time, but results remain elusive. The longer the delay,
the more difficult it will be to collect evidence and
uncover the truth, the more doubts and speculation the
issue will provoke and the less credible the results of
the investigation will be. We hope that the countries
concerned will proactively respond to the international
community’s concerns with a heightened sense of
urgency, announce progress updates of the investigations
in a timely manner and with a responsible attitude to
regional security and development, and ensure that
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

26/09/2023

their conclusions are objective, impartial, authoritative
and able to stand the test of time.

investigations at this juncture would seriously risk
being counterproductive.

Russia is one of the main parties involved in the
explosion, and we therefore call on the countries
concerned to communicate actively and cooperate with
Russia rather than simply ignoring it. Any attempts to
politicize the investigation can only create suspicion
and cause more speculation. On the Nord Stream issue,
the international community, including the Security
Council, should refrain from applying double standards.
We hope to see the truth uncovered and the perpetrators
brought to justice as soon as possible. We also hope the
Secretariat will provide more useful information and
that the Council will remain seized of the matter.

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the briefers for their perspectives.

Mr. Camilleri (Malta): Malta reiterates its strong
condemnation of the possible act of sabotage targeting
the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines that occurred in
September 2022. Such acts pose a serious threat to energy
security and regional stability. Our position against any
form of disruption to critical energy infrastructure is
clear and long-standing. The subsequent leaks have
also presented a substantial threat to the nations
directly involved and to the environment. They have
compromised a critical conduit for the transportation
of a crucial energy resource. They have exacerbated
the challenges faced by developing nations and global
energy markets already strained as a consequence of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The incident
serves as a stark reminder of the vulnerabilities inherent
in essential energy infrastructure.
On 10 July Denmark, Germany and Sweden sent
another joint letter (S/2023/517) to the Security Council
regarding the status of ongoing investigations into the
explosions in which they reiterated their commitment
to investigating the sabotage comprehensively. The
Council cannot ignore the fact that the nature of these
acts is unprecedented. Investigations are complex and
this is something that we should all be able to agree on
and acknowledge. Meanwhile, Malta has no reason to
believe that they are not being conducted meticulously,
in line with the fundamental principles of the rule of
law and independently from political interference. We
reiterate our full confidence in their impartiality and
credibility. The persistent claims that enough time
has passed to establish the truth are groundless. Such
speculation only creates distrust and suspicion among
States. Furthermore, the countries in question have
all the necessary means, resources and expertise to
conduct their own investigations. To introduce further
12/15

The international community remains rightfully
concerned about the sabotage of the Nord Stream
pipelines. We have repeatedly condemned that attack,
and we all want clear answers. That is why we support
the national investigations of Germany, Denmark
and Sweden to determine who is responsible. In July,
Germany, Sweden and Denmark offered a detailed
update on the progress of those investigations. They
highlighted the unprecedented nature of the sabotage
and the subsequent complexity of the investigative
processes. We understand that those investigations
will take time, and we have full confidence in their
impartiality and integrity.
As we have said before, we do not believe that it is
a good use of our time for the Security Council to start
to prejudge the outcome of those investigations, dictate
how they are conducted or otherwise undermine them.
We, and fellow Security Council members, should
continue to offer full support to those investigations so
that we can establish who was responsible.
Before I conclude, let us pause for a moment on
the fact that it was Russia who called this meeting.
Russia claims that it is concerned about the destruction
of civilian infrastructure, so much so that it seeks to
commemorate the anniversary of this attack. Yet we
all know that almost every single day of the year is an
anniversary of a deliberate Russian attack on civilian
infrastructure in Ukraine. We have seen the systematic
bombing of Ukrainian energy and port infrastructure.
We have seen more than 480 Russian attacks on schools
and hospitals and 120 attacks on religious sites. And
beyond infrastructure, what of the lives of civilians
themselves? At least 9,600 civilians have been killed
and 17,500 more injured in Russia’s war of aggression
in Ukraine.
Therefore, as we listen to the representative of Russia
today, let us not forget what it is doing, deliberately and
as a matter of policy. Let us also not forget the callous
disregard Russia showed for civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Aleppo, Homs and Damascus, when
it vetoed nine Council resolutions aimed at ending the
Al-Assad regime’s indiscriminate bombing of hospitals
and schools. And let us not forget that while Russia
repeatedly brings briefers to the Council from the
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

West who are free to attack Western Governments, it
systematically locks up anyone who dares to criticize
the Russian Government’s position at home.
Russia’s hypocrisy today is nothing new, but this
bears repeating: if Russia is seriously concerned about
civilian infrastructure, it must cease its relentless
attacks and ensure accountability for the appalling
destruction and suffering it has caused.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates reaffirms its unreserved
condemnation of the acts of sabotage against the Nord
Stream 1 and 2 pipelines one year ago.
The consistent and predictable supply of energy
is a bedrock of the international order. The need for
energy, stability and security is something that unites
countries around the world, large and small, developed
and developing. The United Arab Emirates, like
all countries, relies on the safety of transboundary
energy infrastructure. Threats to such infrastructure
are a matter of international peace and security
and have rightfully been addressed by the Security
Council. In resolution 2341 (2017), the Security
Council noted the increasing cross-border critical
infrastructure interdependencies, including for the
generation, transmission and distribution of energy. It
also recognized that protecting critical infrastructure
requires cooperation across borders with governmental
authorities, foreign partners and private sector owners
and operators of such infrastructure.

26/09/2023

such investigations. In that regard, we encourage
increased cooperation with the pipeline operators,
which have legitimate equities at stake in the ongoing
investigations. The United Arab Emirates’ own national
experience demonstrates the usefulness of cooperation
and information-sharing in such situations.
Undoubtedly, all members of the Council share
an interest in preventing acts of sabotage against
transboundary energy infrastructure. Such acts must
never be tolerated. We eagerly await the conclusion of
the investigations into the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipeline
explosions, the determination of what transpired and
the identification of those responsible so that they may
be held to account.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique extends
its thanks to the briefers, Mr. Dirk Pohlmann and
Mr. Jimmy Dore, for their important insights on the
topic before the Security Council.
In that connection, we wish to recall that we were told
during Mozambique’s Council presidency in March that
an attempt was being made to establish an independent
investigation under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral. We then learned that it was premature to
call for an international investigation. The idea was
to avoid interference with the national investigations
under way. At the time, Mozambique underlined that
such investigations could not be endless. We therefore
expressed our support for the speedy conclusion of an
objective, impartial and professional inquiry.

Sabotage
against
transboundary
energy
infrastructure is a grave threat to international energy
security. When such acts occur, it is vital for the
competent national authorities to investigate them.
Such investigations should be thorough and rigorously
fact-based. We note the ongoing investigations by the
relevant national authorities into the 22 September
acts of sabotage. The United Arab Emirates welcomes
the letters dated 21 February (S/2023/126) and 10 July
(S/2023/517) from the representatives of Denmark,
Germany and Sweden addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which provided information about
their respective investigations.

Today, despite the prevailing belief that this was
indeed an act of sabotage and that a serious violation
of international law had taken place, we are no closer
to asserting the truth. Mozambique does not condone
the deliberate destruction and weaponization of critical
and transnational infrastructures such as the Nord
Stream pipelines. We are still committed to allowing
the ongoing investigations into the incident being
conducted by the authorities in the three national
jurisdictions, namely those of Germany, Sweden and
Denmark, to come to a conclusion. We hold that view,
guided by resolution 2341 (2017), which aims to protect
critical infrastructure from such attacks.

We encourage further updates and the expeditious
conclusion of the ongoing investigations. We also
urge transparency in sharing the findings of national
investigations with the relevant actors, as appropriate.
We continue to emphasize the value and importance
of international coordination and cooperation in

There is a pressing and well-founded urgency to bring
the clarity of justice to this issue. We must guarantee
that the trust we hold in our collective mechanisms is
not eroded and that our faith in the collective security
system designed by the Charter of the United Nations is
strengthened at all times and in all circumstances. Let

13/15

23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

us not forget the consequences of impunity. It not only
emboldens those who perpetrate such acts, it weakens
the very foundations of international cooperation. It
is legitimate for the Security Council, as the primary
organ responsible for international peace and security,
to be kept abreast of the results of the joint national
investigations. Mozambique strongly encourages
the speedy conclusion of objective, impartial and
professional investigations into an incident that appears
to be contrary to international law.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): We regret
that the Russian Mission continues to call repetitive
meetings on this topic, despite the many other pressing
matters on the Security Council’s agenda. The United
States reiterates its concern about the sabotage of
the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines that took place in
September 2022. Out of respect for the Council’s time,
I will keep my statement brief and refer members to our
prior statements on the matter.
The United States continues to have confidence
in the ongoing investigations led by the Governments
of Denmark, Germany and Sweden into the facts of
what happened. The attacks took place in the maritime
zones of Denmark and Sweden, and those Governments
are conducting thorough and impartial investigations.
Russia has repeatedly claimed that it is seeking an
impartial investigation, despite its own premature
attempts to place the blame on certain countries. It is
no surprise that it selectively promotes narratives in the
Council that comport with its preordained conclusions
while dismissing alternative views. Any country where
such an incident occurred within its territory would
expect to first conduct its own investigation. The
Council should ignore the accusations and speculation
and allow Denmark, Germany and Sweden to conclude
their work. Russia’s disingenuous statements feigning
concern are intended to undermine the ongoing
investigations in an attempt to prejudice their results.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
France expressed its concern clearly when underwater
explosions hit the Nord Stream gas pipelines a year
ago. We took seriously the reports that the explosions
were the result of a deliberate act of sabotage, and
our position is unchanged. These are serious matters
that require thorough investigation. However, we can
only wonder why Russia has requested a Council
meeting on this topic for a fourth time. Since our
previous meeting in July (see S/PV.9373), no new,
credible or serious developments have come to light
14/15

26/09/2023

that would justify a new discussion on the issue. While
expressing so much concern about damage to European
infrastructure, Russia has continued to inflict massive
daily destruction on Ukrainian civilian infrastructure,
power plants, hospitals and schools. The only reason for
holding this new meeting appears to be Russia’s need
to distract the Council’s attention and fuel speculation
about the identity of those responsible for sabotaging
the pipelines.
The competent German, Danish and Swedish
authorities have launched investigations aimed at
establishing the truth of the matter. As we have already
emphasized, we have no reason to doubt their seriousness
and impartiality. Given the seriousness and complexity
of the facts in question, we understand that ongoing
investigations require time and thorough verification.
We want those investigations to continue and reach
their conclusions, free from political interference.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): We listened closely
to the information provided by the briefers and have
noted our common interest in unravelling the facts
surrounding the sabotage of the Nord Stream 1 and
2 gas pipelines. The successive damage done to the
pipelines — at a time when the global energy crisis
was already worsening — shocked the conscience of
the international community into a renewed awareness
of the strategic linkages between critical infrastructure
and security, economic stability and the sustainable
development of societies. The depravity of the acts
highlighted the importance of concerted global efforts
to put in place measures that can pre-empt or mitigate
such actions.
In our view, the incident reflects a disregard for
the inherent rights of the populations dependent on
those energy installations, and it remains unacceptable
by any standard. We reiterate how important it is that
States uphold their responsibilities, established under
international law and reaffirmed by Security Council
decisions, for the protection of critical infrastructure,
especially infrastructure of a transboundary nature.
It will be essential to forestall such acts in the future,
since damage or destruction to critical infrastructure in
one sector — whether energy, water, communications,
cybersecurity or transportation — often results in
extensive and rippling consequences for other sectors
and populations, creating instability and sometimes
humanitarian crises. We support the Council’s sustained
interest in helping to unravel the sabotage of the Nord
Stream pipelines, and we insist that the differences
23-27820

S/PV.9424

Threats to international peace and security

among Council members regarding the establishment
of an international investigative mechanism should
not detract from the position they have expressed in
previous Council meetings, in which they have been
united against the sabotage of the pipelines. As the
Council revisits the issue on the one-year anniversary
of the incident, Ghana would like to reiterate the
following four points.
First, we continue to believe that it is essential to
establish the facts of such heinous actions in order to
ensure that the perpetrators are held accountable and
to send a strong message condemning the deliberate
destruction of critical infrastructure anywhere. In that
regard, we believe the ongoing national investigations
by Denmark, Germany and Sweden, the countries
concerned, are important, and we urge for support to
their efforts to uncover the facts, beyond the initial
establishment of the incident as an act of sabotage.
We also believe that the outcomes of the national
investigations would be instructive for future Security
Council action on the matter.
Secondly, we reiterate our appeal to all the parties
to work collaboratively and in good faith, consistent
with the provisions of resolution 2341 (2017). We are of
the view that the sharing and exchange of information,
technology, expertise and other relevant resources
between and among the countries involved, as well as
the Russian operators, would contribute immensely to
ensuring coherent outcomes and a speedy conclusion to
the investigative processes.
Thirdly, in order to address the persistent problem
of speculation and accusatory rhetoric, which only fuel
existing geopolitical tensions, we urge the parties to work
more openly and transparently. While acknowledging
that some information may be sensitive in relation to
the national security of the countries concerned, we
encourage them to provide regular updates on the
status of the investigations, with a view to bolstering
international confidence in the national processes.

15/15

26/09/2023

Fourthly and finally, we reiterate our previous
submission regarding the necessity of a time frame for
concluding the national investigations and presenting
the outcomes to appropriate international institutions,
including the Security Council, for necessary followup action.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
There have been several meetings on this issue.
Today the same narrative and the same positions have
been repeated once again, for the very simple reason
that there is nothing new to say on the matter. Many
briefers, of different profiles, have tried to explain what
they do not know and what we still do not know. Our
position has been very clear from the beginning, and it
remains the same. We have been — and are — deeply
concerned by an apparent act of sabotage on the Nord
Stream 1 and 2 pipelines, in the exclusive economic
zones of Denmark and Sweden in the Baltic Sea. Such
acts are unacceptable. We reiterate our full support for
the investigations initiated by the national authorities
of Denmark, Germany and Sweden to determine the
origin of the damage and the possible perpetrators. We
understand that the investigation is under way, and we
have full confidence in its objectivity. Such investigative
processes are complex, delicate and need time. The
three countries that are carrying out the investigation
have strong judicial institutions and unquestionable
records on the rule of law. In conclusion, we would
like to stress that we should be patient and wait for the
conclusion of the ongoing investigations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

23-27820
