United Nations

A/RES/69/149

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 February 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 27 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2014
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/69/481)]

69/149. Trafficking in women and girls
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, which constitutes a serious threat to human dignity, human
rights and development,
Recalling all international conventions that deal specifically with and address
issues relevant to the problem of trafficking in women and girls, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 1 and the Protocols
thereto, in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 and the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 3 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional
Protocol thereto, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and the Optional
Protocol thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 7
and the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the
Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, 8 as well as relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions
and the Human Rights Council on the issue,
Recognizing the crucial importance of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, which entered into
force on 25 December 2003 and which provided, for the first time, an
internationally agreed definition of the crime of trafficking in persons aimed at the

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
3
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
4
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 96, No. 1342.
2

14-67592 (E)

*1467592*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/149

Trafficking in women and girls

prevention of trafficking in persons, the protection of victims and the prosecution of
the perpetrators,
Welcoming the outcome of the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, held in
Vienna from 6 to 10 October 2014, in which the Conference took a further step
towards identifying an appropriate mechanism or mechanisms to review the
implementation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, 9
Reaffirming the provisions pertaining to trafficking in women and girls
contained in the outcome documents of relevant international conferences and
summits, in particular the strategic objective on the issue of trafficking contained in
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth World
Conference on Women, 10
Reaffirming also the commitment made by world leaders at the Millennium
Summit, the 2005 World Summit and the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals to devise, enforce and strengthen
effective measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in persons in
order to counter the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims,
Welcoming in particular the efforts of States, United Nations bodies and
agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to address the
problem of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, including the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons adopted by
the General Assembly in its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010,
Taking note of the adoption by the International Labour Conference, at its
103rd session, on 11 June 2014, of the Protocol to the Forced Labour Convention,
1930 (No. 29) 11 and Recommendation No. 203 on supplementary measures for the
effective suppression of forced labour, of the International Labour Organization,
which specify that measures to be taken for the prevention of forced or compulsory
labour shall include specific actions against trafficking in persons for the purposes
of forced or compulsory labour,
Welcoming, in the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the
Status of Women at its fifty-eighth session, 12 the commitment of Governments to
take appropriate measures to raise public awareness of the issue of trafficking in
persons, particularly women and girls, including the factors that make women and
girls vulnerable to trafficking, to discourage, with a view to eliminating, the demand
that fosters all forms of exploitation, including sexual exploitation and forced
labour, and to review and adopt the laws, regulations and penalties necessary to deal
with this issue and publicize them to emphasize that trafficking is a serious crime,
Welcoming also the observance, on 30 July 2014, of the first World Day
against Trafficking in Persons, in the context of the need for raising awareness of
the situation of victims of human trafficking and for the promotion and protection of
their rights,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken, including the reports of human rights
treaty bodies and the Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council on
_______________
9

See CTOC/COP/2014/13, chap. I, sect. A, resolution 7/1.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
11
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 39, No. 612.
12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2014, Supplement No. 7 (E/2014/27), chap. I,
sect. A.
10

2/11

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/69/149

trafficking in persons, especially women and children, on violence against women,
its causes and consequences, on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography, and on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and
consequences, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children, and by United Nations agencies and other concerned
intergovernmental and governmental organizations, within their existing mandates,
as well as civil society, to address the serious crime of trafficking in persons, and
encouraging them to continue doing so and to share their knowledge and best
practices as widely as possible,
Noting the renewal by the Human Rights Council, at its twenty-sixth session,
of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, 13 and the fact that part of her task is to integrate a gender- and
age-specific perspective throughout the work of her mandate, inter alia, through the
identification of gender- and age-specific vulnerabilities in relation to the issue of
trafficking in persons,
Acknowledging the inclusion of gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, 14 which entered into force on 1 July 2002,
Bearing in mind the obligations of States to exercise due diligence to prevent
trafficking in persons, to investigate and punish perpetrators of trafficking in
persons and to protect and empower victims, and that not doing so violates and
impairs or nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
the victims,
Seriously concerned that an increasing number of women and girls are being
trafficked, including to developed countries, as well as within and between regions
and States, and that men and boys are also victims of trafficking, including for
sexual exploitation,
Recognizing that certain efforts against trafficking in persons lack the gender
and age sensitivity needed to effectively address the situation of women and girls,
who are particularly vulnerable to trafficking for the purposes of sexual
exploitation, forced labour, services and other forms of exploitation, thus
highlighting the need to incorporate a gender- and age-sensitive approach into all
anti-trafficking efforts,
Recognizing also the need to address the impact of globalization on the
particular problem of trafficking in women and children, in particular girls,
Recognizing further that poverty, unemployment, lack of socioeconomic
opportunities, gender-based violence, discrimination and marginalization are some
of the contributing factors that make persons vulnerable to trafficking,
Recognizing the heightened vulnerability to trafficking of women and girls in
humanitarian crisis situations, including in conflict and post-conflict environments,
natural disasters and other emergency environments,
Recognizing also the need to reinforce efforts regarding the provision of
relevant documents, such as birth registration documents, in order to lower the risk
of being trafficked and to help to identify victims of trafficking in persons,
Recognizing further that, despite the progress made, challenges to preventing
and combating trafficking in women and girls remain and that further efforts should
_______________
13

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap.
V, sect. A.
14
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.

3/11

A/RES/69/149

Trafficking in women and girls

be made to adopt adequate legislation and programmes to implement such
legislation and to continue improving the collection of reliable data disaggregated
by sex and age and of statistics that would allow proper analysis of the nature,
extent and risk factors of trafficking in women and girls,
Recognizing the importance of exploring the link between migration and
trafficking in persons in order to further efforts to protect women migrant workers
from violence, discrimination, exploitation and abuse,
Concerned about the use of new information and communications
technologies, including the Internet, for purposes of recruiting for the exploitation
of the prostitution of others, including for exploiting women and children and for
child pornography, paedophilia and any other forms of sexual exploitation of
children, as well as for forced marriage and forced labour,
Concerned also about the increasing activities of transnational criminal
organizations and others that profit from international trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, without regard to dangerous and inhuman
conditions and in flagrant violation of national laws and international standards,
Noting with concern that women and girls are also vulnerable to the risk of
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal, and in this regard taking
note of Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 23/2,
entitled “Preventing and combating trafficking in human organs and trafficking in
persons for the purpose of organ removal”, 15 adopted by the Commission at its
twenty-third session,
Recognizing that victims of trafficking are particularly exposed to racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and that women and girl
victims are often subject to multiple forms of discrimination and violence, including
on the grounds of their gender, age, ethnicity, disability, culture and religion, as well
as their origin, and that those forms of discrimination themselves may fuel
trafficking in persons,
Noting with concern that some of the demand fostering sexual exploitation,
exploitative labour and the illegal removal of organs is met by trafficking in
persons,
Acknowledging that women and girl victims of trafficking, on account of their
gender, are further disadvantaged and marginalized by a general lack of information
on or awareness and recognition of their human rights and by the stigmatization
often associated with trafficking, as well as by the obstacles they meet in gaining
access to accurate information and recourse mechanisms in cases of the violation of
their rights, and that special measures are required for their protection and to
increase their awareness,
Encouraging the Commission on the Status of Women to consider the issue of
trafficking in women and girls at its fifty-ninth session, within the framework of the
review of progress made in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, as well as opportunities for achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women in the post-2015 development agenda,
Welcoming the decision by the General Assembly, in its resolution 68/309 of
10 September 2014, that the proposal of the Open Working Group on Sustainable

_______________
15
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2014, Supplement No. 10 (E/2014/30), chap. I,
sect. D.

4/11

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/69/149

Development Goals contained in its report 16 shall be the main basis for integrating
sustainable development goals into the post-2015 development agenda, while
recognizing that other inputs will also be considered, in the intergovernmental
negotiation process at the sixty-ninth session of the Assembly, and taking note with
appreciation of the reference to ensuring gender equality and empowerment of all
women and girls contained in the proposal of the Open Working Group,
Reaffirming the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation mechanisms and initiatives, including information exchanges on best
practices, of Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to address the problem of trafficking in persons, especially women
and children,
Taking note of the second consultative meeting on strengthening partnerships
with national rapporteurs on trafficking in persons and equivalent mechanisms, held
in Bangkok in May 2014, and the establishment of an informal network of such
mechanisms from all over the world in order to address trafficking in persons in a
consistent manner, exchange information and best practices and build on different
national experiences,
Reaffirming that global efforts, including international cooperation and
technical assistance programmes, to eradicate trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, demand the strong political commitment, coordinated and
coherent efforts and active cooperation of all Governments of countries of origin,
transit and destination,
Recognizing that policies and programmes for prevention, protection,
rehabilitation, repatriation and reintegration should be developed through a genderand age-sensitive, comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach, with concern for
the security of the victims and respect for the full enjoyment of their human rights
and with the involvement of all actors in countries of origin, transit and destination,
Convinced of the need to protect and assist all victims of trafficking, with full
respect for the human rights and dignity of the victims,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General, 17
which provides information on measures by States and activities within the United
Nations system to tackle trafficking in women and girls;
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the information submitted by
Member States and United Nations entities on measures and activities taken to
combat trafficking in women and girls, and urges Member States and United
Nations entities that have not done so to submit the requested information for
inclusion in the report of the Secretary-General;
3.
Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on trafficking in persons, especially women and children; 18
4.
Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to, as a matter of priority, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime 1 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,2
taking into
consideration the central role of those instruments in the fight against trafficking in
_______________
16

A/68/970 and Corr.1.
A/69/224.
18
A/69/269 and A/HRC/26/37.
17

5/11

A/RES/69/149

Trafficking in women and girls

persons, and urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully and
effectively;
5.
Urges Member States to consider signing and ratifying and States parties
to implement the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 4 and the Optional Protocol thereto,5 the Convention on the Rights
of the Child 6 and the Optional Protocols thereto, 19 and the Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 20
as well as the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) 11 and the Protocol thereto,
the Labour Inspection Convention, 1947 (No. 81), 21 the Migration for Employment
Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97), 22 the Discrimination (Employment and
Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111), 23 the Minimum Age Convention, 1973
(No. 138), 24 the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975
(No. 143), 25 the Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181), 26 the
Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182), 27 and the Domestic
Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), of the International Labour Organization;
6.
Urges Member States, the United Nations and other international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the media, to fully and
effectively implement the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons 28 and the activities outlined therein;
7.
Welcomes the efforts of Governments, United Nations bodies and
agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to address the
particular problem of trafficking in women and girls, and encourages them to further
enhance their efforts and cooperation, including by sharing their knowledge,
technical expertise and best practices as widely as possible;
8.
Welcomes the convening of the Regional Ministerial Conference on
Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn of Africa, in Khartoum, from 13 to
16 October 2014, organized by the African Union in collaboration with the
Government of the Sudan, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Organization for Migration, in this regard takes note
with appreciation of the outcome document of the Conference, known as the
Khartoum Declaration, and calls for its implementation, including through technical
cooperation and capacity-building by the United Nations and the international
community;
9.
Encourages the United Nations system to mainstream, as appropriate, the
issue of trafficking in persons, especially women and girls, into its broader policies
and programmes aimed at addressing economic and social development, human
rights, the rule of law, good governance, education, health and natural disaster and
post-conflict reconstruction;

_______________
19

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
21
Ibid., vol. 54, No. 792.
22
Ibid., vol. 120, No. 1616.
23
Ibid., vol. 362, No. 5181.
24
Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14862.
25
Ibid., vol. 1120, No. 17426.
26
Ibid., vol. 2115, No. 36794.
27
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
28
Resolution 64/293.
20

6/11

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/69/149

10. Welcomes the focus given by the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to ending violence against
women and to increasing women’s access to economic opportunities, as well as its
work on building effective partnerships for the empowerment of women, which will
contribute to the efforts to combat trafficking in persons;
11. Calls upon Governments to intensify their efforts to address, with a view
to eliminating, the demand that fosters the trafficking of women and girls for all
forms of exploitation and in this regard to put in place or to enhance preventive
measures, including legislative and punitive measures to deter exploiters of
trafficked persons, as well as ensure their accountability;
12. Acknowledges the drafting of the basic principles on the right to an
effective remedy for victims of trafficking in persons; 29
13. Calls upon Governments to strengthen measures aimed at advancing
gender equality and empowering women and girls by, inter alia, enhancing their
participation and leadership in society, including through education, economic
empowerment and promoting an increase in the number of women assuming
decision-making roles in both the public and private sectors, and to take further
appropriate measures to address the increasing rate of homelessness of and
inadequate housing for women in order to reduce their vulnerability to being
trafficked;
14. Also calls upon Governments to take appropriate measures to address the
factors that increase vulnerability to being trafficked, including poverty and gender
inequality, as well as other factors that encourage the particular problem of
trafficking in women and girls for exploitation in prostitution and other forms of
commercialized sex, forced marriage, forced labour and organ removal, in order to
prevent and eliminate such trafficking, including by strengthening existing
legislation, with a view to providing better protection of the rights of women and
girls and to punishing perpetrators, including public officials engaging in or
facilitating human trafficking, through, as appropriate, criminal and civil measures;
15. Calls upon Governments, the international community and all other
organizations and entities that deal with conflict, post-conflict, disaster and other
emergency situations to address the heightened vulnerability of women and girls to
trafficking and exploitation and associated gender-based violence and to include the
prevention of the trafficking of affected women and girls in all such national,
regional and international initiatives;
16. Urges Governments to devise, enforce and strengthen effective genderand age-sensitive measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in
women and girls, including for sexual and economic exploitation, as part of a
comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy that integrates a human rights perspective,
and to draw up, as appropriate, national action plans in this regard;
17. Also urges Governments to ensure that the prevention of and responses to
trafficking in persons continue to take into account the specific needs of women and
girls and their participation in and contribution to all phases of preventing and
responding to trafficking, especially in addressing specific forms of exploitation,
such as sexual exploitation;
18. Further urges Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to support and allocate resources to strengthen

_______________
29

A/69/269, annex.

7/11

A/RES/69/149

Trafficking in women and girls

preventive action, in particular education for women and men, as well as for girls
and boys, on gender equality, self-respect and mutual respect, and campaigns,
carried out in collaboration with civil society, to increase public awareness of the
issue at the national and grass-roots levels, including anti-trafficking awarenessraising campaigns targeted at groups that are at increased risk of becoming victims
of trafficking, as well as at those who may fuel the demand for the exploitation of
trafficked persons and/or their labour;
19. Reiterates the importance of continued coordination among, inter alia,
the Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography and on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and
consequences, in order to avoid unnecessary duplication in their activities in
fulfilment of their mandates;
20. Urges Governments to strengthen measures to eliminate sex tourism
demand, especially for children, through all possible preventive actions, including
legislative measures and other relevant policies and programmes;
21. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the World
Tourism Organization and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to promote their global campaign urging travellers to support the fight
against trafficking in persons, especially women and girls;
22. Urges Governments to develop age-appropriate educational and training
programmes and policies aimed at preventing sex tourism and trafficking, giving
special emphasis to the protection of young women and children;
23. Encourages Member States to establish or strengthen national
programmes and to engage in bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation, including by forging regional initiatives or plans of action, 30 to address
the problem of trafficking in persons through, inter alia, the enhancement of
information-sharing, data disaggregated by sex and age, specific data collection and
other technical capacities and mutual legal assistance, as well as the combating of
corruption and laundering of proceeds derived from trafficking, including for
purposes of commercial sexual exploitation, and to ensure, as appropriate, that such
agreements and initiatives are particularly responsive to the problem of trafficking
as it affects women and girls;
24. Calls upon all Governments to criminalize all forms of trafficking in
persons, recognizing its increasing occurrence for purposes of sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation and abuse, sex tourism and forced labour, and to
bring to justice and punish the offenders and intermediaries involved, including
public officials involved with trafficking in persons, whether local or foreign,
through the competent national authorities, either in the country of origin of the
_______________
30
Such as the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime,
the Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking, the Action Plan for the Asia-Pacific
region of the Asian Regional Initiative against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children
(see A/C.3/55/3, annex), the initiatives of the European Union on a comprehensive European policy and
programmes on trafficking in human beings, as expressed most recently in the European Union plan on
best practices, standards and procedures for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings,
adopted in December 2005, the activities of the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Preventing
and Combating Trafficking in Women and Children for Prostitution, the Organization of American States
Meeting of National Authorities on Trafficking in Persons, the Agreement on the Cooperation of the
Commonwealth of Independent States in Combating Trafficking in Persons, Human Organs and Tissues,
and the activities of the International Labour Organization and the International Organization for Migration
in this field.

8/11

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/69/149

offender or in the country in which the abuse occurs, in accordance with the due
process of law, as well as to penalize persons in authority found guilty of sexually
assaulting victims of trafficking in their custody;
25. Urges Governments, in accordance with their respective legal systems, to
take all appropriate measures, including through policies and legislation, to ensure
that victims of trafficking are protected from prosecution or punishment for acts
those victims have been compelled to commit as a direct consequence of having
been trafficked and that the victims do not suffer from revictimization as a result of
actions taken by Government authorities, and encourages Governments to prevent,
within their legal framework and in accordance with national policies, victims of
trafficking in persons from being prosecuted or punished as a direct consequence of
their illegal entry or residence;
26. Invites Governments to consider establishing or strengthening a national
mechanism, with the participation of civil society, as appropriate, including
non-governmental organizations, to ensure a holistic and coordinated approach to
anti-trafficking policies and measures, to encourage the exchange of information
and to report on data, root causes, factors and trends in trafficking in persons,
especially women and girls, and to include data on victims of trafficking
disaggregated by sex and age;
27. Invites the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, to continue cooperating with international, regional and
national mechanisms to combat trafficking in persons, in consultation with
Governments, relevant treaty bodies, special procedures, the specialized agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, national human rights institutions and other sources, including
victims of trafficking or their representatives, as appropriate;
28. Encourages Governments and relevant United Nations bodies, from
within existing resources, to take appropriate measures to raise public awareness of
the issue of trafficking in persons, particularly women and girls, including the
factors that make women and girls vulnerable to trafficking, to discourage, with a
view to eliminating, the demand that fosters all forms of exploitation, including
sexual exploitation and forced labour, to publicize the laws, regulations and
penalties relating to this issue and to emphasize that trafficking is a serious crime;
29. Calls upon concerned Governments to allocate resources, as appropriate,
to provide access to appropriate programmes for the physical, psychological and
social recovery of victims of trafficking, including sexual and reproductive healthcare services that include affordable treatment, care and support services for
HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections, free of stigma and discrimination, as
well as comprehensive information and voluntary counselling, and to take measures
to cooperate with intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide
for the social, medical and psychological care of the victims;
30. Encourages Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental and
civil society organizations, to undertake or strengthen campaigns aimed at clarifying
opportunities, limitations, rights and responsibilities with respect to migration, as
well as information on the risks of irregular migration and the ways and means used
by traffickers, to enable women to make informed decisions and to prevent them
from becoming victims of trafficking;
31. Also encourages Governments to review and strengthen, as appropriate,
the enforcement of relevant labour and other laws within their territories or
jurisdictions that are aimed at, or have the effect of, requiring business enterprises,
including recruitment agencies, to prevent and combat human trafficking in supply
chains, and to periodically assess the adequacy of such laws and address any gaps;
9/11

A/RES/69/149

Trafficking in women and girls

32. Invites the business sector to consider the adoption of ethical codes of
conduct to ensure decent work and to prevent any form of exploitative practices that
foster trafficking;
33. Encourages Governments to intensify collaboration with nongovernmental organizations to develop and implement gender- and age-sensitive
programmes for effective counselling, training and reintegration into society of
victims of trafficking and programmes that provide shelter and helplines to victims
or potential victims;
34. Urges Governments to provide or strengthen training for, and to raise
awareness among, law enforcement, judicial, immigration and other relevant
officials on the prevention and combating of trafficking in persons, including the
sexual exploitation of women and girls, and in this regard calls upon Governments
to ensure that the treatment of victims of trafficking, especially by law enforcement
officials, immigration officers, consular officials, social workers and other first
response officials, is conducted with full respect for the human rights of those
victims and with gender and age sensitivity and observes the principles of
non-discrimination, including the prohibition of racial discrimination;
35. Invites Member States to provide training for law enforcement and
border control officials, as well as medical personnel, in identifying potential cases
of trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal;
36. Invites Governments to take steps to ensure that criminal justice
procedures and witness protection programmes are sensitive to the particular
situation of trafficked women and girls, and that they are supported and assisted, as
appropriate, in making complaints to the police or other authorities, without fear,
and are available, when required, by the criminal justice system, and to ensure that
during this time they have access to gender- and age-sensitive protection and, as
appropriate, social, medical, financial and legal assistance, including the possibility
of obtaining compensation for damages suffered;
37. Also invites Governments to intensify efforts aimed at the speedy
disposition of cases of trafficking in persons and, in cooperation with, inter alia,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to devise, enforce and
strengthen systems and mechanisms for combating trafficking in persons;
38. Further invites Governments to encourage media providers, including
Internet service providers, to adopt or strengthen self-regulatory measures to
promote the responsible use of media, particularly the Internet, with a view to
eliminating the exploitation of women and children, in particular girls, which could
foster trafficking;
39. Invites the business sector, in particular the tourism, travel and
telecommunications industries, relevant recruitment agencies and mass media
organizations, to cooperate with Governments in eliminating trafficking in women
and children, in particular girls, including through the dissemination by the media of
information regarding the dangers of trafficking, the means used by traffickers, the
rights of trafficked persons and the services available to victims of trafficking;
40. Stresses the need for the systematic collection of data disaggregated by
sex and age and comprehensive studies at both the national and the international
levels and the development of common methodologies and internationally defined
indicators to make it possible to develop relevant and comparable figures, and
encourages Governments to enhance information-sharing and data-collection
capacity as a way of promoting cooperation to combat the trafficking problem;
10/11

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/69/149

41. Invites Governments, United Nations bodies, agencies and special
mechanisms, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the private
sector to undertake collaborative and joint research and studies on trafficking in
women and girls that can serve as a basis for policy formulation or change;
42. Invites Governments, with the support of the United Nations, when
necessary, and other intergovernmental organizations, taking into account best
practices, to formulate training manuals and other informational materials and to
provide training for law enforcement, judicial and other relevant officials and
medical and support personnel, with a view to sensitizing them to the special needs
of women and girl victims;
43. Encourages Governments and relevant intergovernmental bodies and
international organizations to ensure that military, peacekeeping and humanitarian
personnel deployed in conflict, post-conflict and other emergency situations are
provided with training on conduct that does not promote, facilitate or exploit
trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual exploitation, and to raise the
awareness of such personnel about the potential risks to victims of conflict and
other emergency situations, including natural disasters, of being trafficked;
44. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
International Covenants on Human Rights 31 to include information and
disaggregated statistics on trafficking in women and girls as part of their national
reports to their respective committees and to work towards developing a common
methodology and statistics to obtain comparable data;
45. Invites States to continue to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery and to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session a report that compiles information on successful interventions
and strategies, as well as the gaps, in addressing the gender dimensions of the
problem of trafficking in persons and provides recommendations on the
strengthening of human rights-based, gender- and age-sensitive approaches within
comprehensive and balanced efforts to address trafficking in persons.
73rd plenary meeting
18 December 2014

_______________
31

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

11/11
