UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR
rd
MEETING:

15 JUNE

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional Agenda (S/Agenda/2283)
. I . . . , . I . . . , , . . ,. , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.Y

1

Adoptionoftheagen‘da ,.,,,,,.,.,.,,.....

1

,.........

,.,,,.,

,.* ,..,.,,..:

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981from the Charge!d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
*,**,....II,*
Council (S/14509),,,,,,,,,l,l.,,.,,..~,,~,.,,.,..,.,,~

1

S/W .2283

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2283rd MEETING
Held in New Vork on Monday, 15 June 1.981, at 3 pm.
Presideizr:

Mr. Porfirio

MUfiOZ

Present: The representatives

LED0

(Mexico).

of the following States:

China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia,
United
Ireland,

Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (SIAgenda12283)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/14509)
The meeting

of the agenda

was called to order at 4 p.m.

Adoption
The agenda

(Kuwait), Mr. Tueni (Lebanon), Mr. Erdenechuluun
(Mongolia), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. Marinescu
(Romania), Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. Adan
(Somalia), Mr. Abdalla (Sudan), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mrs. Nguyen
Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam), Mr. Komatina (Yugoslaviu),
Mr. Mutukwa (Zambia) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation, Organization) took the places reserved for
tlzem at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Indonesia,
Italy, Morocco, Poland and Yemen, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the Council’s
debate on this agenda item. In accordance with past
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives
to participate
in the
debate, without the right to vote, pursuant to the
relevant provisions of the Charter and of rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

of ihe agenda

was adopted.

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge! d’affaires
of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [228&h to 2282nd meetings], I invite the
representatives
of Iraq and Israel to take places at the
Council table. I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bangladesh,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Egypt, Guyana, Hungary, India, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Mongolia,
Pakistan,
Romania,
Sierra
Leone, Somalia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey,
,Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kittani (Iraq)
and Mr. Bium (Israel) took places at the Council table
and Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria), Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh),
Mr. Correa da Costa (Brazil), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Rou Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Hulinsky (Czechoslovakiu),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), hrlr. Sinclair
(Guyana),
Mr. Rdcz (Hungary), Mr. Krishnan
(India),
Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Al-Sabah

At the invitation of the President, Mr, Suwozzdo
(Indonesia), Mr. La Rocca (Italy), Mr.. Mruni Zentar
{Morocco), Mr. Freyberg (Poland) and Mr. Alaini
(Yemen) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
May I draw the attention of members of the Council to
the following documents: S/14532, containing a telegram dated 12 June 1981 from the Director General of
the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the President of the Security Council, and S/14533, containing a
letter dated 15 June from the representative
of
Czechoslovakia
to the President
of the Security
Council.
4. Mr. DORR (Ireland): The issue at present before
the Council is a matter of concern to Ireland for two
reasons: first, because of the direct consequences and
the dangers which the attack on Iraq could give rise to
in the near future in the Middle East; secondly,
because certain very basic principles
of universal
scope have been breached and a dangerous precedent
has been set for the future, not only in the Middle East
but elsewhere.
5. A good deal has already been said in the Council
on the question. But it has also been said, here and
elsewhere, that not all Governments
are wholly
sincere in their criticism.
It is suggested that some

among us deplore publicly what we privately condone
or even applaud. For this reason, I feel it necessary, in
speaking for my Government, to state our position
clearly and to explain in some detail why we consider
that what Israel did was wrong in itself and dangerous
from a wider viewpoint,

11. Four aspects of the attack cause us serious
concern.
12. First, there are the immediate consequences.
Even though we acknowledge that an effort was made
to minimize casualties, it is clear that lives were lost in
the bombing-Iraqi lives, as well as that of one French
technician-and the reactor was destroyed. We deplore the human suffering and we regret the material
damage caused, just as we deplore and will continue to
deplore any other attacks by Israel across its borders
or any attacks from elsewhere directed against Israel.

6. I should like to emphasize that my country
maintains diplomatic relations with both of the Governments involved. I need hardly say that we do not
speak here out of hostility to any country, but out of a
deep and serious concern for the immediate dangers in
the region and the longer-term threat to the fragile
structures of international life which we have always
worked to maintain and develop.

13. Secondly, there are the wider consequencesfor
the Middle East. We know that there is enmity
between Iraq and Israel and that a formal state of war
has existed between the two countries since 1948. It
would be naive to ignore this. But even where there is
a steady background of hostility between nations, one
can still single out certain actions by either side as
misguided if they greatly escalateexisting tension and
increase the dangers of more serious conflict. It seems
to us that this could well be the effect of the Israeli
attack.

7. We all know the issue. Israel, on Sunday, 7 June,
bombed and largely destroyed an Iraqi nuclear reactor
which, Iraq maintains, was for peaceful use only.
Israel has justified its actions in very explicit terms by
saying tha.t it will not allow an enemy to develop
weapons of mass destruction against its people. That is
to say, it acknowledges explicitly that the attack ias
pre-emptive, and it justifies the attack as a legitimate
act of self-defence. Furthermore, it claims a right to
act si.miIarly in future. We find this deeply worrying.

14. Our fear is that this attack will confirm and
deepen existing hostility and lead almost inevitably to
a desire for retaliation. If that desire is frustrated for
the moment, it may well bide its time and seek an
outlet against Israel at another time and place. And so
the cycle of violence continues on a higher level and at
a higher pitch than before. That cannot but be a matter
of concern to Israel, as it is to all of us, because it
increases the danger of future conflict.

8. Of course, b-eland accepts that aII States in the
region, including Israel, are entitled to be concerned
about their security. We believe too that it would be
regrettable and indeed dangerous for any party to the
conflicts of the region to introduce nuclear weapons
into the area. We hope that all concerned will show the
greatest restraint in this. Ultimately, of course-and
by that I ‘mean as soon as may be-we want to see a
just and compsehensive peace settlement of the whole
Arab-Israeli conflict, Such a settlement would help to
ensure real security for all States. It would also
provide justice and assure the legitimate rights of aII of
the peoples of the region,

15. Thirdly, we are deeply concerned lest the attack
endanger or weaken the international systemworked
out with such difficulty over the past 20 years to
prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. For
over 25 years now Ireland has called attention fo the
dangers of nuclear proliferation.

9. We acknowledge that in the present troubled
situation a comprehensive settlement seems very
distant. We acknowledge, too, that while reIations
remain hostile, all States have the right to look to their
legitimate security concerns. But we still believe that
the Israeli attack was profoundly wrong and misguided
and that it may have far-reaching implications for the
future conduct. of other States. For those reasons,
deeply and sincerely felt, we cannot but condemn it.

16. Against these dangers the international community has erected a fragile barrier? but one which has
held well so far. I refer to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons of 1968 [General
Assembly resolution 2372 (XXII), annex] and the
safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Ireland, through the efforts of its then
Foreign Minister in the General Assembly, in the late
1950shad some share in pressingfor such a treaty; and
we have always thought that, although it may be
imperfect, it was an achievement of major importance.

10. My delegation does not use such words lightly
towards any State, on any issue; least of all do we do
so in addressing ourselves to the complexities of the
Middle East, where fires have burned on both sides in
a long history of conflict between peoples. We know
that where confrontation and conflict are of long
standing it can be unfair and one-sided to single out for
censure a particular incident in a continuing cycle of
violence. Nevertheless, we feel obliged to do this in
speaking of the Israeli attack of 7 June.

17. The safeguards systemof IAEA is an important
part of that achievement; but now its validity has been
challenged in a very fundamental way.
18. Iraa signed and ratified the Non-Proliferation
Treaty in’ 19z9. By doing so it solemnly bound itself,
as did some 110 other countries, not to acquire
or manufacture nuclear weapons. Furthermore, it
2

accepted and implemented the systemof inspection of
IAEA. The most recent such inspection took place in
January last and I understand the next inspection was
due this month. The Director General of the Agency,
Mr. Eklund, has said in a statement within the past few
days that there is a very high probability that the
diversion of fuel elements or plutonium would have
been detected if it had occurred.

arbiter and judge of where and when such a threat may
exist,
24. We simply cannot accept this approach to national security, however much we may try to understand the fears which underlie it. It. would be
extremely dangerous to everyone-and not least to
Israel-if universally applied.

19. Israel, in contrast, has not signed the NonProliferation Treaty; nor has it accepted international
inspection of its own nuclear facilities. That, of
course, is its right. We may regret it, but we do not
condemn it, since adherence to the Treaty is voluntary.

25. Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations
acknowledges the inherent right of self-defence. But it
speaksof defence where armed attack occurs and until
the Security Council has taken the necessary measures. Israel has argued that, in an age of massive and
dangerous weapons, this must be extended to include
imminent attack.

20. But. Israel is justifying its attack now by claims
that Iraq was engaged in a nuclear weapons programme. It is clear that to grant validity to that claim
must call into question the value of the whole
international system on which we and other countries
thought we could rely with some assurance. Of course,
that system is not 100 per cent foolproof; and if it is
defective it should be examined and strengthened. But
we are deeply concerned to see the whole system
challenged and the trust which many countries had
begun to place in it weakened. We have heard no
supporting evidence so far to justify the claim that the
safeguards had not proved effective and, indeed, we
heard the very clear statement of the representative of
France in the Council this morning [2282rzdmeeting] in
the opposite sense. I have to say, of course, in
honesty, that it is harder to accept a challenge to the
safeguards system when it comes by armed attack and
comes from a country which, legitimately but regrettably, has itself chosen to remain outside the system and
which, if it has not yet developed nuclear weapons,
has at the very least kept open its options to do so.

26. But the present claim goes well beyond this. It
starts with the assertion that, despite evidence to the
contrary, Iraq’s nuclear programme will result in the
secret development of a bomb within three to five
years; through a further extrapolation it asserts that
Iraq will use the bomb, once developed, with immense
damage to Israel and its people; and it concludes that
an immediate strike to eliminate that possible future
danger is fully justified under Article 51.
27. Even if one accepts the premise, and further
accepts what many would think improbable-that an
Arab country would use nuclear weapons against
Israel without regard to the consequences for itself, or
the death and desthction it would wreak on fellow
Arabs in the West Bank, in Jordan, in Lebanon and
elsewhere-then such a definition of self-defence is
still impossibly wide. It would replace the basic
principle of the Charter-that defence against armed
attack is legitimate pending international action to.
restore peace-by a virtually unlimited concept of selfdefence against all possible future dangers, subjectively assessed.This would reduce to virtual anarchy
all of the efforts made since the Second World War to
restrain the arbitrary actions of States by developing a
framework of universal principles and obligations to
govern their relations.

21. Fourthly, and related to that, is the fact that
Israel has justified its attack as a pre-emptive strike.
This is the first such strike in the nuclear age by any
country with the stated aim of destroying the capacity
of another country to develop nuclear weapons-an
intention that Iraq, of course, has denied.

28. It is true that the code of international conduct
which the Charter and other such instruments provide
is very imperfectly observed, and it is true that the
particular case of relations between Israel and Iraq is
not a notable example of its application. But even in
such a case there are actions by one side,or the other
which we are entitled to criticize as dangerous in
themselves and subversive of the effort to establish a
world of law because of what would happen if they
were to be applied by all States.

22. At least three other caseshave arisen since 1945,
at either the world or the regional level, where the
temptation for one country to strike pre-emptively at a
.hostife or rival country which was about to acquire
such weapons must have been strong. In each such
case the temptation was resisted. But now Israel has
struck at Iraq. This sets a most dangerous precedent
with wide and dangerous implications.
+23. We have listened carefully to Israel’s own
account of its actions. We recognize that it feels
threatened by hostile neighbours. But Israel’s justification for the attack amounts to a claim that its
security needs may at any time justify immediate
offensive action against a possible future threat in the
region. It is further implied that Israe1 will be the sole

29. If we were once to accept that Israel was right to
strike at Iraq to eliminate the possibility that Iraq
might develop nuclear weapons, must we then accept
that Iraq would be free to strike at Israel, which, in the
view of many, has already acquired them? Such an
argument has already been advanced in the past few
3

by one head of Government.
logic, it is not easy to refute.

days

all the weight which that would carry. But we must
frankly question whether it would now be wise for the
Council, in face of the very complex situation of
conflict in the Middle East, to seek to impose formal
and mandatory sanctions under the relevant provisions of the Charter.

In terms Of strict

30. But if this approach were once accepted, how
could what is right and wrong in international life be
judged any longer on any kind of general principle?
A world where nuclear weapons inexorably spread
and where any country may act militarily against
another at any time if it suspects that it is close to
acquiring them could become a world of universal
conflict and turmoil, under the constant threat of war
by each against each.

37. Thirdly, we would be ready to consider a call by
the Council for appropriate redress as a matter of
principle-though
we realize that such a call in present
circumstances is unlikely to be implemented.
38. Fourthly, we should like to see any resolution of
the Council encourage in some suitable way all States
in the region which have not yet done so to become
parties to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. Such a formula would naturally cover also Israel, which at the
last session of the General Assembly joined in the
consensus on the resolution on the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East [General
Assembly resolution 3.5/147]. That resolution, among
other things, invited the countries in the, region to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under IAEA
safeguards. We believe it could be right for the Council
now to endorse that recommendation.

3 1. In such a world any State physically able to do SO
could justify offensive military action against another
at any time by virtue of its own subjective assessment
of a possible future threat, or indeed its dislike of the
character of the regime or Government in question.
Any potential conflict could become actual at any
time. Regional rivalries, larger ideological divisions
and the further spread of nuclear weapons would
become even more dangerous than they are now.
32. Israel for the moment may judge that its relative
strength is such that it would nevertheless survive and
defend itself against all comers in such a world. But we
other small countries cannot afford to condone anything likely to bring such a world closer to reality.

39. My delegation would be ready to vote in favour
of a resolution on these general lines and we think that
it could secure general support in this Council, and
that that is important, It would do much in our view to
re-establish clearly the principles which we consider of
such importance to any effort to promote a world of
order and of law.

33. So much for our judgement, honestly expressed,
on what we have heard here by way of argument and
justification. I hope that no one will judge our criticism
to be insincere or to be motivated by any kind of
hostility or a lack of concern for the real and legitimate
security needs of any people in the face of hostility.

40. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

34. As members of the Council, however, we must
go on to consider what should now be done. For our
part, we believe-and
here I agree with the representative of France-that it would be right for the Council
to conclude its debate by adopting a resolution.

41. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): It gives me great
pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and to wish you success in carrying out your
responsible duties. Your profound political understanding of the problem of the Middle East and
outstanding qualities as a statesman and diplomat will
enable the Council to deal in an appropriate manner
with this most acute and pressing issue. My pleasure in
congratulating you is all the greater as I am addressing
my felicitations to the representative of Mexico, a
country with which Yugoslavia maintains traditionally
friendly and close relations; both are engaged in
common efforts to create a new world in which the
right to independence, security and progress will be
accessible to all peoples and countries.

35. First, we believe that such a resolution should
contain an appropriate recognition that all countries
are entitled, with due respect for international agreements, to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and that it is their right, if they so wish, to
further their scientific, technological and economic
development in that way,
36. Secondly, because Israel has argued that what it
did on 7 June was justified under the Charter and
because it claims the right to act similarly in future, we
believe that the Council must now pronounce itself
clearly on the issue. For our part, as a matter of
principle and for reasons which I have explained, we
are ready to condemn it. As a member of the Board of
Governors of IAEA, my country already voted with
others for a resolution adopted by that Board at
Vienna on 12 June which condemned the Israeli attack
[see S!145.?21. We would be prepared to consider a
similar judgement in a resolution of this Council, with

42. I should like to pay a tribute also to your
predecessor, the representative of Japan, Mr. Masahiro Nisibori, for his outstanding contribution to the
work of the Council last month.
43. The Yugoslav delegation wishes to contribute to
the consideration of this exceptional situation, which
4

ha
na
In
R

wi

has multiple
and complex implications
for international relations as a whole. This is, in fact, one of the
most important series of meetings of the Council in
recent times, as the international community is faced
with afuit accompli for which there is no precedent.

the organ responsible for peace in the world. That
would throw the door wide open to further actions of a
similar kind; aggressors everywhere would become
even more arrogant, and in the final analysis that
would encourage all those forces in the world which
have raised State terrorism to the level of a fundamental political doctrine.

44. We attach great importance to this debate, which
in our firm view has far-reaching significance. Yugoslavia supported the initiative for convening an emergency series of Council meetings, proceeding from the
fact that this organ is duty bound to act in cases of
threats to or breaches of peace and security and to
take appropriate measures in accordance with the
Charter.

50. What is even more dangerous, the Council would
thereby once again shut its eyes to the substance of the
Middle East crisis, which is entering a new critical
phase, as this act of war has resulted in a qualitative
escalation of aggression.
51. And this crisis not only remains unsolved but it is
worsening all the time. We are constantly faced with
the occupation of Arab and Palestinian
territories,
with the negation of the inalienable national rights of
the Palestinian people, with Israel’s .refusal to comply
with the decisions of the United Nations and the
international
community. The war is being waged
continuously
on a number of visible and invisible
fronts; aggression against sovereign countries continues, a fact that is best illustrated by the drama of
Lebanon, whose very existence is jeopardized,
and
that is also confirmed by the Israeli air raid on
Baghdad that we are now considering.

45. This is yet another exceptional moment when
the Council should take a resolute stand with regard to a premeditated act of wanton use of force,
which constitutes a flagrant violation of the basic
norms governing relations between sovereign States
-in brief, to protect, this time, the sovereignty of Iraq
and, by doing so, to protect the sovereignty of all
independent States. Because what has been infringed
are the fundamental postulates on which stable international relations are based. And that is not all. Israel
not only boasts that everything was done “cleanly and
effectively”, but considers this to be a normal practice
and threatens to continue it.

52. In such a situation, neither the Council nor any
individual State can remain indifferent. It is therefore
this forum’s duty not only to take clear stands and to
condemn the Israeli attack and qualify it as it deserves
but also to take measures under the Charter in order to
prevent similar actions in the future. General disagreement is not sufficient; what is needed are clear
positions aimed at preventing this ominous practice
from taking root. Moreover, the Council should
clearly reflect the feelings of world public opinion,
which has condemned this most recent act of aggression unanimously
and includes voices of protest in
Israel itself.

46. The absurd and particularly dangerous argumentation concerning the right of preventive attack “in
self-defence” must be rejected because not to reject it
would be to open the way to lawlessness and to
legalize aggression. If such argumentation
were even
partly endorsed, no country could be safe. Force
would become the law that any powerful country
could take into its own hands on the basis of a
subjective appraisal of the existence of an alleged
danger threatening its security. Who could feel safe in
such a situation?
47. Furthermore, Israel has dealt a serious blow to
the very principle of peaceful co-operation
among
States in the field of nuclear energy and has trampled
upon the international system of nuclear safeguards. It
has infringed upon the inalienable right of sovereign
countries to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
It has been internationally
confirmed and proved that
the nuclear reactor in Iraq was built precisely with
such purposes in mind. That is corroborated also by
the findings of the appropriate department of IAEA
and the statement of its Director General, Mr. Eklund.

53. My country has again taken a resolute stand in
accordance with its policy of consistent resistance to
any encroachment on the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of independent countries. The
Federal Secretariat for Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia
has quafified the unprovoked air raid on the capital of
Iraq as “an act of State terrorism and a most flagrant
violation
of the principle of sovereignty
in international relations”. Further, it has characterized it as
“yet another serious violation of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms of
international
conduct” and a “very dangerous development which gives cause for grave concern and
calls for energetic condemnation by the entire international community”.
The statement of the Secretariat for Foreign Affairs emphasized that:

48. We wonder what would happen if other countries
too began to destroy, for instance, nuclear power
stations, laboratories, research institutes and other
installations.
If that form of interventionism
is not
nipped in the bud, the world, and the militarily weak
countries
in particular, will remain helpless and
unprotected.

“Israel again resorted to brutal use of force with a
view to spreading the flames of war in the Middle
East and exacerbating the crisis rn that region. With

49. If the Council failed to react in an adequate
manner it would not respond to its basic vocation as
5

its latest armed aggression it has extended the area
of its intervention and onslaught on the freedom of
the peoples and countries in that region”.

occupation is short-sighted. Although it may secure
temporary advantages, such a policy is bound to turn
against its proponents.

In this connection, the statement laid stress on the
need to proceed resolutely and without delay to a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East crisis on
the basis of the implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations and the decisions adopted at meetings
of non-aligned countries, which have assessed the
Middle East crisis as one of the most dangerous
conflicts in the world. In that sense, the statement
underlines the necessity of taking urgent measures to
initiate a process of political settlement of the Middle
East conflict.

58. Peoples throughout the world are ever more
strongly resisting such a policy of force and domination. Countries are resolutely defending their independence and territorial integrity. No one is willing to
reconcile himself to unjust relations and oppression,In
the final analysis, no people can be held in subjection
for ever, The liberation struggle against colonial and
foreign domination has not been defeated anywhere.
That is an undeniable fact of international life and a
motor force of positive developments in the world.
59. All this has found expression in the principles
and objectives of the policy of non-alignment and, for
that reason, it could become one of the ever more
influential global, positive factors of peace, equality
and progress.

54. Yugoslavia has always called for such a solution,
which is more urgent today than ever before. In order
to be lasting, just and comprehensive, such a settlement must include the withdrawal of Israel from all
the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied in the
1967war; achievement of the inalienable national right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
creation of its own State under the leadership of the
Palestine Liberation Qrganization (PLO), as its sole
legitimate representative; and the establishment of
equal security for all States in the Middle East. Of
course, the idea of equal security implies the right of
every people to live in its own State safely and
independently, as well as the protection of all countries against aggression.

60. To conclude, my delegation believes that the
main messageof the Council at this serious moment
should be to prevent the use of force from gaining
ascendancy over the rule of law. For this reason, we
feel that the Council should condemn unequivocally
the unprovoked attack against Iraq and express its
solidarity with that country; apply effective measures
compelling Israel to behave in accordance with the
principles of the Charter and decisions of the United
Nations and prevent acts against peace and security;
reject the policy off& uccomplis; reaffirm the right
of all countries to develop and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes; and ensure that all countries
contribute towards the implementation of the decisions of the world Organization and refrain from
giving Israel such assistance as is, directly or indirectly, likely to encourage or enable it to defy the will
of the international community. This would contribute
not only towards restraining force and aggression in
the Middle East and liberating the Palestinian people,
but also towards improving international relations as a
whole.

45. The liberation of the Palestinian people has been
and still remains the key component of such a solution.
For as long as the Palestinian people does not emerge
from its forced exile and does not achieve the right to
its own national State; as long as all thefuits accomplis
created by force are not eliminated and the occupied
territories liberated; and as long as the Israeli policy of
domination and expansion, which is the root cause of
war and instability there, is not thwarted, there can be
neither peace nor stability in the Middle East.
56. We live in a world burdened by ever deeper
contradictions which are constantly being aggravated.
The worsening of international relations affects almost
all spheres of international life. There are no limits to
open or covert use of force. The latter is assuming ever
more diverse forms of interference, armed intervention, occupation, pr’cssure, State terrorism and subversion for the purpose of destabilizing independent
countries. It is also manifested in the fact that world
problems remain unresolved and unequal economic
and political relations are maintained. We encounter it
in great-Power rivalry for spheres of interest, in
attempts to impose alien models of development and
to jeopardize the aspirations of peoples to free social,
national and economic development, All this brings
into question the policy of detente and constitutes a
threat to international peace and security.

61. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The
Soviet delegation has listened with great attention to
the statement madeby the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq, Mr. Saadoon Hammadi [228&h meeting], who
very convincingly set forth the facts and arguments
relating to the Iraqi Government’s appeal to the
Security Council.
62. As members know, year in and year out, the
question of Israel’s acts of aggression againstthe Arab
peoples has been on the agenda of the Security
Council and of other organs of the United Nations.
The international community has frequently condemned Israel’s continuing occupation of Arab lands
and other hostile acts carried out by Israel against the
Arabs, This new criminal act committed by Israel, this
time against Iraq, has brought forth a wave of

57. However, everyday practice in substance confirms that any policy relying on force, aggression and
6

indignation and condemnation throughout the world as
a flagrant violation of international norms and customs, as a serious threat to the fate of the world not
only in the Middle East, but also beyond that region.
This condemnation has been reflected in the resolution
adopted at the extraordi.nary session of the Council of
the League of Arab States, which took place at
Baghdad on 11 June [S/14529, annex] and also in
statements made in the Security Council by the
Foreign Ministers of Kuwait [2281st meering] and
Tunisia [2280th meeting], the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States [2281st meeting] and many
other representatives.
63. Indeed, the raid by the Israeli Air Force on the
nuclear research centre close to Baghdad cannot be
considered otherwise than as a direct act of aggression
against a sovereign State member of the United
Nations. As a result of the raid, human lives were lost
and serious material damage inflicted. Either of these
effects would have been enough for us to call to
account the high-handed aggressor. But that is not the
only point. We must realize that the attack committed
by the Israeli Air Force represents a new stage in
Israel’s policy of international terrorism against the
Arab States and an attempt to strengthen its criminal
practice of carrying out so-called “pre-emptive
strikes’” against Arab cities and villages and to replace
international law with the law of the jungle and a
policy of operating from “a position of strength”.
Israel’s actions require not only the harshest condemnation but also decisive suppression, the more so in
that the Israeli leaders have openly threatened to
continue carrying out such strikes in the future when
they see fit. The Security Council has not yet
completed its consideration of the question of Israel’s
aggression against Iraq, and Mr. Begin is already
threatening to carry out another armed attack against
the territory of another Arab State, Lebanon.

it entered into force, “Iraq accepts Agency safeguards
on all its nuclear activities”. The statement continues:
“These safeguards have been satisfactorily applied
to date . , .“,l Therefore, statements by the Israeli
leaders, and in particular by Prime Minister Begin, to
the effect that the Israeli raid was motivated, supposedly, by the desire to ensure the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, simply sound like an affront to
common sense. On the contrary, as was correctly
noted by the Secretary-General of the 1Jnited.Nations,
this Israeli attack further complica.testhe implementation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, in particular in
respect of the application of the safeguards and
inspection system by IAEA.
67. At the same time, as is well known, Israel,
despite many appeals by the international community,
has refilsed to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
This is not the first year that the question of Israel’s
nuclear ambitions and its co-operation with the racist
rkgime of Pretoria. in the production of nuclear
weapons has been on the agenda of the United
Nations. The General Assembly [resolution .W89] has
firmly condemned the actions of Israel aimed at
manufacturing, acquiring and stockpiling nuclear
weapons, called upon Israel to place all its nuclear
installations under the control of IAEA and asked the
Security Council to adopt appropriate measures to
ensure the implementation of the relevant resolutions
relating to the question of Israel’s nuclear armament.
Israel’s refusal to comply with these decisions of the
United Nations bears eloquent witness to the fact that
its real objective is the establishment of its own
dominance in the Middle East region. We can well
imagine to what consequences these adventuristic
plans would lead were they not to be halted.
68. We would be telling only half the truth if, in
condemning the irresponsible actions of the Israeli
politicians, we were to pass over in silence the role of
those who stand behind Israel. Many are now posing
the question: Did the Government of the United States
know in advance about the intended raid by the Israeli
Air Force? It is difficult to imagine that it did not know
in advance. However, what is important here is not so
much the answer to the question, but, rather, the
indisputable fact that Begin’s Government would not
have dared to challenge the entire international community unless it were convinced of the understanding
and virtual encouragement for its adventuristic expansionist course extended by Washington, which has for
many years been providing the most varied kinds of
assistanceand support to Israel in its armed activities
against the Arab States.

64. The representative of Israel [22800thmeeling] has
cited even legal arguments to support the doctrine.of
preventive war. These arguments are familiar to us
from the 1930s when another State carried out “preemptive strikes” right and left until it collapsed under
the weight of its own crimes.
65. Israel’s attempts to justify its criminal action are
futile from beginning to end.
66. The Israeli representatives’ statements that Iraq
has embarked on the construction of nuclear weapons
are contradicted by the facts. The nuclear reactor
destroyed by t.heIsraeli Air Force was under construction and, as has been emphasized by international
specialists, was not intended for the production of
nuclear weapons. In this connection, we find noteworthy the statement by the Director General of IAEA,
Mr. Eklund, made on 9 June this year, and which
many representatives have cited, to the effect that in
accordance with the Treaty of Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, to which Iraq has been party since

69. Now the whole world has been able to see for
itself once again: the bombing of the nuclear research
centre near Baghdad was carried out using the most
modern American military technology, the F-15 and
F-16 aircraft, And their use was not hindered by
statements by the United States Government to the
effect that the weapons given by them to Israel were to
7

be used only for defensive purposes. Moreover, in
Wqshington they are acknowledging openly that the
United States had long been concerned over the
construction of the nuclear reactor in Iraq. It is
obvious that the Israelis had fully understood the hint
given them from across the ocean.

must also take measures to halt its criminal policy.
This is what the international community expects of
the Council, Millions of Arabs are looking to the
Council with hope-and
indeed it is not only Arabs
who believe that Israeli aggrebsion should not go
unpunished.

70. Now they are trying in Washington to distance
themselves from the Israeli action, so as to avoid the
just anger of the Arab peoples; but they cannot
mislead anyone by putting on such a show. What it
really cost the United States to take the decision to
delay the delivery to Israel of four F- 16 aircraft can be
seen from the explanation given by a representative of
the State Department that this delay will not apply to
other weapons, but only to those four aircraft. It is
sufficient to recall in this connection that quite
recently Israel already took delivery of 53 F-16
aircraft. In addition, Israel was to receive another
15 F-15 aeroplanes, 200 M-60 tanks, 600 air-tq-air
missiles, 600 air-to-ground missiles and 800 armoured
transports. There is no doubt that a certain delay in’the
delivery to Israel of the four aircraft will not have any
effect whatsoever on the rate at which the Israeli army
is arming itself. To ensure that even this essentially
empty gesture should not unduly concern the ruling
circles of Israel and the Zionist lobby in the United
States of America, the White House hurriedly assured
the Israeli Ambassador that there would be no change
in the United States policy of support for Israel.

75. The Soviet Union has consistently advocated and
continues to advocate support for the just struggle of
all the Arab peoples, including the Iraqi people,
against Israeli aggression. Proceeding from that premise, the Soviet delegation fully supports Iraq’s position
in respect of Israel’s attack on its territory. We stand
in solidarity in support of the just demands of Iraq for
the application
of sanctions against Israel under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
76. It is evident that this new act of armed aggression
by Israel is a logical consequence of the policy of the
United States in the Middle East, which, instead of
seeking to achieve the establishment of a firm and just
peace in the region, has moved towards separatist
deals and division of the Arab world. The results of
this American policy are evident: Tel Aviv’s lying has
become even more blatant and uncompromising,
leading day by day to an ever greater exacerbation of
the situation and dealing a blow to the process of a real
settlement in the region.
77. In counterpoint to this anti-Arab approach, the
Soviet Union calls for a return to the honourable
collective search for a comprehensive settlement on a
just and realistic basis. As was emphasized at the
twenty-sixth Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, under
the circumstances, this could be achieved within the
context of a specially convened internationa1 conference. The Soviet Union is willing, in a constructive
spirit and’ with good will, to participate in the work of
such a conference, along with other interested parties.
The United Nations could continue to play a useful
role in this. We would call on all those who truly desire
to see peace and security triumph in the Middle East to
follow this path.

71. As can be seen from the TASS statement of
9 June [SIZ452.5], the Soviet ruling circles categorically
“condemn the bandit-like
raid carried out by the
Israeli Air Force against the capital of Iraq and hold
that the responsibility for that raid lies with Israel and
with the United States of America, which arms the
aggressor and provides it with support of every kind.”
72. It is evident that the basis for this comprehensive
and close American-Israeli
co-operation is the aspiration of the United States to use Israel as an instrument
for its imperialist policy in the Middle East. Can there
be any doubt that, if the United States really wanted to
.,do so, it could long ago have put an end to the outrageous attacks by the Israeli expansidnists against
Arab lands, whether it be in the occupied West Bank,
the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights or in the land of
Lebanon which has suffered so much?

78. This most recent armed intervention by Tel Aviv
provides once again convincing proof that we can no
longer dally in taking decisive action to curb aggression. An important step in that direction would be the
adoption by the Council of a resolution categorically
condemning Israel for its act of aggression against Iraq
and the application against Israel of mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

73. Quite a good deal has recently been heard from
Washington about the so-called need to struggle
against international
terrorism, and yet it would be
difficult to find any clearer example of international
terrorism at the level of State policy than what is done
by Tel Aviv using American weaponry and with the
political cover of the United States of America.

79. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

74. The Soviet delegation considers that it is the duty
of the Council, given this continuing escalation of
Israeli aggression, to take decisive measures against
the aggressor. We should not only condemn Israel, we

80. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Mr. President,
I should like first of all to congratulate you today on
8

your assumption of the presidency of this principal
organ of the United Nations at a crucial juncture in
world events. I should like also to pay a high tribute to
the friendly country that you represent. My delegation
is confident, Mr. Pre’sident, that you are fully capable
of performing your task in guiding the work of the
Council to a most satisfactory outcome,

87. Israel has set a very serious precedent that
threatens world peace and subjects the Middle East to
a new wave of instability and chaos.

81. Similarly, Sir, I cannot fail on this occasion also
to express my delegation’s deep appreciation and
admiration for your predecessor, Mr. Nisibori of
Japan, who fulfilled his mandate last month as
President in an excellent way which won him our
highest esteem and admiration.

88, Unfortunately, this latest act of irresponsible
aggression was made possible by Israel’s abuse of
American arms in violation of the International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976
and the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement of
23 July 1952whose pertinent portions provide that:

82. The Council meets today in a grim mood,
befitting this tragic occasion. The tension-ravaged
Middle East received another setback with the Israeli
air assault on a scientific research facility near
Baghdad, an act that introduces anarchy to international affairs. There is cause for grave concern
about the very serious and extraordinary fall-out of
this totally unwarranted Israeli raid of 7 June 1981.

“The Government of Israel assures the United
States Government that such equipment, materials
or services as may be acquired from the United
States I . . are required for and will be used solely
to maintain its internal security, [and] its legitimate
self-defense . . . of the area of which it is a part . . ,
and that it will not undertake any act of aggression
against any other State.“2

83. That date will, no doubt, stand out in history as
the date on which Israel wilfully tried to shake the
fragile situation in the Middle E&t and acted against
international law and the internationally sanctioned
moral code of conduct.

89. We have seen to what end American weapons,
supposedly for defensive purposes, are being misused
by Israel. They are being misused against civiiian
targets and Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon and
now against scientific installations in Iraq. It is hoped
that obligations under the agreement to which I have
referred will be effectively discharged.

against and contrary to all expectations and the
making of further sincere attempts to consolidate the
peace structure in the region.

84. The facts speak for themselves. The Osirak
reactor is a scientific research facifity that is already
subject to inspection by IAEA-and I must remind the
Council that the last inspection of that scientific
facility was made last January, barely five months ago.

90. The Government and people of Egypt joined with
the rest of the Arab world and all peace-loving
countries in condemning this attack and, upon the
instructions of my Government, we have already
circulated a letter dated 9 June [S/14513], on Egypt’s
condemnation of Israel’s raid.

85. The Director General of IAEA, in his statement
at the opening of the IAEA Board of Governors
meeting on 9 June, said that:

91. It is with the deepest regret and indignation that
Egypt views Israel’s outrageous attack against Iraq.
The Egyptian people and Government were profoundly shocked and angered by that act, which was
contrary to all prerequisites for establishing a solid
basis for a just and lasting peace in the area.

“Iraq has been a party to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty since it came into force in 1970. In accordance with that Treaty, Iraq accepts Agency safeguards on all its nuclear activities. These safeguards
have been satisfactorily applied to date, including
during the recent period of armed conflict with Iran.
The last safeguards inspection at the Iraqi nuclear
centre took place in January of this year, and all
material there was satisfactorily accounted for. This
material included the fuel so far delivered for the
Tamuz reactors.“’

92. Actually, Israel’s destruction of Iraq’s nuclear
plant is against the spirit of, and runs counter to,
sincere efforts to forge peace in the area. It does not
help the whole process to which we have been
dedicated for the last three years.
93. The peace process was initially based on the
Camp David accords, which did not and do not justify
or permit acts of aggression. Aggressive policies and
practices cannot and should not be accounted for by
those accords, which were meant to formulate a
framework for peace in the Middle East.

In the same statement, the Director General also said
that “This attack on the Iraqi nuclear centre is a
serious development with far-reaching impIications”.
86. It is indeed futile to try to fathom Israel’s motives
in its raid on the Osirak facility. The attacks runs
counter to Israel’s declared intention of seeking a
comprehensive peace or stability in the area. Perhaps
Israel is trying to tell the whole world that it will accept
no restraint on its ability to destabiiize the Middle East

94. If a party to those accords acts to the contrary,
the blame and responsibility should be put on that
party and not on the accords, which must be fully
9

there is a cause-and-effect relationship underlying the
whole issue before us today: it is in the Middle East
crisis, in essence, that the causes of the latest Israeli
attack on Iraq lie.

implemented and scrupulously respected, That is the
position of my Government, which has painstakingly
pursued, and is still pursuing, sustained and persistent
efforts to achieve peace, stability, security, progress
and development for the whole region.

101. It is the Middle East crisis, the core of which is
the Palestinian question, that motivated the latest
explosion in the Middle East, It is in vain that we focus
on the effects or the symptoms, overlooking the
original causes behind them. The time is overdue for
the international community, for the United Nations,
for the super-Powers, for Western Europe, for the
non-aligned countries and for all peace-loving peoples
to embark with us, intensively, on an all-out initiative
to consolidate the fragile peace and security structure
in the Middle East, to help to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peaceful settlement of the Middle
East problem, fulfilling the right of all people and all
States to existence, security and sovereignty, and
particularly the rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and independence. This is the real cause
which we have to espouse and dedicate ourselves to, if
we really want to spare that region further eruption,
confrontation and conflicts which might potentially
engulf the whole world in unknown eventualities.

95. The Israeli Government stands fully responsible
for all the negative consequences which will be
brought about by its totally unacceptable behaviour.
Egypt cannot afford to overlook the inherent dangerous threat to the security of the region, which is
seriously damaged by Israel’s aggressive attack on
Iraq.
96. That act of aggression, committed under an
excuse of so-called legitimate self-defence, portends
dreadful prospects for the region, since Israel will
invoke that principle whenever and wherever it likes.
That will only lead to the further isolation of Israel, for
no peace-loving State can tolerate or acquiesce in such
an irresponsible act.
97. Today more than ever, Israel stands alone,
condemned by friends and enemies alike for its
application of t.he law of the jungle in international
relations. While Israel may have felt it was improving
its short-term safety and security, it has actually
destabilized the situation in the Middle East, thereby
jeopardizing in the long term its own security.

102. Conscious of a potential nuclear threat to peace
and stability in the Middle East, Egypt, since the
twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly in 1974,
has advocated the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region. The General Assembly
adopted by overwhelming majorities a series of resolutions on this subject. Yet it was only during the thirtyfifth session that General Assembly resolution 35/147,
on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
was adopted by consensus. Israel, while trying to
project an image of genuine interest in a Middle East
free of nuclear weapons, refuses to demonstrate in a
concrete way’its commitment to the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons. Instead of implementing the
provisions of resolution 351147, Israel persisted in its
rejcctionist attitude and opted to execute by this raid
its self-imposed responsibilities, having blatantly violated a resolution to which it had subscribed.

98. I have to emphasize that this act of aggression
constitutes a real challenge which should be confronted
and condemned. It is a challenge that necessitates on
our part a continued commitment to the cause of peace
in the Middle East, a resolute determination to
overcome these obstacles created by Israel and to
respond courageously to the chaIlenge posed by the
irresponsible act of the Government of Israel, which
further aggravates an already tense situation and
obstructs the road towards a just, comprehensive
peaceful settlement in the area,
99. The Council, the international community, the
world conscience is called upon to prevent this return
to old concepts and doctrines which should have been
abandoned after the initiative of the peace process in
the Middle East. Such concepts and acts represent,
regrettably, a setback to genuine efforts to achieve a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

103. Resolution 35/147 calls on all concerned parties,
inter alla, to adhere to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to agree to place
all its nuclear activities under IAEA safeguards. To
date, Israel refuses to adhere to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty or to place its nuclear activities under IAEA
safeguards. In fact, Israel has not taken any credible
steps towards the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the Middle East.

100. There could be-or, rather, will be-very
serious consequences as a result of the bombing raid.
They could come within months or even after years,
However, there may still be room for reason and
statesmanship and wisdom. In our modest opinion, the
terms in which the debate is taking place may be
missing a substantial point: condemnation in itself,
however necessary, may not remedy the aftermath of
the aggression. Indeed, we have before us a specific
case with specific circumstances, and we should not
be diverted into a labyrinth of discussions and argumentation. Nevertheless, it is our firm conviction that

104. By its unwarranted air raid on the Iraqi peaceful
nuclear reactor, Israel has cast serious doubts on its
previous pronouncements of its support for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East. Israel’s latest action is an assault on the two
basic multilateral instruments against the proliferation
of nuclear weapons-the Treaty on the Non-Prolifera10

1j.O.
The
PRESIDENT (intc3rpretation
fronl
SpUftish): The next speaker is the representative of
Romania. I invite him to take a place at the council
table and to make his statement.

tion of Nuclear Weapons and the system of safeguards
administered by IAEA. Israel, it seems, believes no
one but itself. This is a very dangerous attitude for a
country that does not cease to proclaim its desire for
peaceful co-existence with its neighbours and to have
friendly relations with all countries.

111. Mr, MARINESCU (Romania) (inler!-VYfalion
from French): Romania is a country which devotes its
efforts to peaceful construction and development and,
on the international level, to strengthening co-operation and understanding among all peoples, and we
deem it necessary clearly to submit our views to the
Council in these diEficult circumstances for peace and
security in the Middle East and throughout the world.

105. Israel, although an adamant opponent of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty, has arrogated to itself, it
seems, the right to interpret and execute the provisions of the Treaty in a strange manner. It cites
unsubstantiated arguments that Iraq was constructing
the Tamuz reactor for military purposes, whereas the
peaceful character of the reactor is beyond doubt, as
Iraq is a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and has
subscribed to the safeguards of IAEA.

112. I am grateful lo you, Mr. President, and to the
other members of the Council for having granted my
country’s request to be allowed to participate in this
important meeting of the Council. May I wish YOU, as
the representative of Mexico, a country with which
Romania has manifold links, complete successin YOUI
most responsible tasks. I am certain that you will guide
the Council’s debates with expertise and wisdom,
following in the footsteps of the great diplomats and
politicans whom your country has given to the world.

106. To make good its declaration in support of the
establishment of a nuclear weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, we call upon Israel to accede to the NonProliferation Treaty and place all its nuclear activities
under the safeguards system of IAEA, in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 35047, as all other
concerned parties have done. .

113. The aggressive act which is the subject of the
present debate in the Council has been justly reproved
and condemned throughout the world by the authorized representatives of many States and by world
public opinion, which learned with profound disquiet
and indignation of the aerial attack by Israel against
Iraqi nuclear installations.

107. We equally reiterate our call to all States,
pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East, to declare solemnly that they
will refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing,
acquiring or in any way possessingnuclear weapons
and nuclear explosive devices, and to deposit such
declarations with the Security Council for consideration, as appropriate. This has been the initiative of
my Government and has been our consistent position
since 1974.

114. From the outset, the Government of the Socialist Republic of Romania and the public opinion of my
country most vigorously condemned this inadmissible
act of armed aggression as a grave violation of the
elementary rules governing relations among States,
the sacred principles of national independence and
sovereignty, non-intervention in internal affairs, territorial integrity and non-recourse to force or the
threat of its use.

108. Israel’s tragic and ominous aggression underscores the great urgency of a comprehensive peaceful
settlement of the Middle East crisis based on these two
interrelated elements, the cause and the effect. It is
through the achievement of the right of all peoples and
States to existence, security and independence and
more particularly the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination, and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, that this vital
region and the whole world could be spared a doomed
destiny.

115. As is well known, Romania has unceasingly
affirmed the absolute value of those principles and has
undertaken constant and resolute efforts to promote
their strict application among all countries of the world
as a fundamental premise for the maintenance of
international peace and security and the freedom of all
peoples. In accordance with these principles and
generally accepted binding rules, the use of force, acts
of aggression and armed attacks directed against other
peoples and against independent and sovereign States
connot be accepted in any form, in any circumstances
or on any pretext.

109. To conclude, Egypt has been affected by this
act of aggression as much as all Arab countries and
peoples have been. Egypt has been and will continue
to be an organic part and parcel of the Arab nation.
Our history is one, our present aspirations and ordeals
are one, and our common destiny is and always will be
one. Not one person, Government or country should
be under the illusion that Egypt’s national interests
differ from those of the Arab peoples-and I say that
loud and clear. They are one andthe same. Egypt, as it
has done in war, will fulfil in peace all its historical
tasks in safeguarding and enhancing the legitimate
interests and aspirations of the Arab people.

116. In the light of those principles and norms, as
well as the experience of history, the bombing of the
territory of Iraq by Israeli aircrafts is a deliberate act
of aggression and the motives invoked to justify it
appear totally hollow and devoid of any legitimacy.
One cannot in any way accept the “‘motjvation”
11

whereby.the Government of Israel attempts to justify
its attack, namely, that it was determined by security
considerations.

the interests of all peoples, as well as the maintenance
of peace and security.
122. In our opinion, the Council should also reaffirm
the inalienable right of all countries to use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes, their right to access to
scientific achievement in this field and to nuclear
technology,
as an integral part of their right to
development. Any act designed to prevent or restrict
the exercise of that right would be detrimental to
international
co-operation, to the solution of urgent
economic and social problems facing mankind.

117. First of all, a flagrant violation of the principles
and fundamental rules of the Charter and of international law can in no way assume the mantle of a legal
act. It is all the more grave and dangerous to make of
such a pretension a doctrine for attack, or even of
preventive war, for that doctrine is totally unacceptable for reasons which relate both to an elementary
respect for international morality and law and to the
interests and fundamental rights of every people with
regard to peace and security.

123. There is no doubt that the military action by
Israel seriously damages the situation in the Middle
East, as well as the interests of all the peoples of the
region, including those of the people of Israel. Everyone knows how tense the situation in the Middle East
is and how vast is the potential for explosion that has
been building up in that region, In those circumstances, any act of force can only enlarge the area of
conflict, make the possibility of a settlement even
more remote and create an immediate
danger of
escalation of the confrontation-one
of the most
serious threats to world peace.

118. Let no one-and above all not those who bear
the heavy responsibility for this inexcusable act-misunderstand or harbour illusions: recourse to force inevitably leads to the further use of force, with the most
serious consequences. World experience bears indisputable testimony to the fact that the course which
leads to the strengthening of the security of a State, to
its independent and sovereign development,
can in no
way include military actions or acts of aggression
against other States. On the contrary, recourse to the
use of arms and any aggressive actions are a source of
insecurity, because they are inevitably followed by
reactions and reprisals.

124. The Israeli bombing of Iraq, Israel’s military
actions in Lebanon-which
bring widespread destruction and such terrible loss to the Lebanese people-the
constant risk that new hotbeds of conflict will develop:
all that shows how necessary it is to reach a
comprehensive solution to the Middle East problem,
to establish a just and lasting peace in that part of the
world.

119. The military action taken by Israel constitutes
an extremely dangerous precedent in international life.
To acquiesce in it would open the way to arbitrariness
in its most dangerous form and to the most irresponsible actions with the gravest implications
for security
and even for the very existence of the countries and
peoples of the world. It is all the more dangerous since
it occurs at this time in a particularly
complex and
tense international situation, when the efforts of all
States should be devoted to a resumption and continuation of detente, to a policy of peace and cooperation. It is on the basis of those considerations
that we believe the Israeli Government has just taken
on a grave responsibility,
even towards its own
people, and that it is its duty urgently and definitively
to halt all such aggressive actions.

125. In firmly condemning the Israeli act of aggression and expressing its deep concern over the development of events, Romania reaffirms its consistent
position that the very complex situation in the Middle
East can be solved only by political means, through
negotiations,
126. In Romania’s
view-constantly
affirmed
by
Romania’s
President, Nicolae Ceaugescu-there
is
no conflict in any part of the world that can justify
recourse to arms; all problems must be settled solely
by peaceful means, by negotiations among the parties
concerned. That is the only viable course for solving
the problems of conflict in the Middle East.

120. As is emphasized in the statement issued by the
Romanian Press Agency, with the authorization
of
the Government of Romania [S/f4528, anrzex], it is
imperative to understand with total clarity that no one,
for any reason and in any circumstances, can take it
upon himself to violate the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of another State; that the
defence of a State’s own security can in no way justify
a flagrant failure to respect the security of other
States.
121. For that reason, we feel that the Council

127. The events of recent weeks have proved beyond
any challenge the imperative need to proceed without
delay to the achievement of a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East. As we have repeatedly
emphasized since the conflict began, such a settlement, to be viable, must provide for the withdrawal
of Israeli troops from the Arab territories occupied as
a result of the 1967 war. To meet the vital interests of
all the peoples of the region, as well as, the supreme
requirements of justice and peace, it is necessary, at
the same time, to recognize the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination,
including its right to

should

give the clearest expression to the general condemnation of the Israeli act of armed aggression and
resolutely affirm that the international
community
is
determined not to tolerate such acts, which jeopardize
12

establish its own independent State. The facts prove
-if proof is still needed-that
an equitable solution of
the problems and the achievement of an atmosphere of
calm and security. in the Middle East cannot be
envisaged without a solution of the Palestinian problem: an essential component of a lasting settlement in
the region. A peaceful settlement must also include
the guaranteeing of the independence and territorial
integrity of all the States of the region,

133.

Mrs.

DUNG (Viet Nam)
First of all, the delegation of the Socialist Repubfic of Viet Nam would like
to express its appreciation
to the President and
members of the Council for giving us this opportunity
to state the views of our Government on the air raid
carried out by Israel against the nuclear research
centre in Iraq on 7 June.
(interpretation

NGUYEN
from

NGOC

French):

134. Together with the international
community,
which has risen up in indignation
at that odious
aggression, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Viet
Nam issued a statement dated 9 June [S/14526, annex]
on this problem. The statement said that the pretext
advanced by Mr. Begin to the effect that that
unprovoked criminal act was an act of self-defence
bore witness to cynical arrogance and was futile as a
justification
of it.

128. Emphasizing
those basic requirements
of a
comprehensive
solution, the Presideut of Romania
recently reaffirmed the need to intensify the efforts
to organize an international
conference, under the
auspices and with the participation
of the United
Nations, of all the parties concerned, including the
PLO, as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the co-Chairmen of the Geneva
Conference: the Soviet Union and the United States of
America. It seems to us very appropriate to recall on
this occasion that the idea of a peace conference on the
Middle
East was included in General Assembly
resolution 34/70, adopted by an overwhelming majority on 6 December 1979.

135. That shocking attack, far from being an isolated
act of aggression by the Israeli Air Force, was
undertaken along with a series of bombings against the
territory of Lebanon, which indiscriminately
killed
thousands of innocent people, and other military
operations against Syria and other Arab countries
aimed at crushing the forces of resistance of the Arab
countries and thereby perpetuating the illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestine and the Arab territories.

129. We are more than ever convinced of the
timeliness
and realism of that idea, proposed by
Romania several times during recent years, as well as
of the urgency of a peaceful solution in the Middle
East. To that end, the Government of Israel must fully
understand the seriousness of the situation that has
been created and, in a spirit of reason and political
lucidity, of responsibility
towards the cause of peace
and the interests and the future of all the peoples of the
region, it must put an immediate
end to such a
dangerous development.

136. Israel’s allegation made to support its attack
against the nuclear research centre-namely,
that it
was carried out to prevent Iraq manufacturing an atom
bomb-is
not only completely
tendentious but also
quite clearly shows Israel’s design, with the assistance
of the United States, to keep a monopoly on nuclear
weapons in the region.

130. It is high time for the United Nations, all its
organs and in particular the Security Council-while
taking the measures necessary to put an end to these
intolerable
acts that threaten peace and security in the
region-to
place at the forefront of their concerns the
fundamental
objective of the establishment of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East, to make every
effort to go beyond the present state of affairs, to act
firmly for a comprehensive settlement of the conflict,
in accordance with the deep aspirations of all the
peoples of the region.

137. It is quite evident that the operation was a
premeditated act of terrorism carefully prepared and
carried out, using the most sophisticated American
weapons and equipment, within the context of the
well-known plan of Israel to continue at any cost its
expansionist designs against the Arab countries. That
operation could not have been carried out without the
support and encouragement of the United States. It
seriously exacerbates already existing tension in the
Middle East and endangers peace and security in the
region.

131. If the present debate were to conclude in that
way, if that were to be the direction taken by the
international
community’s
action, then these meetings
of the Security Council would represent an important
contribution
to the solution of one of the most critical
conflicts in the world, in conformity with the interests
of peace and security and the requirements of detente
and international
co-operation.

138. The Government of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam considers that act of aggression to be a
flagrant violation of the sacred independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Iraq
and a violation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international
law and custom. It
is an insolent challenge to Arab and world public
opinion.

132. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Viet
Nam. I invite her to take a place at the Council table
and to make her statement.

139. As was stated in the recent message sent by Mr.
Nguyen Co Thach, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, to Mr. Saadoon
13

Hammadi,
of Iraq,

Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic

“‘The Government and people of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam strongly condemn the aforementioned criminal acts carried out by the expansionist Zionist Israeli aggressors and call on them to
respect the independence and sovereignty of the
Republic of Iraq and of the other Arab countries.”

the illegal use of force against a. State Member of the
Organization contrary to Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter; secondly, Israel stands accused of a serious
violation of the territorial integrity of Jordan, Saudi
Arabia and Iraq. By its action against Iraq, Israel
stands accused of committing a deliberate and calculated act of aggression-the
gravest of all crimes
against international
peace and security-against
a
State Member of the Organization.

140. Minister Nguyen Co Thach at the same time
reaffirmed the resolute support of the people and
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for,
and their militant solidarity with, the Iraqi people, the
Palestinian people and the other Arab peoples in the
just struggle against American imperialism
and the
Zionist aggressors of Israel to recover the occupied
Arab territories and to achieve the sacred national
rights of the Palestinian people.

146. Having been caught in flagrante delicto committing that offence and having admitted responsibility
for the attack, Israel, in order to justify its action,
propounded a new thesis, that of “anticipatory”
or
“preventive aggression” in the guise of self-defence.
This new thesis, notwithstanding the numerous but,
none the less, selective citations in its defence, ought
to be rejected, if only for the maintenance of international peace and security throughout the world,

141. The Vietnamese delegation is willing to support
any resolutions and decisions that the Council may
take at this series of meetings on Israel in the discharge
of its difficult task of helping to ensure peace and
security, which are so gravely jeopardized
in the
region.

147. It was also asserted in this forum last week, with
a flamboyant
display of legal chicanery, that the
military attack against Iraq was both moral and legal.
My delegation finds nothing admirable in a morality
that denies by force of arms the right of the Palestinian
people to a homeland, that subjects its men, women
and children to incessant bombing raids or that
persists in international
brigandage and the illegal
occupation of foreign territories. Israel’s plea of selfdefence cannot, in any case, be justified in law. It
cannot be justified because, as Israel itself argued
before the Council in 1951 [551st meeting, para. 361,
the plea of self-defence is untenable where no armed
attack has taken place or is imminent. Israel’s decision, therefore, to take the law into its own hands
was predicated on the false notion that Iraq, having
completed the installation
of a nuclear research
station, was going to manufacture nuclear weapons
and then unleash a war against Israel. On the basis of
this suspicion, Israel took it upon itself to commit a
crime of enormous gravity against a Member of this
Organization. It persisted in its suspicion, notwithstanding the impeccable evidence of IAEA that Iraq’s
reactors had consistently been inspected and no
evidence has been found of any activity not in
accordance with the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. In other words, the Israeli assertion that
with the completion of the nuclear installation Iraq
was going to start making bombs was at best a pretext
used to justify Israel’s aggressive designs against a
neighbouring State and at worst a mendacious fabrication.

142. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative
of Sierra
Leone. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
143. Mr. KOROMA
(Sierra Leone): I have been
instructed by my Government to make the following
statement.
144. Mr. President, for my country it is not just a
matter of coincidence that you should be presiding
over the affairs of the Council at a time when it is
considering the grave matter which is before it. For
your country, Mexico, which you so ably represent in
the Council, is a firm believer in the United Nations
and its purposes and principles and a staunch supporter of international law and justice, We also know for
certain that Mexico cannot be a party to the conspiracy now being hatched in certain quarters to
destroy the United Nations, undermine its authority
and weaken its effectiveness, which is precisely the
inevitable consequence of the latest Israeli attack
against Iraq.
145. The charge against Israel now before the Council is that on Sunday, 7 June 1981, deploying its
military war machine, as is its wont in the Middle East
region, it carried out a premeditated and unprovoked
attack against a nuclear research installation
situated
near Baghdad, thereby causing many civilian casualties
and much material damage. In the course of executing
such a nefarious operation, Israel violated the territorial integrity not only of Iraq but also of Jordan and
Saudi Arabia. Thus, under the Charter of the United
Nations, Israel stands accused, first and foremost, of

148. As for the principle of self-defence, it has long
been accepted that, for it to be invoked or justified,
the necessity for action must be instant, overwhelming
and leaving no choice of means and no moment for
deliberation.
The Israeli action was carried out in
pursuance of policies long considered and prepared
and was plainly an act of aggression.
149. Accordingly,
if Israel still harboured certain
suspicions, notwithstanding
the IAEA explanation
14

that Iraq’s reactors had consistently been inspected
and no evidence had been found of any activity not in
accordance with the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the proper course would have been to
come to the Council with such evidence as it may have
had in its possession. The right to self-defence exists
only to the extent to which protection by a higher
authority, in this case the Security Council, is not
available. Instead of coming to the Council, Israel
chose to take the law into its own hands. Thus, Israel,
by carrying out an armed attack against Iraq, acted
illegally and entirely without justification and the plea
of self-defence is not in any way applicable in this
case.
150. Furthermore, since Israel was not and could not
have been acting in self-defence, the military action by
Israel was tantamount to aggression, a capital offence
which has to be adjudged under Article 39 of the
Charter and against which measures have to be taken
under Articles 41 and 42. In this particular case, the
offence committed by Israel is of such enormous
gravity and establishes such a dangerous precedent
that an appropriate response reflecting the abhorrence
with which the international community views the
action must be given to Israel, if only to restore
confidence in the international security system and to
ensure that such a flagrant act of aggression is not
rewarded.

ness is fraught with grave consequences and it is for
the Council to put a stop to it. If the Council fails to
take appropriate action against Israel, or if it is
perceived to have adopted a meaningless resolution
not in consonance with the enormity of the crime
committed, a premium will be placed on aggression
and the credibility or relevance of this body will be
brought further into question,
154. Equally, when Israel, a State that has refused to
become a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, takes
it upon itself to launch a military attack against the
nuclear installations of another State which is a party
to the Treaty and is judged to be of good behaviour as
far as the Treaty is concerned, then, unless the
Council can impose sanctionsagainst Israel, the nonproliferation regime will be seriously undermined.
Little wonder, then, that the Director General of
IAEA spoke out as forcefully against the Israeli raid as
he did. It is the duty of the Council to restore faith in
the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
1.55. Notwithstanding the vituperation, my delegation has been instructed to take part in the deliberations of the Council, not out of hypocrisy or to shed
crocodile tears, but to speak out against international
lawlessness as well asto reaffirm our faith and belief in
the United Nations, so that at the end of the day it can
offer protection to all nations, to the weak as well as to
the strong.

151. But leaving aside the legal dimension of this
matter for a moment, one further aspect of the Israeli
raid is the dangerous precedent it will set with respect
to the maintenance of international peaceand security,
if such action is not nipped in the bud by the
international community, Today a number of States
are engaged in peaceful nuclear research and, if all
such nuclear installations are going to be bombed out
of existence merely on the basis of suspicionsthat they
may be used for military purposes against another
Qate, then the world, we would submit, is entering a
irery dangerous period of international insecurity. This
s a further reason why this body should take an
r-revocable stand against such action, and no one State
should be allowed to arrogate to itself the responiibility of being a world policeman.

156. My Government continues to believe that a
durabIe and just peace will return to the Middle East
only with the solution of the Palestinian question. My
Government reaffirms its recognition of the Palestinian people as a principal party in the establishment of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East and the PLO
as the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people.
157. May I conclude by thanking Mr. Nisibori of
Japan for the serenity and wisdom with which he
presided over the affairs of the council last month,
May I also thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Council, for allowing my delegation to
take part in the Council’s deliberations.

152. As the concomitant of its co-conspirator against
he Organization, the pariah regime of Pretoria, Israel
ras appointed itself the regional gendarme of the
diddle East and carried out incessant raids against the
,ebanese and the heroic Palestinian people which,
laving been driven out of their homes, have taken
efuge in Lebanon, Lately Israel has carved out and
et up an enclave in Lebanon which, to all intents and
ut-poses, is under its control while, at the sametime,
persists in the illegal occupation of territories
ccupied since 1967.

1.58. The PRESIDENT (interpretation

from

Span-

ish): The next speaker is the representative of Mon-

golia, I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
159. Mr. ERDENECHULUUN (Mongolia): Allow
me first to express the gratitude of the delegation of
the Mongolian People’s Republic to you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council for
giving me the opportunity to present my Government’s position on the question under consideration.
May I take this opportunity to congratulate you
warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of June.

53. To crown it all, Israel has now embarked upon a
olicy of destroying scientific installations in the name
f security. This latest form of international lawless-

is

160. I also wish to pay tribute to Mr. Nisibori
Japan, who presided over the Council last month.

of

not happening again. One would have to bear in mind
the cynical assertion that, should the Iraqis try again to
build a reactor, the Israelis would use all the means at
their disposal to destroy that reactor.

161. The Council is once again seized of the problem
of the Middle
East, following
a flagrant act of
aggression committed
by Israel, this time against the
Republic of Iraq.

169. In order to put the Israeli act of aggression in its
proper perspective, it is necessary to deal with the
facts, and particularly those in the nuclear field. Unlike
Israel, Iraq was among the first countries to sign and!
ratify the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear
Weapons. Later on Iraq concluded an agreement with.
IAEA for the application of safeguards to all its
nuclear activities, as required by the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. As is well known, Iraq, besides being a
member of IAEA, has concluded bilateral co-operation agreements with a number of countries.

162. The Government
and people of the Mongolian
People’s Republic have learned with extreme concern
and indignation
of the Israeli air raid on the Iraqi
atomic reactor near Baghdad, which caused loss of
lives and extensive material damage.
163. The Government
of the Mongolian
People’s
Republic, in the statement of the spokesman of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, resolutely condemned the
aggressive attack of Israel against Iraq as a flagrant
violation of international
law and supported the Iraqi
request for an immediate
convening of the Security
Council for the discussion of the situation brought
about by the Israeli aggression.

170. It is no coincidence that the Board of Governors
of IAEA adopted a resolution entitled “Military attack
on Iraqi nuclear research centre and its implications
for the Agency”, in which the Board strongly condemned Israel for that premeditated and unjustified
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre, which was
covered by Agency safeguards, and recommended
that the General Conference at its forthcoming regular
session should consider all the implications of that
attack, including suspending the exercise by Israel of
the privileges and rights of membership [S/I#532].

164. The extreme danger of such a blatant act of
aggression becomes all the more evident in the light of
the increasingly
precarious situation in the Middle
East, fraught with serious consequences for peace and
security in the world as a whole. It is absolutely clear
that this barbarous act cannot be divorced from the
over-all policy of aggression and expansionism
of
Israel against the Arab nations.

171. As far as Israel is concerned, it is no longer a
secret that it is developing a nuclear capability and has
bluntly refused to heed the call of the international
community that it accede to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. Moreover, the world community
has repeatedly voiced deep concern over and condemnation
of the military and nuclear collaboration
between
Israel and the racist regime of South Africa, as well as
certain Western Powers, and appealed to all States to
put an end to any co-operation with Israel in the
nuclear field.

165. The reasons underlying the total disregard by
Israel of the elementary norms of conduct between
States, the cynical arrogance with which it defies
world public opinion, can be found first and foremost
in Israel’s conviction
of being irreplaceable
in the
global strategy of imperialism.
166. It seems obvious that, without enormous military and other support on the part of imperialist
circles, especially that of the United States, it would
not have been possible for Israel, which has elevated
international
terrorism to the level of State policy, to
act the policeman in that part of the world. This clearly
shows the danger of the United States-Israeli collusion
in the Middle East and of their notorious policy of
separate deals.

172. The recent escalation of military actions by
Israel against Lebanon, Iraq and other countries
necessitates the adoption of decisive and effective
measures to frustrate such actions and to establish just
and lasting peace in the Middle East,
173. It is the considered view of the Government of
the Mongolian People’s Republic that the Council, as
the organ bearing primary responsibility
for the
maintenance of international
peace and security,
should not limit itself to condemning Israel’s act of
aggression against Iraq, but should impose upon Israel
mandatory sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Council should also reaffirm the right of
all States to develop their programmes of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. We strongly support the
demand that all Israeli nuclear facilities be open to
inspection and be placed under IAEA safeguards.

167. It is more than strange to hear the allegations to
the effect that Israel was compelled to resort to the
so-called pre-emptive
attack in the exercise of its
“inherent right of self-defence”.
One may conclude
that Israel has decided to assume the role of supreme
judge, to determine at its own discretion whether one
State or another is acting in consonance with the
security requirements of Israel and to deliver verdicts
against those who have violated those requirements.
168. This time it turned out to be Iraq whose nuclear
research centre was allegedly endangering the security
of Israel. There is certainly no guarantee of such an act

174. The dangerous situation prevailing in the Middle
East, heightened by the naked aggression of Israel
16

against Iraq, reaffirms the need to make every effort
aimed at a comprehensive solution of the Middle East
crisis. We believe that the convening of an international conference on this problem has become a matter
of extreme urgency. In that connection, I should like
to refer to the report of the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Mongolian People’s Revolutionary
Party, Chairman of the Presidium of the
Great People’s Khural of the Mongolian
People’s
Republic,
Comrade Yu Tsedenbal, delivered at the
eighteenth Congress of the Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party, where it is stated, inter a&, that the
Mongolian
People’s Republic is firmly on the side of
the Arab peoples’ struggle for an early and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem, That
problem must be settled on the basis of the complete
withdrawa
of Israeli troops from all the occupied
territories
and respect for the legitimate national
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their
right to create their own State,

most strongly condemn. Israel has once again
brazenly violated international law. State terrorism,
as repeatedly committed by Israel, ought to be a
source of grave international concern, It heightens
tensions in the Middle Ea.st, a volatile part of the
world, and constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security.
“The friends and allies of Israel have the duty to
restrain the Tel Aviv rigime in its aggressive actions
and instil a sense of realism in its outlook. The core
of the conflict in the Middle East remains the
question of Palestine. The prerequisite for Israel to
live in conditions of peace and security is its
recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Wanton and unprovoked acts of aggression against independent and sovereign Arab States
in the region are but scapegoats which can only
prolong the conflict in the Middle East.
“I convey to you, my dear brother,
the
unflinching solidarity of the party and its Government, as well as the people of Zambia as a whole.”

175. In conclusion, my delegation would express its
hope that the Council will adopt a resolution that
would envisage effective measures aimed at forcing
Israel to comply with the demands of the world
community.
0

179. Furthermore, as we join the entire world in its
unanimous indictment of Israel for its irresponsible
military action against Iraq and also for its brazen
violation of the territorial integrity of Saudi Arabia and
Jordan, my delegation wishes to commend the Government and people of Iraq for their display of
maximal restraint in the face of naked provocation by
Israel. We also wish to call upon those among us who
are under obligation-contractual
or otherwise-as
suppliers of arms to and backers of Israel to reconsider
seriously their traditional support, which blinds Israel
and encourages that country to engage in unrestrained
militarism.
We also appeal to the supporters of Israel
to be objective and not to apply double standards in
assessing the havoc which Israel is creating in the
Middle East region and elsewhere.

176. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
.finm Spmis/z): The next speaker is the representative of Zambia,
and I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
177. Mr. MUTUKWA
(Zambia): Mr. President, on
behalf of the Zambian delegation, I wish to congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for the
month of June. Having served with you on the Council
last year, my delegation is aware of your enormous
diplomatic
skills and qualities, which befit the office
that you hold.
178. Once again, the Council is summoned to a series
of emergency
meetings because of yet another reckless and senseless act by Israel. On Sunday, 7 June
198 I, Israel perpetrated an unprovoked and premeditated aerial attack on an Iraqi nuclear facility, a facility
which was designed for peaceful applications. In the
process, Israel not only destroyed property and lives,
but violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq. In this connection, with the indulgence of the
President,
I shall quote the message sent by Mr.
Kenneth
Kaunda, the President of Zambia, to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq:

180. We cannot but draw parallels between Israel’s
latest violation of Iraq’s sovereignty and the acts of
unprovoked aggression, characterized by human and
material destruction, that racist minority regimes have
been visiting upon Zambia and the other front-line
States in recent years. Zambia therefore understands
fully the plight of the people and Government of Iraq
in these circumstances.
We cannot, furthermore,
remain silent when fundamental principles of international law and peace have been trampled upon.
181. The attack by lsrael on Iraq has very grave
implications
for international peace and security and
this should not be underestimated. No State could feel
secure if lawlessness and anarchy held sway in
international
relations. The United Nations and, in
particular, the Security Council must ensure that the
world does not revert to a primitive state of nature.
What should be self-evident even to the most vocal in
Tel Aviv is that they, too, would not be safe in a world
of anarchy and lawlessness. It is equally dangerous for

“It was with deep shock and indignation that
I heard the news about the bombing and the
destruction
of your country’s nuclear installations
by Israel. In their arrogance, the Israeli leaders have
shamelessly
invoked frivolous pretexts to justify
their action.
and

“NO pretext whatsoever can justify the barbaric
criminal
Israeli action, which we in Zambia
17

acts of aggression to be committed as a ploy to further
myopic electoral gimmicks by some leaders in Israel
who are bent on trying to deceive the world. Fortunately, all enlightened members of -the international
community can see through those transparently deceptive manoeuvres by Israel.
182. It is ironic that Israel, a country that seeks to
have recognized, secure borders, should be engaged in
committing repeated acts of aggression beyond its
borders. Israel must learn the principles of peaceful
coexistence with its neighbours, which constitute the
quintessence of peace. Peace and security are not
compatible with aggression. Irrational use of force can
only harm the perpet:rator. Only durable peace can
ensure stability in the Middle East, and at the core of
that stability is the resolution of the Palestinian
problem,
183. We call upon the Council to take prompt,
effective measures to deal with the problem of Israeli
aggression against Iraq, But that should not be the end
of the measures to be taken by the Council. It is of
vital importance that the Council address itself to and
prescribe measures to deal decisively with the root

Litho

in United

Nati&,

New

York

00400

cause of Israeli aggression and the whole question of
the attainment by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights and of a State of their own. The
linkage here is quite obvious, and we believe that
piecemeal approaches can only bring temporary
solutions,
184. Zambia believes that there is an urgent need for
the Council to deal with the incessant conflict in the
Middle East before it escalatesfurther into a holocaust
with serious consequencesfor all mankind.
The meeting ro<e at 6.20 p.m.

I This statement was made at the 563rd meeting of the Board of
Governors of IAEA, the official records of which are publishedin
summary form.
’ United States Treutics und Other International

Agreements,

vol. 3, Part 4, 1952(UnitedStatesGovernmentPrintingOffice,
Washington,
DC., 1955),p, 4985,

Sh-61103~September

198S-2,050
