UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

I.

,
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :.

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I.. , . . . . . . . . .. . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to.
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12066) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l920)

SlPV. 1920

/;

.::
..

i
a

I

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
‘of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
onthatdate..
‘_.
,.

1920th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 14 May 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Lo&

de GUIRINGAUD

the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of Qatar in which he asks to be invited,
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure,
to participate without the right to vote in the discussion. Accordingly, if I hear no objection, I propose, in
accordance with the practice of the Council and with
the relevant provisions of the Charter, to invite the
representative
of Qatar to participate in the debate
without the right to vote.

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/lMO)
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jamal (Qatar)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12066)
The meeting

3. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): First of
all, Mr. President, I should like to express, on behalf
of the Libyan delegation and on my own behalf, our
warmest welcome to you as President of the Security
Council for the month of May. It is most gratifying to
know that this important debate will be conducted
under your wise leadership, and we look forward to
co-operating with you in every way.

was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. I should like also to extend to the representative
of China, Ambassador Huang Hua, the thanks of my
delegation for his most competent leadership and
guidance as President of the Council during April.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12066)

5. It is a particular pleasure for me to welcome back
Ambassador
Malik of the Soviet Union. We are
fortunate that he has been able to return to his place
on the Council in time for the discussion of this most
crucial issue. I should like also to extend a most sincere
welcome to Ambassador Abe of Japan and to congratulate him on the assumption of his new and
important post with the Organization.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier [1916th
to 1918th meetings], I shall now invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yemen, as well as the representative of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization (PLO), to participate in the
debate without the right to vote.

6. One might well question why another series of
meetings of the Council must be called only one month
after the debate in March on the same subject. However, as several of our colleagues have pointed out,
the subject is not quite identical to what we discussed
in March. It is now far worse. I call to the attention
of the Council four letters that were addressed to
the President of the Council by the observer of
the Palestine
Liberation
Organization-documents
S/12029, S/12052, S/12058 and document S/12067-all
of which cite examples of Zionist brutality and mistreatment of inhabitants in the occupied territories,
most of wliich incidents have occurred since the debate
in March.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Herzog
(Israel) and Mr. Teizi TPalestine Liberation Organization) took places at the Council table and Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hussen
(Somalia),
Mr. Medani (Sudan), Mr. Allaf (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr. Sallam (Yemen) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
In addition, I should like to inform

from French):
the members of
1

7. On 17 April, for instance, armed Zionist demonstrators under the protection
of the Zionist army
spent two days marching through the West Bank
to show their support of the Gove-nment’s
policy of
annexation and expansion. Unarmed Arabs, protesting
against that officially sanctioned disregard for their
rights to their own land and property and protesting
against the continued
military
occupation,
held
counter-demonstrations
and were fired upon by
Zionist troops. Some were killed and many more were
wounded. Again, on 1 May, Zionist troops opened fire
into a crowd of unarmed Palestinians protesting the
occupation of their lands and homes and the imminent
establishment
of more Jewish settlements.
Further
deaths and injuries resulted.

11. In building those settlements the Zionists are
depending upon the passage of time and a do-nothing
apathy on the part of the rest of the world in order to
create their own facts, which they hope will eventually
become accepted as fairs accomplis. Only last week,
according to Newsweek of 3 May, Prime Minister
Rabin told settlers in the Jordan Valley, “We don’t
establish new villages only to pull them down later”.
Exactly a year ago in that same place, Shimon Peres
declared that the Jordan Valley and the Rafah salient
were “intended
for widespread Jewish settlement”,
as was the area around Jerusalem.
12. The intention is obvious. It appears that if the
Zionist entity intends to give anything back to the
Arabs it will be the population of Palestine, and not the
territory. Joseph Weitz,. head of the Jewish Colonization Department,
once said: “Between ourselves it
must be clear that there is no room for both peoples
together in this country. The only solution is Palestine
without Arabs. And there is no other way but to
transfer all of them: not one village, not one tribe
should be left.” And Moshe Dayan, when he appeared
on United States television, said, “There are about a
million Arabs which we don’t want as citizens of
Israel”.
When asked whether it was possible for
Israel to absorb the Arabs in the territory it now
occupies, he answered, “It is not in accord with our
aims in the future. It would turn Israel into either a
binational or a poly-Arab-Jewish
State instead of a
Jewish State, and we want to have a Jewish State.”
That is the ultimate aim of the Zionists-the
final
solution to the Palestine problem: total deportation,
total removal. It would appear that the Zionists cannot
live side by side with other people. They cannot
share a land with anyone whose religion and culture
may differ from their own.

8. The Zionists refer to their Government as the only
democracy in the Middle East. I should like to ask
how it is that in the so-called only democracy in the
Middle East, armed troops are permitted to shoot and
kill unarmed demonstrators who are only asking for
their freedom from occupation, for the right to their
own property and for their legally established right
to self-determination
and national sovereignty. I fail
to see how the Zionists can behave in that manner
and still call themselves a democracy, unless perhaps
there is a special meaning of democracy of which we
are not aware.
9. The problem in this case is not only one of military
occupation,
although
conquests,
occupation
and
oppression are ,provocation
enough in themselves.
One of the mam problems here is the continuing
Zionist policy of displacing the Arabs from their homes
and their lands and planting Jews in their place
-the transfer out of the people who have lived many
hundreds of years in their villages and on their plots
of land and the transfer in of a settler population
whose hollow claim to those villages and lands is
based solely on its adherence to a partictilar religion,
and not on any legally recognized basis of ownership.

13. There are now some 60 Jewish settlements in the
occupied territories forming a chain which encircles
the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and the Golan Heights,
all in order to swallow the land, to take it from its
Arab owners and to people it exclusively with Jews.
As Moshe Dayan frankly stated:

10. To this end the Zionists are building settlement
after settlement, eating further and further into the
occupied territories,
absorbing all of Palestine and
the surrounding
regions piece by piece like some
insatiable jelly-like
creature of science fiction. Even
outside Palestine, in the Sinai desert in Egypt proper,
they are building the city of Yamit, which they plan
to make their third largest community after Tel Aviv
and Jerusalem, with .a population of a quarter of a
million. This is outright, unabashed annexation. Yet
what they are doing to Palestine is totally obliterating
it. They intend to leave nothing for the Palestinian
Arabs, who, before the Zionists established a foothold
in 1918, formed 93 per cent of the area’s population
and who ask only to be allowed to stay in their own
homes and live in peace with their Jewish neighbours
in a democratic, non-racist State, in which a human
being’s religion is a private matter between himself
and his God, and not a basis for special privilege and
special rights.

“Our people have been in the process of building
up the country and the nation, of expansion, of
getting additional Jews and additional settlements
in order to expand the borders here. Let no Jew
say that the process has ended.”
Even as far back as 1943, President Roosevelt’s
personal representative
in the Middle East, General
Patrick J. Hurley, reported:
“The
indicated
for:

Zionist
Organization
in Palestine
has
its commitment
to an enlarged programme

” 1. A sovereign
embrace
Palestine
Transjordan;
2

Jewish State which would
and.! probably
eventually
1i

have kicked out all the Gentiles from Jerusalem and
purified it from them completely.
We are also
forbidden to allow the Gentihs to be a majority
in any town of Israel. God forbid that we should
leave the Temple Mount in the hands of the
Ishmaelites.”

“2. An eventual transfer of the Arab population from Palestine to Iraq.”
14. This transfer of the Arab population
from
Palestine is being implemented
in a number of ways.
Displacement
through the establishment
of Jewish
settlements is one; forcible transfer and deportation
is another. The latter occurred on a parti c,ularly large
scale during the wars of conquest in 1948 and 1967,
but it continues all the time, never ceasing.

Rabbi Willdenberg,
who uttered those words, is far
from being a pariah on the lunatic fringes of Zionist
society. Only a few days ago, on 6 May, the State
honoured this man by giving him the highest award it
has: the Prize of Israel.

15. Another method is through the confiscation of
Arab land under several so-called laws, the legality of
which might well be questioned under the terms of
the United Nations Partition Plan [General Assembly
resolution 181 (1Z)], but, of course, as we know, the
Zionist entity tends to disregard any law or resolution
adopted by the community of nations which does not
suit its convenience.

19. This attitude-that
the holy places of Jerusalem
should belong exclusively to the Jews rather than to
all three faiths whose roots are in the city-is
all too
prevalent among the Zionists and has been since the
1967 war, when Christian churches holy to the
followers of Christ were bombed and fired upon and
Moslem holy places were desecrated by improper
behaviour, by persons wearing skimpy clothes and
even by the presence of dogs. These things are not
done out of ignorance but out of a conscious desire to
annoy and offend religious Moslems and Christians.

16. When the Arab residents of an area coveted by
Jewish developers refuse to leave their homes, the
Zionists set about destroying their property and making
their lives miserable. In the village of Akraba, on the
West Bank,
when the Arabs did not want
to sell their land, Israeli planes sprayed a chemical
defoliant on the villagers’
fields, destroying their
entire crop. In East Jerusalem, when Arabs refused to
sell their family homes, bulldozers
piled rubble
round them, shaking them to their foundations. These
families were more fortunate than others, however,
All too often the pattern is simply to order the Arabs
out of their homes and then to destroy their houses.

20. The problem in Jerusalem is not only one of the
holy places, however, but also one of people. The
violations of human rights in all the occupied territories
take place equally in Jerusalem-as,
for instance, when
several hundred Arab homes were tom down to build
a plaza in front of the Wailing Wall and no provision
was made for the people thus rendered homeless. They
wandered the streets until eventually they found their
way to Jordan.

17. All this is justified in the name of Zionism and
by a racism which is officially perpetrated and taught.
In an interview on United States radio, an Israeli
Jewish humanist, himself a former prisoner of the
Nazis, stated:

21. What the Zionist entity is doing in the area of
Jerusalem is annexing the city, although we might
say they have annexed the land but not the people,
since the people, being Gentiles,
are considered
insignificant as well as undesirable. Since the first few
weeks after the 1967 war, the Zionists have been
erecting those five-story fortifications which they call
apartment houses in a determined attempt completely
to isolate that area from its Arab neighbourhood.
Citizens of Jerusalem are faced with constant pressure
and threats to leave or surrender their houses and
property. There is no need to give examples, since
anybody who reads will know what I mean.

“It is completely taught now in all Israeli schools
that extermination
of peoples, of other peoples than
the Jews, carried out by the Jews, is the good and
proper thing to do. The idea is that Jewish interests
are the only interests to be considered, and Jews for
their own must have a piece of land in which they
will live in purity. The point is the purity. Purity
means without strangers.”
And he went on to quote from the important Zionist
newspaper Ha’arefz,
which referred to “an Israeli
society clean from non-Jews”. That these attitudes are
officially taught in the schools has been confirmed by
former students of those schools.

22. I should also like to point out that those same
Zionist policies are imposed upon the Arabs living
in the areas of Palestine occupied since 1948, despite
the pretence of the Zionist officials that they treat their
Arab minority as equals. The opposition shown by
those Arabs in recent months shows all too clearly
how pleasant their treatment must have been to win
such co-operation,
even after 28 years of so-called
citizenship in the Zionist entity. And the Zionists are
not yet satisfied. They are still expropriating
Arab
lands in the Galilee, still displacing Arab people, still
imposing curfews and military oppression.

18. On 30 April another leading Zionist newspaper
quoted the Chief District Judge of Jerusalem, Rabbi
Eleazar Yehuda W-illdenberg:
“I am for the implementation
of the haiakah,
which means that it must be forbidden for any nonJew to live in Jerusalem. Accordingly,
we should
3

been taking place in the occupied Arab lands for
several weeks now. The whole world has been
witnessing the bloody clashes between the civilian
populations of the occupied West Bank and the Gaza
Strip and the Israeli soldiers, which have caused many
victims. The facts are known to all; they have been
set forth eloquently by several speakers who have
preceded me here.
29. Since the .1967 war, which resulted in the
acquisition of further Arab territories, Israel has been
trying in different ways to annex the newly occupied
lands, especially those of, the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip and the Golan Heights. The Israeli position in
24. I could go on and on discussing the various
relation
to those territories has been simply that of an
racist and inhuman actions committed by the Zionists
army
of
military
occupation, subjecting the Palestinian
against the non-Jewish inhabitants of occupied
Arabs
to
an
administration
that has all the aspects of
Palestine. I will spare the Council these horrors and
colonial
rule.
will close my statement with the simple appeal that we
put an end to this misery and remove this blot on 30. My delegation asked for an opportunity to
humanity. Last March, all but one of us agreed upon
participate in the Council’s debate in order to express
a draft resolution [S/12022] condemning the policies
my Government’s grave concern about the serious
of the Zionist entity in the occupied territories. Let
situation arising from the recent developments in the
us hope that what has happened during the period
occupied Arab territories. I do not wish to take the
between these two related series of Council meetings Council’s time by setting forth at length the history of
will have made it clear to all, including the representathe application of the annexationist policy of Israel in
tive of the United States, that urgent action must be the occupied Arab lands.‘Instead, I wish to state clearly
taken to stop the oppressive Zionist policies and to that a policy of institutionalized terror is the offtcial
remove the cause of so much misery for the policy of the Israeli occupiers in the territories they
Palestinians.
have occupied. The laws applied in these territories
-namely, the emergency regulations of 1945, inherited
25. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
from the British Mandate period-were denounced by
The next speaker is the representative of Qatar.
Palestinian Jewish lawyers in 1946as fascist. Now they
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to are being used against the Palestinians in the occupied
make a statement.
territories and in the settler State of Israel. Among the
methods used are the deportation of nationalist figures,
26. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Mr. President, my delega- mass arrests and imprisonment without trial, demotion would like to join those who have already spoken lition of houses and whole villages, destruction of the
and extend our sincere congratulations and express economies of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in
our highest esteem for you on your assumption of the order to make them dependent on Israel’s economy,
post of President of the Security Council for this month.
collective punishments designed to break the will and
Your exceptional qualities and skills are well known to determination of the Palestinians to get rid of Israeli
all of us here within the United Nations as well as occupation, confiscation of property, imposition of
outside it. We are confident that they will be a great long curfews and staging of sieges against whole
asset to our deliberations. Equally, my delegation is villages. Those are the characteristic features of
grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the members of
the occupation. Israel has confiscated more than one
the Council for giving me this opportunity to present and a half million dunums in the West Bank, which
my Government’s views on a question that has the amounts to more than one sixth of the total area of
deepest relevance to the establishment of a just and the West Bank, and one third of the Gaza Strip.
durable peace in the Middle East.
Thousands of Palestinians in the Strip have been
evicted from their lands. The so-called “thinning out”
27. I should like also to join the representatives
policy practised in refugee camps has entailed the
who have already spoken in welcoming back Ambasmass expulsion of refugees and the destruction of
sador Malik, the representative of the Union of Soviet
many thousands of houses in the Jabalia and Shatti
Socialist Republics. We are very pleased indeed to refugee camps in the Gaza Strip.
see him in good health. I wish him and Mrs. Malik
continued good health and happiness. My delegation 31. The expulsion of political leaders and other
would like, too, to welcome the representative of patriots is aimed at depriving the Palestinians of their
Japan, who has just assumed his duties here, and we I leaders and moral supporters. Many hundreds of
people were expelled during those dark years, but the
wish him every success.
Israeli occupiers committed an error common to all
28. Once again the Security Council has before it persecutors in human history:--they thought that such
the serious situation arising from the events that have measures would break the resistance of the persecuted.

23. On the eve of 30th March last, the Day of the
Land, without any Arab demonstrations or provocation, Zionist troops entered several Arab villages and
*imposed a curfew so strict that people could not stand
on the balconies of their houses or cross their own
courtyards to get water without being shot at, wounded
and even killed. One girl was murdered when she tried
to bring her little brother in from the street. Two
people were killed for trying to help neighbours who
had been shot. Perhaps this is some new type of
democracy, or equal citizenship, with which we are as
yet unfamiliar.

4

32. Colonization of the occupied, Arab lands by
Jewish settlers is going on at this very moment. There
are more than 68 settlements in these occupied territories, and more are pIanned; a new city is under
construction. Such is the policy of creating new
realities in the occupied territories. The Israeli
authorities, who have been committing robbery for
nearly 30 years and are continuing at this very moment
to steal the land of Galilee and the triangle, have
for the last eight years been stealing Arab land in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip, changing Arab names
into Hebrew ones, hoping-mistakenly-that
they will
thus be able to change the map of the Middle East
and annihilate Palestinians as they did in Deir Yassin,
Kafr Qassem and Palestinian refugee camps in
Jordan and Lebanon. All thoseactions and activities
of the Israeli authorities in the occupied territories
contravene the provisions of international law and the
Charter and principles of the United Nations, including
the principle of the non-acquisition of territory by the
use of force, as well as constituting grave breaches of
the fourth Geneva Convention* and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights-breaches punishable
as war crimes under the law of nations.

36. Professor Israel Shahak, President of the Israeli
League for Human and Civil Rights, has expressed his
feelings on Israel’s image in the world as follows:
“Israel is widely described as a ‘democratic
State’. Nevertheless, throughout its history nonJews in that State have been expelled, put in prison,
limited in their movements, have seen their property
confiscated and have suffered many other forms of
oppression, without the fact even being noted except
in the case of most flagrant crimes.”
Professor Shahak’s views on the administration of the
occupied territories are as follows:
“In my opinion, the Israeli occupation regime in
the conquered territories is not only not a liberal
one; it is, in fact, one of the most cruel and repressive
regimes in modem times.”
37. We have also heard the representative of the
settler State of Israel calling for negotiation in order
to establish peace in the area. I wonder whether
the establishment of Jewish settlements on the
occupied Arab lands is a sign of the establishment of
peace in the area. Will the confiscation of Arab
properties, the demolition of houses and the expulsion
of nationalist figures lead us to believe that Israel
wants peace with justice? The answer is well known to
all of us: unless Israel ceases to annex Arab lands,
withdraws totally from the occupied Arab territories
and recognizes the national rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, peace will not prevail
in the area.

33. How long can a people endure such an ordeal
without revolting? How much longer can the world
remain aloof and watch a whole nation being subjected
to such treatment? It is very ironic that to the present
day there are still head-hunters of Nazis while Zionists
are running free, and nations are still being blamed
for not opposing the Nazi occupation of Europe by the
very ones who are perpetuating the occupation of
Palestine.

38. Mr. PAQUI (Benin)(interpretationfrom
French):
Mr. President, our common past, the language we
share and the special links of privilege which unite the
People’s Republic of Benin with France authorize
my delegation to tell you that we are not merely
paying Ii-service to tradition but expressing a profound
and sincere feeling as we assure you of our satisfaction
at seeing you presiding over the Council this month.
This is particularly true at a time when, once again,
we are dealing with so delicate a question as that of
the occupied Arab territories. Our confidence in your
gifts as a perfect diplomat is no greater than your
intrinsic merit, the exceptional loftiness of vision you
display and the discretion and the courtesy that are
so familiar and so pleasing to us all. In other words,
Mr. Ambassador-for you are among the rare French
diplomats on whom this title has been conferred-it
is the conviction of my delegation that, under the lofty
authority of a political figure of your stature, an
illustrious son of France-a country recognized for its
revolutionary past, its struggle to win liberty, equality,
fraternity-the work of the Council will be crowned
with success.

34. After long years of waiting for the United Nations
to restore justice in Palestine and after the failure of
the Organization to take any positive measures, is
it too much to hope that some of the Council’s
permanent members might some day, before it is too
late, reconsider their policies of support to the
expansionist forces and their financing of the occupation forces on Arab lands? Are we to understand that
the only resolution those permanent members of the
Security Council would not block would be one which
exonerates the occupation of other peoples’ lands and
glorifies aggression and expansionism? Nevertheless,
we still believe that time has not yet run out for the
rectification of past mistakes. The Council can still
keep its credibility by adopting a resolution which
would restore justice to the indigenous inhabitants
of Palestine.
35. Finally, I cannot remain silent on the long
statement made several days ago by the Zionist representative. He lectured us on the freedom, democracy,
prosperity, full employment, better education and so on
which Arabs enjoy under the occupation forces.
I believe that Council members are well aware of what
is really going on in the occupied territories. I am
sure that the Israeli General is fooling nobody but
C,’
himself.

39. In addition to these congratulations, I should
like to express the great satisfaction of my delegation
for the excellent manner in which Ambassador Huang
Hua conducted the Council’s work last month.
5

40. Before going further, let me discharge two
pleasant duties. First, let me express once again to
Ambassador Malik, the representative of the Union of
Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
how pleased
my
delegation is to see that he has recovered and is among
us again after a serious car accident that immobilized
him and his wife for some weeks. We express the
hope that very soon Mrs. Malik will, like her husband,
recover sufftciently to resume her usual activities
side by side with him.. Secondly, I wish to welcome
most warmly Ambassador
Abe of Japan, who is
participating in our work for the first time, following the
departure of Ambassador Saito, which we regret.

should proceed by stages and advance from the less
controversial
issues to those which are increasingly
difficult to solve.
43. To do so, before committing
ourselves to
concrete proposals, we must determine whether the
parties to the conflict have the political will finally
to settle, in the evident interest of the entire population of the Middle East, the dispute which divides
them. We must ask whether they wish to demonstrate
the will to act which is needed for any success. Finally,
we must ask whether they are determined to arrive at
a genuine peace, which requires self-sacrifice and
reciprocal concessions. Indeed, the parties to the
conflict must recognize the imperative
need of all
States of the region; in&ding
Israel and the Palestinian
State the creation of which is becoming more and more
evidently necessary, to live together in peace and
harmony. This means that they would sit down around
a conference table to’ discuss practical ways and
means of arriving at that,peace. it goes without saying
that the political will of the parties is of necessity
linked to the determination
of the great Powers to
encourage and promote in each one of their customary
partners this view of things. It is certainly good to give
unconditional
support to one’s allies, but it is far
nobler to have the intellectual honesty and the courage
to impress upon them what seems right and clearly
serves the interest of everyone, if they wish to live in
peace in a region where all have so much to contribute
to and to learn from one another.

41. -Doubtless you realize that I have deliberately
mentioned the motto of France’on the occasion of a
further debate on the situation in the occupied Arab
territories. In fact, as my delegation has already stated
and can never repeat often enough, the withdrawal
of Israel from all the Arab territories occupied since the
1967 war will constitute a decisive step in the search
for a just and lasting solution to the eternal crisis in
the Middle East. After having listened to the delegations of our Arab brothers, as well as the representative of Israel, stating their views, my delegation is
convinced that, far from accepting the thesis that there
is no problem in the occupied Arab territories, we
must recognize that this problem constitutes a special
aspect of the Middle East crisis. It is a question that
cannot be underrated if one is not to be politically
short-sighted,
because, as my delegation stated on
25 March:

44. My delegation listened with great interest to the
statement made by the representative of Israel and
took note of his country’s will to achieve a negotiated
peace with the Arabs. True, this was not the first
time that we,had heard such a statement. Nevertheless
we shall ask him whether the Government
of Israel
has decided to recognize the imperative
need for it
to withdraw from all the Arab territories occupied since
1967, as well as the right of the Palestinian people to
exist and to establish a State for itself. I need hardly
say that a declaration of principle on these points
by Israel would contribute enormously to lessening
present tensions and to encouraging the Arabs to
make a reciprocal gesture of goodwill in this respect.
But it is not by encouraging
settlements
in the
occupied territories that the Government
of Israel
can take this decisive step.

“any situation of occupation, if it does not draw
to a close at an appropriate time, ends by exasperating the populations
and provoking reactions
of rebellion which the forces of occupation usually
cannot control” [1899th meeting, para. 271.
The recent demonstrations,
brutal confrontations and
loss of human life which have been reported by the
international
press are an eloquent illustration of our
assertion. That is why my delegation hopes that
Israel will draw greater inspiration from the French
motto in dealing with the populations of the occupied
Arab territories until a final settlement of the problem
is found. It is in Israel’s own interest to do so; it is
also in the interest of the peaceful coexistence to
which that country is entitled to aspire, coexistence
with the neighbouring
Arab States, including
the
Palestinian State which, of necessity, is to be created.

45. In spite of everything, my delegation ventures
to believe that we may be optimistic,
because if we
are to believe certain information,
within the State
of Israel itself more and more voices are being raised
in unconditional
support for what the overwhelming
majority
of the international
community
has
afftrmed for a number of years: first, that Israel should
withdraw from all the occupied territories,
and
secondly, that a dialogue with the Arab world must
start with an understanding
and peace with the
Palestinians.
Furthermore,
my delegation considers
the participation in our debates of the Israeli delegation

42. We already discussed this question in March,
and unless we are vigilant, a growing disaffection may
emerge with regard to questions which keep coming
before the Council without producing any concrete
or positive results, since, obeying I know not what
logic, the Council fails to demonstrate that it has a
memory or to draw lessons from the past in order to
determine its present attitude. To forestall this danger,
my delegation believes that, as a practical matter, if
we wish to do useful work and move forward, we
6

and that of the Palestine Liberation
Organization as
a sign of the gradual change of circumstances that
has occurred. While the two delegations
are not
discussing issues face to face, the very fact that they
can address each other through us is a most encouraging development.
46. My delegation therefore appeals to Israel to show
common sense and courage by adopting the kind of
measures that will give specific content to the will
it has so often afBrmed to negotiate peace with the
Arabs. My delegation likewise appeals to theUnited
States to relinquish
its isolationist
policy that is
dictated by domestic Jewish pressure and resolutely
to follow the course of history, for sound judgement
must be followed by sound political action. The ideal
is not to give verbal support to one partner and
invaluable political support to the other.
47. Bearing in mind that politics is, above all, the
art of the possible, and particularly
mindful of what
took place here in March, my delegation wonders
whether the Council would not be well advised, in
coming to the decision which it will have to take this
time, to concentrate on certain specific aspects of
the question under discussion which at least have the
advantage of being supported by all members. Indeed,

all here recognize the inadmissibility
of Israel’s brutal
and illegal actions in the occupied Arab territories,
as well as the inviolable character of the Holy Places.
Therefore, why could we not this time concentrate on
these questions so that we may be sure that some
substantive progress is made? This, then, is the
question which, in conclusion, my delegation puts to
the Council with the purpose of assisting you,
Mr. President, in your difficult task, and to assist the
United States in abandoning its awkward isolation.
48. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I thank the representative of Benin for the extremely
kind words; I might say even excessively kind words,
which he was good enough toaddress to me. I should
like to assure him that- I am very touched by the
reference he made to the special links existing between
Benin and France. I am particularly moved by these
remarks because during a rather prolonged stay which
I spent in the neighbourhood of his country I was able
to visit it frequently, and I value highly the outstanding
qualities of its inhabitants.
The meeting

rose at 4.50 p.m.

I United Nations, Treaty Series,

vol. 75, p. 287.

,---,’
I

./‘

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adre-ssez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas disttibuidoms
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

83-60801-September

1984-2.200
