Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committ.-e

including the structural reforms that may be necessary;
3. Invites developed countries to consider ways of
enlarging the volume of their concessionary assistance
and thus enhance the capacity of developing countries
to eradicate mass poverty and unemployment among
the poorest sections of their communities;
4. Urges organizations within the United Nations
system, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, to
give due consideration to the development and implementation of measures to assist the developing countries in raising the level of living of their low-income
groups;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, on the progress of
the implementation of the present resolution.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3019 (XXVII). United Nations Fund for
Population Activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its invitation and the requests set forth
in its resolution 2815 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
W elcomin.g the Secretary-General's note 82 with interim recommendations requiring urgent action to
achieve improvements in the administrative machinery
of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
aimed at the efficient and expeditious delivery of population programmes,
Expressing its appreciation to the fifty-two Member
States which, to date, have responded to that invitation
and have pledged financial support to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities,
Noting from the information given by the SecretaryGeneral that the administration of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities has been reorganized
over the past year in order to make even more effective
use of its staff and resources,
Noting further that the resources of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and its scope of
operations have now grown to a size which makes
its supervision by an intergovernmental body desirable,
Expressing further its appreciation to the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
and to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities for their efforts, which
have achieved the significant results of the past year,
Noting also the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to change the character of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities from a trust fund of
the Secretary-General into a fund established under the
authority of the General Assembly,
1. Decides to place the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities under the authority of the General Assembly;
2. Decides further, without prejudice to the overall responsibilities and policy functions of the Economic
and Social Council, that the Governing Council of
s2 A/8899.

SI

the United Nations Development Programme, subject
to conditions to be established by the Economic and
Social Council, shall be the governing body of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities and
invites the Governing Council to concern itself with
the financial and administrative policies relating to the
work programme, the fund-raising methods and the
annual budget of the Fund;
3. Invites the Governing Council to organize itself
in such a way that it can exercise effectively these functions, taking into account the separate identity of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities and its
need to operate under the guidance of the Economic
and Social Council, in close relationship with interested Governments and with appropriate international
and national bodies, governmental and non-governmental, interested in population activities;
4. Authorizes the Governing Council, at its fifteenth
session, to apply to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities funding principles similar to those
of the United Nations Development Programme and
to establish the necessary financial rules and regulations, subject to consideration by the Governing Council of a report, prepared by the Executive Director
of the Fund in consultation with the Administrator of
the Programme, and of the full implications thereof;
5. Requests the Governing Council to consider
further steps necessary to achieve improvements in the
administrative and operational machinery of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities, to inform the
Economic and Social Council in its annual report of
those further steps taken to implement General Assembly resolution 2815 (XXVI) and the present
resolution and to submit annually a report on the activities of the Fund to the Economic and Social Council;
6. Renews its invitation to interested Governments
to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities without prejudice to
the agreed level of growth of contributions to the
United Nations Development Programme and development assistance in general.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3035 (XXVII).

Code of conduct for linn
conferences

The General Assembly,
Welcoming the unanimous agreement reached by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its third session, held at Santiago, Chile, from 13
April to 21 May 1972, that there was an urgent need
for adopting and implementing a universally acceptable
code of conduct to regulate the activities of liner conferences, which fully takes into account the special
needs and problems of the developing countries,
Recalling resolution 66 (III) of 19 May 1972 entitled "Draft code of conduct for liner conferences"
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development/ 3
83 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

52

-----------------------

1. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to convene as early as possible in I 973, under
the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, a conference of plenipotentiaries to
consider and adopt a convention or any other multilateral legally binding instrument on a code of conduct for liner conferences;
2. Decides to establish, also under the auspices of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on a Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences, consisting of forty-eight members to be appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Developments 4 with the same
distribution between the diff crent regional areas as
was established for the fourth session of the Working
Group on International Shipping Legislation, with the
addition of two members from each regional area;
3. Also decides that the Preparatory Committee
shall prepare the draft of a convention or any other
multilateral legally binding instrument on a code of
conduct for liner conferences for submission to the
conference of plenipotentiaries referred to in paragraph
1 above;
4. Decides further that the fir,t session of the Preparatory Committee should be convened as early as
possible and that the final session should be held at
least two months before the conference of plenipotentiaries;
5. Recommends that the Preparatory Committee
should take into consideration, as a basis for its work:
(a) The draft code of conduct for liner conferences
annexed to resolution 66 (IH) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development:

(b) The report of the debates on this subject by
the Fourth Committee of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its third session, 85 including an informal exchange of views on the
draft code of conduct for liner conferences and a summing-up by the Chairman of that Crn1mittee;
( c) The report of the secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development entitled Regulation of Liner Conferences/n
(d) The report of the Working Group on International Shipping Legislation on its third session.~.

2 I 15th plenary meeting
19 December 1972
84 The Preparatory Committee will be composed of the
following States: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, c,_echoslovakia, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, German Democratic Republic, Germ;iny, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Indi'.l, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq. Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan,
Madagascar, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Philippines. Poland. Romania, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Thailand. Uganda. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzar1ia, United Slates of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia w1d Zaire.
8 ~ See Procecdinrts of tlie U11it<'d Nations Conferenc<' 011
Trade and Dcvelopmc11t, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.IT.D.4).
annex VI.D.
8 6 United Nations publication, Sales N,1.: E.72.ILD. l3 and
Corr. I.

87 TD/B/C.4/93.

3036 (XXVII).

SpPcial measm·«·s in favour of
the least developt•d among the developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Having consiciercci the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its third
session 88 and the report of the Trade and Development
Uoard for the period from 22 September 1971 to 25
October 1972, ~~
Bearing in mind the joint statement by eight socialist countries at the twrnty-fifth sL"ssinn of the
General Assembly concerning the Second United Nations Development Decade and social progrcss 90 and
their declaration at the third session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Dcvelopment, 01
Conscious that the production capacity and trade
flows of the least developed among the developing
countries have been and continue to be extremely low,
and that it is urgent for the commercial policy measures
which arc applied to all developing countries to be
supplemented by liberal and considerably larger contributions of financial and technical ;1ssistancc for tit,
least developed countries, in order lo eliminate the
existing bottle-neck in their economy .1t the production
level,
Recognizing that the relevant provisions of resolution 62 (lll) of 19 May 1972 adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and n~·vclopment 9 ~ and
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade"': must be
applied in practice as soon as possible,
1. Endorses resolution 62 (III) unanimously
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session;
2. Requests the specialized agencies concerned and
other United Nations bodies, as well as the regional
economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social Office at Beirut, to initiate and accelerate the implementation of their action programmes
in favour of the least developed countries in the areas
within their competence and to submit periodic reports
on the matter to the General Assemblv throu!!,h the
Economic and Social Council;
•
~
3. Also requests aL! States members of the United
Nations ConfcrencL· on Trade ;111d lkvelopmcnt, especially developed countries, to implement urgently the
special measures in favuur nf the kast developed countries contained in Conference resolution 62 (III) and
to continue to review the measures they have taken in
favour of these countries, as well a, ivavs and means
of carrying out those measures, and !,) 1mwide information to the Senetar_y-General of the l Jnited Nations
Conference, on Trade and Development 011 actions
taken in connexion with the considcratinn and implementation ot thL' recommendations nf the Conference,
SR See Procccdinis of the United !\'a1io11., C,>11{cu·11ce 011
Trade and Dcv,·lopmen/, Third Session. vol. I, J?cport and
Annexes !United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.Il.D.4).
,n Official Records of the (;,•neml Assembl\', Twc111r-sevn11/i
S1·ssio11, SurplcmPnt No. 15 ( A/8715.IRev.1).
!IO Ibid_, Twent,· filth .'ic.,s1<111, A1111ncs. ;igcnda itc1n 42. docu-

11,ent A/8074.
111 See Proceedings of the United Nutions C,mferen,·c on
'frade and Dei·c/opment, Third Session, vol. I, Rf'['or/ and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Saks No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex VIII.G.
!12 Jhid.
11 ~ Resolution 2626 (X)(V).
