UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/29
24 September 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ARABIC, CHINESE,
ENGLISH, FRENCH,
RUSSIAN AND SPANISH
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3931st meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 September 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Africa", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council met on 24 September 1998, at the level of
Foreign Ministers, in accordance with its resolution 1170 (1998) of
28 May 1998, to assess progress in achieving peace and security in Africa
since the last Ministerial Meeting on 25 September 1997. It recalls the
statement of its President (S/PRST/1997/46) of 25 September 1997 and
reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report of
13 April 1998 (A/52/871-S/1998/318).
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to Africa in the areas
of conflict prevention and the maintenance of international peace and
security, in accordance with its responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations. It also reaffirms the principles of the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.
"The Security Council underlines that peaceful societies rest upon
respect for fundamental human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person. It recognizes the close linkage between the promotion of economic
and social development and the prevention of conflict. It stresses that
the quest for peace in Africa requires a comprehensive, concerted and
determined approach, encompassing the eradication of poverty, the promotion
of democracy, sustainable development and respect for human rights, as well
as conflict prevention and resolution, including peacekeeping, and
humanitarian assistance. It underlines that genuine political will is
necessary, in Africa and beyond, to achieve durable results towards these
ends, and stresses the urgent need for Member States, the United Nations
system, including the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
the international financial institutions and other relevant organizations
to continue to consider appropriate action in response to the comprehensive
recommendations set out by the Secretary-General in his report.
"The Security Council recognizes the positive developments in Africa
in the past year and welcomes progress achieved by African States in
98-28065 (E)

240998

/...

S/PRST/1998/29
English
Page 2

promoting democratization, economic reform, the protection of human rights
and sustainable development. It commends efforts by African States and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular the Organization of
African Unity, to resolve conflicts by peaceful means. It welcomes
progress made in Sierra Leone and the Central African Republic, and in the
peace process in Burundi. It urges all States and relevant bodies to
provide financial and technical support to strengthen African regional and
subregional arrangements for conflict prevention, the maintenance of peace
and security and dispute settlement. It calls for an enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and African regional and subregional
organizations in support of these efforts.
"The Security Council expresses its continuing concern over the number
and intensity of, and the interrelationship among, conflicts in Africa, and
especially at the emergence of new conflicts during the past year. The
border conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the resurgence of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the impasse in the peace
process in Angola, the continued violence in Sierra Leone, and the complex
emergencies in Somalia and Sudan, among others, cause grave concern. These
situations, which in some cases threaten the stability of large parts of
the continent, call for concerted action by African States, the
international community and the United Nations system to prevent further
tragedy.
"The Security Council urgently calls on African States and all parties
concerned to demonstrate the political will to settle their disputes by
peaceful rather than military means, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and to respect international humanitarian law and the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity of States in
the region. It also encourages States in the region to continue to improve
the implementation of good governance and undertake the various reforms
needed to promote economic growth. It calls upon the international
community to assist those efforts initiated by African States and regional
and subregional organizations aimed at such goals.
"For its part, the Security Council expresses its renewed commitment
to contributing to conflict resolution in Africa. In this context, it
recalls its decisions during the past year to authorize two new United
Nations peacekeeping operations, in the Central African Republic and Sierra
Leone, to assist efforts towards peace and national reconciliation. It
also expresses its determination to improve further its ability to prevent
conflicts, and to make its responses to conflicts more efficient and
effective, and underlines its support for measures taken within the United
Nations system to strengthen post-conflict peace-building efforts.
"The Security Council, based on the recommendations of its ad hoc
Working Group established pursuant to its resolution 1170 (1998), has
already begun to take concrete steps as part of a wider, comprehensive
response to the recommendations put forward by the Secretary-General. It
has taken action to help strengthen support for regional and subregional
initiatives as well as to enhance coordination between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in the areas of conflict
/...

S/PRST/1998/29
English
Page 3

prevention and the maintenance of peace. It has also taken action in order
to strengthen the effectiveness of arms embargoes imposed by the Council
and addressed the need to support the strengthening of African peacekeeping
capacity.
"The Security Council encourages the ad hoc Working Group to continue
its work, in accordance with its mandate, and to elaborate further concrete
recommendations to the Council, in particular on the need to stem illicit
arms flows to and in Africa and with regard to measures to assist host
Governments in Africa in maintaining the security and neutrality of refugee
camps and to enhance the ability of the Council to monitor activities
authorized by it but carried out by Member States or coalitions of Member
States.
"The Security Council, recognizing that the challenge of achieving
peace and security in Africa is a continuous process, will continue to
assess progress in promoting peace and security in Africa at the level of
Foreign Ministers, on a biennial basis, in accordance with its resolution
1170 (1998)."

-----
