A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/47/86
22 March 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 93 (~)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the Third Committee (A/47/703)]
47/86.

Implementation of the International Plan of Action on
Ageing: integration of older persons in development

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the challenges the ageing of populations poses to all
countries,
Noting with appreciation the activities of the global information
campaign for the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan
of Action on Ageing and the many observances of the International Day for the
Elderly,
Noting with satisfaction the active participation of Member States,
specialized agencies, United Nations bodies, non-governmental organizations,
older persons and experts in developing a practical strategy on ageing in the
form of a set of targets on ageing for the year 2001,
Welcoming the convening of the XVth International Congress of
Gerontology at Budapest, from 4 to 9 July 1993,
Welcoming with appreciation the participation of older persons in
development programmes and projects,
Aware of the plight of older persons, particularly those in developing
countries and those in difficult circumstances,
Aware also of the heavy obligations on families that provide care to
older persons and the need for comprehensive community care programmes,

I ...
93-16823

A/RES/47/86
Page 2

Aware further of the increasing concern of development agencies for
securing the human and financial resources needed for adjusting policies and
programmes to population ageing,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Secretary-General on the global targets on ageing for the year 2001: a
practical strategy 1/ and on the implementation of the International Plan of
Action on Ageing; 1/
2.
Adopts the global targets on ageing for the year 2001 J/ as a
practical strategy on ageing, and urges Member States to support that strategy
and to consult the guide for setting national targets on ageing; ii
3.
Invites the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs
of the Secretariat, as the lead and coordinating agency for the global
targets, to update the target strategies periodically on the basis of
achievements and new opportunities and to refine indicators for measuring
progress in cooperation with the International Institute on Ageing in Malta
and others;
4.
Invites the regional commissions to assist Member States in their
regions in setting regional targets on ageing for the year 2001, bearing in
mind the global targets and the diverse national needs in their regions;
5.
Invites the specialized agencies and United Nations bodies to
examine technical, organizational and financial means of strengthening the
inter-agency consultative process, including the biennial meetings on ageing,
and to suggest measures for the consideration of the Administrative Committee
on Coordination;
6.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to give all possible support, in
the form of both regular and extrabudgetary resources, to the Ageing Unit of
the Centre, to enable it to fulfil its mandate as lead agency for the action
programme on ageing for 1992 and beyond;
7.
Welcomes the support of the United Nations Population Fund, the
Government of Sweden and two non-governmental organizations for the research
project of the Centreentitled "Developmental Implications of Demographic
Change: Global Population Ageing" and invites continuing support for this
project as the basis of a global research component at the Centre;
8.
Invites Member States to second national experts and junior
professional officers to the Ageing Unit of the Centre to support selected
target strategies;

1/

A/47/339.

ll

A/47/369.

J/

A/47/339, sect. III.

~/

Ibid., sect. IV.

I ...

A/RES/47/86
Page 3

9.
Requests the Commission for Social Development to convene an
ad hoe informal working group at its thirty-third session for the third review
and appraisal of the International Plan of Action on Ageing and for proposing
measures in support of setting national targets on ageing in the decade ahead;
10.
Invites interested Member States and organizations to support the
Centre in establishing and maintaining a data bank on ageing policies and
programmes so that the data gathered in the quadrennial reviews can be
systematized and made available to Member States and others on a continuing
basis;
11.
Acknowledges with appreciation the major contribution of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to the global information
campaign, and requests it to continue its work on ageing during the coming
decade;
12.
Also acknowledges with appreciation the initiative, expertise and
dedication of the non-governmental community, and invites the Centre to
explore the feasibility of establishing a non-governmental advisory committee,
funded by voluntary contributions, to assist the Secretariat in promoting the
United Nations Principles for Older Persons~/ and in implementing the Plan of
Action and the target strategies;
13.
Commends the International Institute on Ageing on its training
programme and related activities, and invites national, regional and
international organizations to cooperate closely with the Institute;
14.
Urges the United Nations, Member States and non-governmental
organizations to support the African Society of Gerontology in developing and
implementing a regional programme of activities on ageing;
15.
Invites interested Member States and others to explore the
feasibility of establishing a training institute on ageing for Latin America
and the Caribbean;
16.
Also invites Member States generously to support the United
Nations Trust Fund for Ageing in order to enable it to continue serving as an
operational tool of the United Nations programme on ageing;
17.
Invites Member States, corporations and foundations to support the
Banyan Fund Association: A World Fund for Ageing;
18.
Urges the United Nations Development Programme and other
development agencies to include a component on ageing in their regular
programmes;
19.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution
under the item entitled "Social development".
89th plenary meeting
16 December 1992

~/

Resolution 46/91, annex.
