IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(h) To draw the attention of the States and other
participants referred to in subparagraphs (d) to (g)
above to the desirability of appointing as their representatives persons especially competent in the field to be
considered;
(i) To place before the Conference:
(i) All comments and proposals received from
Governments;
(ii) Working and background papers which may
be received from the United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade Law, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other interested international
organizations, taking into consideration the
legal, economic and shipping trade aspects of
the draft Convention;
(iii) Draft provisions concerning implementation,
reservations and other final clauses and all
relevant documentation and recommendations
relating to methods of work and procedure;
(j) To ensure that all relevant documentation for
the Conference will be distributed to all participants in
the Conference at the earliest possible date;
( k) To arrange for adequate. st~ and. facilities required for the Conference, beanng m mmd the fact
that the legal, economic and shipping trade aspects of
the carriage of goods by sea should receive due consideration at the Conference.

99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

31/101.

Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on

Relations with the Host Country, 21
l. Accepts the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 65 of its report;
2. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, with the purpose of examining all matters
falling within its terms of reference and requests the
Secretary-General to provide the Committee with all
necessary assistance;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-second session the ítem entitled "Report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

31/102.

21 [bid.,

Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the
underlying causes of those forms of
terrorism and acts of violence which lie
in misery, frustration, grievance and
Supplement No. 26 (A/31/26).

185

despair and which cause sorne people
to sacrifice human lives, including their
own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism

which are occurring with increasin~ frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human hves,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 22
Noting that the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Terrorism, established under General Assembly resolution 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, has been
obliged to suspend its work,
Deeply convinced of the importance to mankind of
the continuation of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee,
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
international terrorism which endanger or take innocent
human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to continue to seek just and peaceful solutions to the underlying causes which give rise
to such acts of violence;
3. Reafjirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial and
racist régimes and other forms of alien domination,
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle of national liberation movements,
in accordance with the purposes and principies of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the continuation of repressive and
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien régimes in
denying peoples their legitimate right to self-determination and independence and other human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Invites States to become parties to the existing
international conventions which relate to various aspects
of the problem of intemational terrorism;
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures
at the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7. Invites the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Terrorism to continue its work in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 3034 (XXVII);
8. Invites the States which have not yet done so
to submit their observations and concrete proposals
as soon as possible to the Secretary-General so as to
enable the Ad Hoc Committee to carry out its mandate
more efficiently;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Ad Hoc Committee an analytical study of the observations of States submitted under paragraph 8 above;
22 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.
