S/PV.8672

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8672nd meeting

Friday, 22 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Ntsoane
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-38117 (E)
*1938117*

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Griffiths is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Members of the Council may recall
that, after the events in the south in August of this year,
I called for decisive action to seize the opportunities
available for peace in Yemen. Since then, the
momentum to reach a political settlement in Yemen has
been building. We have seen the parties work together
with the support of Saudi Arabia, regional powers, the
international community and the United Nations to
achieve compromise on a range of issues, including the
situation in the south, the de-escalation of hostilities
and specific economic challenges. None of those are
small issues. Reaching compromises has been no small
achievement by those involved.
We are now beginning to see the need in Yemen
for the kind of leadership that creates peace. A leader
for peace is one who practises the art of concession
and of inclusion and who encourages forbearance over
entitlement. We are now seeing some evidence of that
kind of leadership. In this briefing, I would like to give
some examples.
The Riyadh agreement, signed on 5 November
between the Government of Yemen and the Southern
Transitional Council, is a first example. The events of
August created what I defined to the Council at the time
as “an existential threat” to Yemen. The prospect of a
2/18

22/11/2019

break-up of the State was real and, frankly, terrifying.
During the talks leading to the Riyadh agreement,
negotiated over 86 days, leaders from opposing parties
sat down and agreed to work for a greater cause. The
mediator, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in the best
traditions of that role, praised them for their courage
rather than criticizing them for the many weeks of hard
work that had gone into making that moment happen.
We must all thank President Hadi Mansour and
the Southern Transitional Council, as well as the Saudi
leadership, for this example of how to bring out the
best in the parties. It should serve as a catalyst to move
Yemen swiftly towards settling the conflict before us in
the Council through political means.
Saudi Arabia’s achievement in that regard shows
the positive role that regional support can play in
all our efforts to achieve peace. Two weeks ago, I
had the privilege to meet with the Crown Prince and
Deputy Prime Minister, His Royal Highness Prince
Mohammed Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
He was very positive about the prospects for a
comprehensive peaceful resolution to the conflict in
Yemen and made clear to me that Saudi Arabia would
support efforts to make that happen soon. That was
confirmed on Wednesday by Saudi Arabia’s King
Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud in his message to the
Shura Council, in which he hoped that the agreement
signed in Riyadh would open the door to broader peace
talks. I am grateful to the leadership of the King and
that of the Crown Prince for their words of support.
In what is perhaps an even more important sign
that something is changing in Yemen, I would draw
the Council’s attention to a simple indicator of the war
itself. In the past two weeks, the pace of that war has
dramatically reduced. There were reportedly almost
80 per cent fewer air strikes nation-wide than in the
previous two weeks. I realize that those are short
periods but nonetheless it is striking. In recent weeks,
there have been entire 48-hour periods without any air
strikes for the first time since the conflict began.
We call this de-escalation, a reduction in the tempo
of the war and perhaps, we hope, a move towards the
overall ceasefire in Yemen for which Mr. Lowcock,
Ms. Mueller, I am sure, and many members of the
Council have been calling for a very long time. The
cessation of missile and drone attacks on Saudi territory
announced by Ansar Allah on 20 September has been
sustained for the second month in a row. Efforts to
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

de-escalate violence are holding. I hope that we will all
soon be able to build on that achievement.
I should say here very clearly that I fully support
and endorse all efforts that reduce the war in Yemen.
I am sure that the members of the Council agree with
me. As the United Nations, we continue to uphold our
responsibility to bring the parties closer to ending the
conflict. What is taking place at the moment, both in
the south and in the north, lays the necessary, indeed
vital, groundwork for that process. The acts that we
have seen translated into a reduction of the tempo in
the war and an agreement on the south are the decisions
of leaders who begin to see, perhaps as yet indistinctly,
though clearly unmistakably, a prospect for peace.
They are doing the right thing. Let us have a lot more of
it. We therefore celebrate these achievements, even as
we prepare for our turn at the table.
My third example relates to the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, which is now almost
a year old. We have seen continued positive signs in
Al-Hudaydah, where the parties have taken further
steps forward in implementing the agreement reached
in Stockholm last year. In an earlier briefing to the
Council, Mark Lowcock and I both spoke of the urgent
need for some creative flexibility on the part of the
Government of Yemen to allow fuel ships expeditiously
to enter Al-Hudaydah to avoid the crushing damage
to livelihoods of a fuel shortage, the outlines of which
were already visible in Sana’a and in other cities. At
that time, the Government stood by its right to issue
decrees for the purpose of raising taxes — a process
which led to a politicized deadlock over fuel imports to
Sana’a and surrounding governorates.
This month, however, the Government’s economic
and technical team has agreed with my Office to
establish a mechanism to have traders deposit the taxes
and customs for commercial oil and gas shipments into
a special account in the Central Bank in Al-Hudaydah,
under United Nations supervision. The proceeds will go
to pay the salaries of the civil servants in Al-Hudaydah
and elsewhere, as set out in the Al-Hudaydah element
of the Stockholm Agreement. I am grateful to both the
Government and Ansar Allah for the concessions they
have made to achieve significant progress on addressing
this issue of port revenues and for breaking the logjam
for the entry of fuel ships into Al-Hudaydah. The result
is that fuel ships are now entering Al-Hudaydah and a
crisis has been averted due to the creative thinking of
those involved.

S/PV. 8672

In Al-Hudaydah, the parties have also strengthened
their adherence to the ceasefire. The establishment
of the ceasefire enhancement and de-escalation
mechanism has enabled a reduction of the number of
security incidents in the governorate; there are now
40 per cent fewer incidents than before the mechanism
came into effect. Since the creation of five joint
observation posts on the frontlines in Al-Hudaydah,
we have also observed a decrease by approximately
80 per cent in the number of security incidents in the
city. Indeed — remarkably, belatedly, but very much
welcome — for several days in a row, there were no
incidents in the city at all. I would like to commend, as
I am sure Lieutenant General Guha will, the parties for
this constructive cooperation. Both achievements are
remarkable and should be noted by all of us. I suggest
that Al-Hudaydah is another example of the value of
creative concession supplanting the desire for victory.
The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA) has been playing a vital role
in supporting the parties with the implementation
of that agreement. I would therefore like to express
some concern here about the increasing restrictions
imposed on the movements of the Mission’s personnel
in Al-Hudaydah. These restrictions not only hamper the
Mission’s day-to-day operations, but also threaten the
implementation of its mandate. I hope that the relevant
authorities will take all necessary measures to ensure
the freedom of movement necessary for UNMHA to
carry out its mandate.
In late October, my Office had the privilege of
meeting for two days with 20 Yemeni women peace
leaders from across the country. We discussed together
the elements of any political settlement so as to ensure
that their perspectives are taken into account now,
before the settlement is negotiated. They also provided
evidence of the intrinsic and, I think, perhaps unique
contribution that women’s groups make in Yemen, as
they do elsewhere, in improving local conditions during
conflict. We know how important it is to include both
a gender perspective and women’s participation in the
processes of peace.
In conclusion, during my last briefing to the Council
(S/PV.8642), I referred to signs of hope in Yemen. I hope
that through this brief survey I have given evidence
that these signs are beginning to produce results. That
means that Yemen’s leaders must now ask themselves
what peace should look like. They will need to reach an
agreement on the political and security arrangements to

19-381173/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

end the fighting, and we will be there to help them to do
so. They will need to lead in rebuilding the country, its
economy and its social fabric, and we will all be there to
make that happen. They will need to deal pragmatically
with complex political challenges in a landscape that
has changed dramatically during the years of conflict.
Laying the groundwork to address all of these issues
must start now, but we believe, as one Yemeni leader
said so vividly to me, that we may soon see a return to
civility in Yemen’s social life.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: Every month in Yemen, some 250
humanitarian partners work with the United Nations
to assist 13 million people in the country. We are
delivering the world’s largest humanitarian operation
in an extremely challenging environment, in which
things seem to be relentlessly getting worse. That
is why humanitarians have consistently advocated
action on five priorities: first, respect for international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians;
secondly, unhindered humanitarian access; thirdly,
funding for the humanitarian response plan; fourthly,
support for the economy; and fifthly, progress towards
a political solution. If fully implemented, these steps
would immediately and significantly reduce people’s
suffering and help set the stage for lasting peace. I would
like to review where these five priorities stand today.
First, I will review compliance with international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians. Every
month, the Council hears examples of the devastation the
war has brought to civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Attacks continue to cause civilian harm across the
country. Two days ago, artillery shells struck a market
in Sa’ada. Initial reports indicated that that attack
killed and injured dozens of civilians. Two weeks ago,
an attack in Taiz governorate badly damaged a hospital
in the town of Al-Mukha. That was the only medical
facility providing free emergency surgical care in the
area. Its closure deprived local communities of access
to those services until the hospital reopened just a few
days ago. It is a miracle that no one on the hospital
grounds was killed or injured in the attack, which
occurred when patients and medical staff were inside
the compound. Over the past month, we have also seen
reports of fishermen killed by air strikes. Shells have
fallen on civilian homes and sites hosting displaced
families. Landmines and other explosives have also
4/18

22/11/2019

killed and injured civilians. These events occur with a
regularity that should alarm all of us.
It is not only Yemenis who suffer. Migrants and
asylum-seekers, mainly from the Horn of Africa,
continue to arrive in Yemen. The International
Organization for Migration estimates that more than
160,000 migrants will arrive in Yemen this year. They
face appalling levels of abuse, including rape, torture
and economic exploitation by human traffickers. The
war has not spared migrants and asylum seekers either.
Casualties in the Sa’ada attack earlier this week, for
example, included Ethiopian and Somali nationals. Their
plight is now getting more attention. Despite those and
other incidents, there are also some signs of progress.
There were fewer civilian casualties in October than any
other month this year, while September was the year’s
deadliest month for civilians. We hope that the violence
will continue to decrease. We continue to call on the
parties to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to take constant care to spare
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The second area of priority action is the obligation
of all parties to facilitate humanitarian relief. Yet
humanitarian access remains an enormous challenge in
Yemen, particularly in areas controlled by Ansar Allah.
There were recently some limited improvements — for
example, Ansar Allah authorities have allowed more
non-governmental organization (NGO) projects to start
over the past few weeks, and we have heard assurances
on several other issues. But, despite those assurances,
Ansar Allah authorities continue to enforce an increasing
number of restrictive regulations on humanitarian
action. Those restrictions regularly hinder assistance
for millions of people. Although partners are still able
to deliver aid, doing so requires constant engagement
at all levels, often resulting in unacceptable delays for
people who need the help.
Although some projects were approved recently,
Ansar Allah authorities are still blocking or delaying
half of all NGO projects in areas under their control.
Needs assessment and monitoring are frequently
blocked as well. In several cases, United Nations
and NGO staff have been forced out of Yemen, often
without cause. All types of humanitarian movements in
the north, including deliveries of life-saving assistance,
are routinely blocked. Even when movements have been
authorized, partners may still face arbitrary refusals or
delays at checkpoints. Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities
also frequently seek to interfere in humanitarian
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

operations, including attempts to influence the selection
of beneficiaries or implementing partners.
Ansar Allah authorities are also continuing their
campaign to coerce humanitarian partners into working
under conditions that, if accepted, would contradict
humanitarian principles and almost certainly result
in loss of funding and programmes closing down. We
have also seen an alarming increase in violence and
harassment targeting humanitarian workers in areas
controlled by Ansar Allah. Over the past three months,
there have been 60 separate incidents of attacks,
intimidation, detention and other forms of mistreatment
of humanitarian staff. In several cases, the looting of
relief supplies and occupation of humanitarian premises
have disrupted critical deliveries of aid and services.
The very serious issues I have just outlined have
all been directly, clearly and repeatedly raised with
Ansar Allah. Although some forward steps have been
taken after continuous engagement, the humanitarian
operating environment in the north remains extremely
constrained. As we begin to think about next year’s
humanitarian response plan and our ability to raise
money for it, we sincerely hope that Ansar Allah
authorities will listen and change course in line with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
On a separate note, we also hope that Ansar Allah
will allow the long-planned United Nations assessment
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker to take place. The FSO
SAFER tanker continues to pose a serious risk of
environmental and humanitarian disaster in the Red
Sea — and such a disaster is avoidable. Our assessment
team remains ready to deploy within three weeks.
Access challenges in Government-controlled areas
are of a different nature. We continue to seek a faster and
more streamlined approach to Government processes to
approve humanitarian projects, as well as to expedite
humanitarian cargo arriving at the Port of Aden.
The third point I want to highlight is funding for
the humanitarian response plan. As the Council heard
last month from Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
(see S/PV.8642), new funding since September from the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait and the United States, among others, has
enabled agencies to reopen suspended programmes.
That means that children are once again receiving
regular vaccines, health-care centres are receiving
supplies and malnutrition treatment centres are getting
back to work. With the humanitarian response plan now

S/PV. 8672

more than 70 per cent funded, the aid operation is on
a much stronger financial footing than it was several
months ago. We are grateful to all donors for their
continuing support.
The fourth priority is the economy, which is a key
driver of humanitarian needs. Yemen imports almost
everything, including food, fuel and medicine. That
means the exchange rate makes an enormous difference
to people’s lives and their ability to access the goods
they need to survive. The rate is currently fluctuating
between 540 and 575 rial to the United States dollar. That
is better than the 595 rate last month, but still more than
twice as high as the pre-crisis level. We continue to call
for a regular programme of foreign exchange injection
into Yemen’s economy to stabilize the exchange rate
and help make goods and services affordable.
Last month we also updated the Council on the
impact of severe fuel shortages following the strict
enforcement of Government regulations on commercial
fuel imports. Fuel is essential to transport food to
markets, pump drinking water and power sanitation
systems. Shortages have eased considerably since then,
and fuel prices have come down, although rural areas
are taking longer to rebound. As members just heard
from Special Envoy Griffiths, the parties have also
worked closely with his Office to design a mechanism
that will allow adequate fuel supplies to enter all ports,
including Al-Hudaydah. We commend the flexibility of
all stakeholders on this critical issue. It is essential to
keep supplies of fuel and other essential commodities
flowing. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock was in
the region this week and had positive discussions
with the Government of Yemen on the fuel issue and
the economy.
The fifth and final priority is the need for progress
towards a political solution and, ultimately, peace. We
all agree that Yemen needs a political solution if the
crisis is ever to end. Members also just heard Special
Envoy Griffiths summarize several very encouraging
developments in that regard. We welcome those steps
and join millions of Yemenis in hoping that they are a
sign of even more progress to come.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): We thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-

19-381175/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

General Mueller for their briefings and for the admirable
work their teams continue to do.
The United States welcomes the signing of the
Riyadh agreement between the Government of the
Republic of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council. Forming a new and inclusive Cabinet will help
create a Government that is more representative of the
Yemeni people. We encourage the parties to swiftly
implement the terms of the agreement. The return of
the Government of Yemen to its temporary capital in
Aden and the reintegration of forces in the south under
Government control are important steps on the path to
a broader political settlement. Saudi Arabia’s laudable
work and the Yemeni parties have produced vital
progress. With the support of the Southern Transitional
Council, the Government of Yemen can now refocus
its attention on dialogue with the Houthis to end this
horrible conflict, which recent reports indicate has
claimed the lives of more than 100,000 women, children
and men since 2015.
We welcome Special Envoy Griffiths’ announcement
today of progress that will enable fuel ships to enter
Al-Hudaydah. We are also heartened by the recent
progress made by the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement and Lieutenant General
Guha in establishing observation posts for monitoring
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
We call on all parties to safeguard the Mission’s
personnel as they carry out their duties. However, the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement should not impede broader
efforts towards a comprehensive political agreement.
As the parties engage in dialogue with the aim of
ending the conflict, the financial contributions of
Member States remain essential for addressing what
has become the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. We
are pleased to hear that contributions this autumn to
the United Nations humanitarian response plan enabled
several critical humanitarian programmes to become
fully operational once again after facing closure owing
to funding shortfalls.
We are proud of our continued role as one of
the largest humanitarian contributors in Yemen,
especially because the programmes that the United
States funds through the United Nations and multiple
non-governmental organizations have a profound impact
on the lives of ordinary Yemenis. Two examples illustrate
this point. Recently, one of our implementing partners
treated more than 16,000 people for communicable
and non-communicable diseases. And in the second
6/18

22/11/2019

instance, that humanitarian partner improved access
to safe drinking water for 24,000 people. It is those
kinds of faithful efforts that provide desperately needed
resources for thousands of vulnerable Yemenis. We are
increasingly concerned, however, about limitations on
humanitarian access in northern Yemen. In order to do
their vital work, humanitarian organizations must be
allowed to operate freely and independently in a manner
that reflects the principles of humanity, independence,
neutrality and impartiality. Recent developments in
Yemen are encouraging, and we hope that they will
lead to further de-escalation throughout the country.
That will of course aid Special Envoy Griffiths and his
team’s efforts to invigorate the political process, but
even more importantly, it will begin to clear a path for
dignity to the return of the people of Yemen, a path that
we hope will widen in the coming weeks and months.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their comprehensive overview of the
political and humanitarian situation in Yemen.
As we have heard from today’s briefers, the
situation in Yemen is extremely worrying, especially
on the humanitarian front. Despite the efforts both
through the United Nations and bilaterally by Member
States, the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
has stalled. In the light of that, we view the signing in
Riyadh on 5 November of an agreement between the
internationally recognized Yemeni Government and
the Southern Transitional Council as an important step
towards uniting Yemeni society and a positive example
of how to arrive at desperately needed mutually
acceptable solutions and compromises, given the current
realities on the ground. We would particularly like to
highlight the mediation role played by Saudi Arabia,
which has contributed significantly to the achievement
of these agreements, and which also took on the role
of monitoring their practical implementation. We also
note the United Arab Emirates’ constructive approach
to the process.
We hope that the Yemeni parties’ ability to reach
agreement and find common denominators will help
them to reach a political settlement to this protracted
political and military conflict as soon as possible. In
that regard, we support Mr. Griffiths in his mediation
efforts to convince the parties to the conflict of the
futility of any military solution and of the importance
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of achieving a comprehensive ceasefire and developing
confidence-building measures. Since the very
beginning of the conflict Russia has advocated solely
for a political and diplomatic solution through inclusive
dialogue among all Yemeni forces, without exception.
We are continuing our assistance, including through our
contacts with all of the country’s political stakeholders
and interested parties, encouraging them to adopt a
constructive approach and reject military solutions.
It is still possible to make progress in Al-Hudaydah
and with the comprehensive Yemeni settlement
that the Special Envoy has been working on. The
international community must continue its collective
efforts to shift the conflict onto a political track and
provide the necessary aid to the millions of Yemenis
in dire need of various kinds of assistance, who are
starving or unable to access essential health services
and medicines. We urge all the parties to work for a
comprehensive de-escalation, which will make it
possible to address Yemen’s humanitarian catastrophe,
whose scale Ms. Mueller talked about today, in
earnest. The provision of humanitarian assistance to
Yemen should be one of our priorities. I want to stress
that humanitarian assistance to Yemen from abroad
must be distributed on a non-discriminatory basis
among the entire population throughout the country,
regardless of who controls which territory. We stand
behind unconditional compliance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law and ensuring
unimpeded access for humanitarian aid to all parts of
the country.
We have been compelled to conclude that the
armed confrontation in Yemen contributes to further
strengthening the positions of terrorist groups there.
Based on our experience in Syria, we know that the
fight against militants has to happen now. It cannot be
put off till later. The sooner all the parties in Yemen
unite their efforts to counter the threat of terrorism, the
less likely it is that the radicals will be able to maintain
their positions.
In conclusion, I would like to remind the Council
of resolution 598 (1987), which directed the SecretaryGeneral, in concert with the States of the region, to
develop an architecture for security and trust in the
region. In that context, Russia’s well-known concept
of collective security in the Gulf region, which is
specifically aimed at resolving conflict situations and
developing control and confidence-building measures,
is becoming increasingly relevant. We once again call

S/PV. 8672

on all interested parties to study that document and join
the collective quest for mutually acceptable solutions
to the problems in the region. There is an urgent need
for joint efforts to improve the atmosphere, which
will enable the Special Envoy to focus on the work of
settling conflicts.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, we would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
valuable briefings.
I will focus on two areas, the developments on the
political and security front and in the humanitarian
situation. As we are meeting here today we are
witnessing constructive and positive developments in
Yemen, particularly the fact that on 5 November the
Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional
Council succeeded in signing an agreement in Riyadh.
We commend the role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and its eagerness to lead the negotiations and succeed
in reaching an agreement. The signing of the Riyadh
agreement and the implementation of the first of its
provisions, with the Yemeni Government beginning its
work in the temporary capital of Aden, show clearly
that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the States of the
coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen are keen to
see security and stability restored there.
We hope that the agreement will build trust
and support the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, paving the way for a comprehensive
political settlement to the crisis based on the three
agreed terms of reference — the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
We welcome Mr. Griffiths’ information on the
remarkable and clear decrease in military operations in
Al-Hudaydah. This is encouraging. We hope it continues
and leads to a dialogue and constructive negotiations.
Accordingly, we affirm Kuwait’s willingness to
host the Yemeni parties, under the auspices of the
United Nations, with the aim of reaching a final and
comprehensive settlement of this crisis.
On the humanitarian front, in a hoped-for result
of the positive developments in Yemen, humanitarian

19-381177/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

agencies resumed their activities in a number of areas,
and the funding for the 2019 humanitarian response
plan also saw an increase. Kuwait has pledged a total
of $600 million to support the humanitarian activities
of the United Nations in Yemen since the beginning
of the crisis, $350 million of which we have disbursed
to international organizations and relief agencies and
the remainder of which we intend to distribute. In that
regard, we reaffirm how important it is to remove all
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and to cooperate with humanitarian agencies, notably
the World Food Programme. We are deeply concerned
about the obstacles in the areas under Houthi control,
which Ms. Mueller mentioned in her briefing. We
therefore emphasize the importance of ensuring that all
Yemeni parties comply with international humanitarian
law and allow humanitarian agencies to carry out their
tasks freely, independently and objectively.
We commend the Yemeni Government’s recent
constructive role in allowing 10 oil tankers to enter
the country. As Ms. Mueller mentioned, that has had
a positive impact on the country’s oil shortages. We
deplore the fact that United Nations experts were
unable to reach the FSO SAFER floating oil tanker in
Ras Isa in order to carry out the necessary inspection
and assessment processes, despite the Organization’s
repeated requests, which runs the risk of creating
a serious imminent environmental disaster in the
Red Sea.
In conclusion, we want to reiterate our position
that there can be no military solution to this crisis.
We call on all the Yemeni parties to fully implement
the three pillars of the Stockholm Agreement in order
to support the Special Envoy in his efforts to reach a
political solution based on the three agreed-on terms of
reference in order to end the crisis, preserve Yemen’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and
ensure non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Mueller for
their briefings.
It is becoming clearer every day that a political
solution must be found to the Yemeni crisis. As the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen has
shown, we are seeing positive and encouraging signs
of de-escalation, momentum that must continue and be
translated into tangible progress on the ground so as
to achieve a significant reduction in the hostilities. We
8/18

22/11/2019

welcomed the adoption of the Riyadh agreement, which
is an important step in the settlement of the crisis and
helps to preserve Yemen’s unity and territorial integrity.
It must now be fully implemented.
Discussions on a comprehensive and inclusive
political solution must be resumed without delay or
preconditions. The United Nations has an essential
role to play in mediation and supervision in the quest
for this political solution and its implementation. A
political solution is the only way out of the conflict for
the Yemeni people, who continue to suffer as a result
of the disastrous humanitarian situation. Respect for
international humanitarian law is not negotiable. It
is binding on us all. That means protecting civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, along
with civilian infrastructure. It also means guaranteeing
full humanitarian access. All the parties to the conflict
must ensure that. The increasing restrictions imposed
by the Houthis on humanitarian actors are preventing
millions of people from receiving aid, and that is
unacceptable. The effective coordination of assistance
must be a priority and every effort must be made to
facilitate the work of humanitarian actors. It is also
essential to ensure that the United Nations has access to
the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which is a serious potential
threat to the environment. An oil spill would have a
disastrous impact on the entire region.
The Council can rely on France to remain fully
engaged in the pursuit of a political solution to the
Yemeni crisis, both within the Council and as part of its
broader efforts to promote de-escalation in the region.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you for convening this meeting, Madam President, and
we are also grateful to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for
their valuable briefings.
Peru is following developments in Yemen closely.
It is clear that in recent months there has been progress
on the ground and that the level of violence has
decreased. But it is also true that the overall picture
remains uncertain and that millions of people are living
in conditions of extreme vulnerability. This morning
Mr. Griffiths noted some positive political signs, which
give us reason for cautious optimism. If acted on quickly
and pragmatically, they could lead to concrete progress
towards sustainable peace in Yemen. That applies
specifically to the renewed willingness to participate in
dialogue shown by some of the main stakeholders in the
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

conflict, assisted by the recent hopeful understandings
in southern Yemen that we are all aware of.
Peru encourages the parties to maintain this
dynamic of rapprochement in order to overcome the
deep-seated mistrust that still governs their relationship,
for which a genuine, good-faith commitment without
preconditions is critical. It is essential to make progress
in that regard because of the ever-present risk of
widespread famine, the persistence of cholera and the
collapse of public services and the economy, which
have claimed more lives than military action has. We
must therefore assume our responsibility to protect
the country’s most vulnerable citizens, which includes
eliminating all obstacles to assistance and all threats
to humanitarian personnel in the course of their work.
Specifically, we urge the Ansar Allah authorities to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by the
United Nations and other actors in the territory under
their control, and to refrain from setting conditions on
the location, form or beneficiaries of the aid.
We also emphasize that the ports, airports and land
routes in Yemen must remain open and operational in
accordance with the Council’s direction in its various
statements. Opening Sana’a airport for the delivery of
medical supplies and to enable emergency humanitarian
evacuations is particularly important, and we hope
to see greater flexibility from the Arab coalition and
other relevant actors on that sensitive issue. We also
welcome the recent fuel supplies that have reached
Yemen, although we encourage the promotion of
comprehensive solutions to prevent future shortages.
To that end, we consider it a matter of urgency to
ensure that the international community continues to
contribute to stabilizing and reactivating the Yemeni
economy in order to consolidate the appreciation in
the local currency’s value in the past few weeks and to
contain the inflation that has wreaked so much havoc
among the poorest populations.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Peru’s full support
for Mr. Griffiths in his efforts to prevent further
escalation and promote dialogue between the parties, as
well as our unwavering commitment to the protection
of civilians in all situations and circumstances.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Ms. Ursula Mueller for their briefings.
A negotiated political agreement as the basis for an
inclusive dialogue is the only way to resolve disputes

S/PV. 8672

and address the legitimate concerns of all Yemeni
people, including those from the south of the country.
We therefore acknowledge the efforts being made in the
region to bring peace to the people of Yemen.
We are optimistic about the progress achieved
and wish to thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its
mediation efforts, which have helped to bring about
the signing of the Riyadh agreement between the
Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council. The agreement marks a pivotal moment that
opens the door to broader consultations that could lay
the foundations for peace to be achieved across Yemen.
While we welcome all of the efforts to exercise
restraint, which have led to a decrease in the number
of air strikes within and outside Yemen, we stress
that protecting the civilian population and civilian
infrastructure are fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law, and therefore condemn
the attacks carried out across the country.
Turning to the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, we echo the call made on the parties
to abide by the ceasefire in that governorate and to
guarantee the necessary freedom of movement to the
staff of the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen so as to allow them to carry out
the required monitoring. At this crucial juncture, it is
more necessary than ever for the parties to refrain from
escalating the situation.
We wish to highlight the situation of persons
internally displaced by the war, migrants and refugees,
many of whom are women and children, and the
exceptional work being done by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations in
providing assistance to those vulnerable groups. These
efforts must be underpinned by humanitarian access
and security guarantees.
The humanitarian needs of women, children and
other vulnerable groups must figure prominently on
the agenda, and assistance must be provided to Yemen
to allow it to improve its economy and therefore to
meet the basic needs of its people. Allow me also to
note our concern at the current state of the abandoned
floating storage and offloading facility, the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, in Al-Hudaydah. We must not allow
a potential oil spill that would lead to an unprecedented
environmental disaster in the Red Sea, and we call on
all actors, especially the Houthis, to allow the United
Nations assessment team to access the tanker.

19-381179/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

This concern has been repeated countless times
in the Council, but nothing happens. It is crucial that
in the light of the advances towards peace in Yemen,
efforts continue to be made to seek a political solution,
including through the significant participation of
women and young people in the conflict-resolution
processes in Yemen.
The Council remains united in the face of the
situation afflicting the people of Yemen, recognizing
that the only answer is a political solution that once
and for all lays the groundwork for putting an end to
the conflict.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their briefings.
China supports Special Envoy Griffiths in his
efforts to advance the political process in Yemen and
commends the untiring efforts of the United Nations
and the relevant agencies to improve the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. Recently there have been signs that
the situation in Yemen is easing. The United Nations
and countries of the region should seize this opportunity
and further encourage the Yemeni parties to bridge
their differences and strive for an early resumption of
the comprehensive political settlement process.
China welcomes the fact that the Yemeni
Government and the Southern Transitional Council
formally signed the Riyadh agreement recently. We
commend Saudi Arabia and the other countries involved
for the positive role they played in this respect. We hope
that this will serve as a good example of negotiated
solutions achieved through dialogue.
China supports Special Envoy Griffiths in his
preparations for a new round of peace talks. The Yemeni
parties should refrain from any action that could lead
to an escalation of tensions and keep the momentum
towards a political solution going.
Since it was concluded nearly a year ago, the
Stockholm Agreement has been instrumental in
improving the situation in Al-Hudaydah and advancing
the political process in Yemen. We also can see that
right now the situation in Al-Hudaydah remains
tense. Nevertheless, the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC) have
overcome all difficulties and eased the situation there.
10/18

22/11/2019

China appreciates this. It would behove the Yemeni
parties to demonstrate political will, stop violating the
ceasefire agreement and ensure that the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement is fully implemented.
China supports the prisoner-exchange committee
and encourages it to keep up its effective work in
effectively implementing existing agreements. That
will also help the parties have greater confidence in
each other and pave the weight for comprehensive
political negotiations. The Council should remain united
on this matter, firmly support Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territory integrity and provide
political support for the diplomatic efforts of the United
Nations and countries of the region.
Recently the Ambassadors of the permanent
members of the Council to Yemen held a meeting in
Riyadh with Special Envoy Griffiths and General
Guha, Chair of the RCC, and reiterated their support
for its work. All members of the Council should work
in synergy with the Special Envoy, UNMHA, the RCC
and the countries of the region to contribute to the early
restoration of peace and order in Yemen.
The international community should provide
assistance tailored to improving the living conditions
of the Yemeni people. The Yemeni parties should fully
cooperate with the humanitarian operations of the
United Nations and other relevant agencies. Current
efforts should be focused on easing Yemen’s oil
crisis, stabilizing the Yemeni rial and prices, curbing
the cholera epidemic, supporting development and
reconstruction projects and increasing employment.
China has long been working to provide assistance
to the Yemeni people. Recently, through bilateral
channels, we once again provided assistance to Yemen;
in particular, we provided a gift of sporting goods to
Yemeni youth. On 31 October, China and the Yemeni
Government signed an economic and technical
cooperation agreement whereby Yemen will receive
100 million yuan renminbi, or $40 million, worth of
aid to improve Yemen’s economic and humanitarian
situation. It is China’s consistent position that
development is an effective pathway to peace and
stability in countries in conflict.
China stands ready to carry out further practical
work for the benefit of the Yemeni people, participate
in the economic reconstruction of Yemen, bolster
the Yemeni people’s confidence in their future and
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8672

contribute constructively to the early achievement of
lasting peace and stability in Yemen.

the peace process. A nationwide ceasefire and an end
to the conflict should be the ultimate objectives for all.

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
very pertinent updates today. We are happy about
these encouraging updates, including on the significant
decrease in the number of security incidents disclosed
by the Special Envoy, particularly concerning the
prospects for the continuation of the peace talks. They
reignite hopes that had been dimmed for several months.

Thirdly, further progress is required in
implementing the Stockholm Agreement, in parallel
with a resumption of the political process. That
process should include the swapping of prisoner and
dialogue on Taiz. We also expect further progress
in Al-Hudaydah, the maintenance of the ceasefire
and the demilitarization of the area around the ports.
Al-Hudaydah is crucial, not only because it is key to
humanitarian assistance, but also because it is a source
of revenue for the Yemeni people. Implementation must
not be derailed.

In responding to the briefings, Indonesia would
like to underscore three points. First, we welcome the
Jeddah agreement between the Government of Yemen
and the Southern Transitional Council, facilitated by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We thank the Kingdom
for its excellent work in that regard.
Some seem to believe that the timeline and objectives
of the Riyadh agreement are ambitious, but for the
people of Yemen who have suffered so much for so long,
an ambitious timeline and objectives are necessary. The
challenge is implementation. Indonesia strongly hopes
that the agreement will be implemented without delay,
as a building block towards a national-level political
settlement. As my delegation has repeatedly stated,
the only way to reverse the humanitarian crisis and
ease the suffering of the Yemeni people is through a
comprehensive political settlement.
That brings me to my second point. We strongly
support the efforts of the Special Envoy to resume talks
at the earliest possible moment. It is now almost a full
year since the Stockholm Agreement was reached.
While the Agreement has not been fully implemented,
it is evident that it has brought hope to Yemenis. There
is no doubt that there would have been no improvement
in the situation in Al-Hudaydah without the Agreement.
Building on the gains of the Stockholm and Riyadh
Agreements, the intra-Yemeni political process should
be resumed, under United Nations facilitation, with
the participation of all legitimate parties concerned,
including women and youth. It is critical that Yemenis
own the process and the outcome; accordingly, we
support a Yemeni-led process facilitated by the United
Nations. It is also crucial that whatever the result, it be
well understood by the parties and properly implemented
and that it trickle down to the situation on the ground.
Regional key countries play a pivotal role in supporting

Lastly, my delegation calls on Ansar Allah
authorities to protect and grant unhindered access to all
humanitarian workers operating on the ground as they
carry out their work to deliver humanitarian assistance.
As this is the penultimate briefing on Yemen this
year, Indonesia calls on everyone to make a big push in
the month ahead to boost hope for all Yemenis as the
year comes to a close.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank the briefers for their detailed accounts of
the current situation in Yemen. Allow me to reiterate
our full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and to express our appreciation for the tireless
work of all United Nations personnel in Yemen.
I would like to begin by expressing Poland’s full
support for the progress made to date with regard
to the political situation in Yemen. We welcome in
particular the signing of the Riyadh agreement by the
Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council and commend the diplomatic efforts of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which were instrumental
in reaching an understanding between the parties.
The return of the Prime Minister of Yemen to Aden
marks an essential first step in the implementation of
the agreement. We urge all stakeholders to show good
faith, abide by the terms of the agreement and ensure its
timely implementation.
The Riyadh agreement is an important step
towards reaching a political settlement in the conflict
in Yemen. It opens a window of opportunity for the
resumption of an inclusive political process that would
resolve differences and address the legitimate concerns
of all Yemenis. We therefore urge all parties to step
up their engagement with the Special Envoy in good

19-3811711/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

faith and without preconditions with a view to reviving
comprehensive negotiations, with the participation of all
groups in Yemeni society, including women and youth.
Apart from inclusivity, other key factors to
restore stability and create conditions conducive
to the resumption of the political process include
renouncing violence, de-escalating tensions and
advancing confidence-building measures. It is therefore
paramount that the parties uphold their obligations
under the Al-Hudaydah Agreement; ensuring the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement is also of
critical importance.
With regard to the humanitarian situation,
notwithstanding the positive developments outlined
by Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, the
overall living conditions of the Yemeni people remain
extremely dire. In that connection, we call upon
the parties to allow and facilitate the safe, rapid and
unhindered flow of humanitarian aid and personnel
to all parts of the country and to immediately lift all
restrictions on humanitarian access and commercial
imports. We also urge them to prioritize the protection
of civilians, including the most vulnerable groups,
namely, women and children, and to fully comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
perpetrators of violations must be held accountable.
Lastly, I would like to touch upon the very
concerning issue of the decaying FSO SAFER oil tanker
in Al-Hudaydah, whose rupture and a subsequent oil
spill would lead to an unprecedented environmental
and humanitarian catastrophe in the Red Sea. We call
on all actors, especially the Houthis, to allow the United
Nations assessment team to access the tanker without
further delay.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire): My delegation thanks
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Ms Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
informative briefings on the latest developments in the
political and humanitarian situations in Yemen.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the signing of the
agreement reached on 5 November in Riyadh between
the Yemeni Government and the separatists of the
Southern Transitional Council. The agreement provides
for power-sharing within a new Government formation
and the return of institutions to Aden, the provisional
capital. That is very good news for the Yemeni people
12/18

22/11/2019

and for the peace process. Negotiations made possible
by the involvement of regional actors send a strong
message of unity to all stakeholders. All stakeholders,
without exception, should be encouraged to see that
advance as a window of opportunity to overcome
their differences through negotiated political solutions
that would consolidate the de-escalation and further
boost the peace process. It would also be wise to fully
involve women and young people in the quest for that
long-awaited peace. Above all, Côte d’Ivoire would
like the Riyadh agreement to serve as an anchor point
for building an environment of trust between the
parties concerned. It also supports ongoing diplomatic
initiatives, in particular those under the auspices of the
Sultanate of Oman, to facilitate talks between regional
actors and the Houthis.
Côte d’Ivoire shares the international community’s
concerns
about
the
particularly
worrisome
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Indeed, after several
years of conflict, Yemen is a depleted country where,
according to United Nations agencies, 80 per cent of the
population is experiencing a humanitarian emergency,
10 million people are food insecure and 3.3 million are
internally displaced. It is therefore important to invite
all the protagonists of the current crisis to respect
human rights and international humanitarian law. In
that regard, my country welcomes the adoption by the
Human Rights Council on 26 September of resolution
42/2, condemning breaches of those international
legal standards.
Côte d’Ivoire believes that it is urgent to ensure the
full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, signed
in December 2018. Compliance with the provisions of
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement on the redeployment of
military forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa remains an urgent necessity in that regard.
Control of the ports is undoubtedly the main issue and
obstruction to the process of the full redeployment
of military forces from those port facilities. The
establishment of local security forces in those ports
should therefore allow for a revitalization of the
political process. That is why my country welcomed
this morning’s announcement by Mr. Griffiths of an
oil tanker entering the port of Al-Hudaydah to supply
the country with oil. Côte d’Ivoire urges the Yemeni
parties to pursue the redeployment of military forces
from the ports under the auspices of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and to cooperate fully
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

with the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement.
The relative ceasefire observed by the Houthis
since 21 September and the releasing of 290 prisoners
should constitute the basis of a peace agreement.
We welcome that as a very positive step forward.
Those humanitarian gestures, consistent with the
Stockholm Agreement, should serve to create an
environment conducive to the continuing exchange of
prisoners and the implementation of the statement of
understanding on the city of Taiz. Moreover, it is of
the utmost importance to Yemen that any momentum
that generates hope for peace, stability and security be
supported and encouraged.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire wishes to renew its
encouragement for the Special Envoy in his steadfast
efforts to promote dialogue among the parties, which the
Council hopes will be fruitful in realizing a definitive
settlement of the conflict in Yemen.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is always a pleasure to
see Mr. Martin Griffiths, and today it has also been a
pleasure to listen to him and his upbeat briefing. I do not
need to repeat all of the various positive developments,
I can only echo what he and my colleague from Côte
d’Ivoire said: the momentum that has been built needs
to be sustained in both the south and the north of the
country. It is essentially the obligation of the leadership,
as Mr. Griffiths said, that leaders on all sides continue
to be constructively engaged by talking to each other
and that they pursue the path of de-escalation.
I was a little concerned that by the end of his very
interesting statement, Mr. Griffiths would propose
that the leaders be candidates for the next Nobel Peace
Prize, but then had the cold shower from Ms. Ursula
Mueller. It is always a pleasure to see her, but it was not
a pleasure to hear what she had to say. She reminded
us of the humanitarian situation, which continues to be
the worst we face in the world today. Although we have
heard about positive developments in Al-Hudaydah,
that governorate remains the place with the highest
number of civilian casualties.
With regard to humanitarian access, I had to listen
very carefully, but I heard our Russian colleague say
that we must ensure unconditional compliance with
international humanitarian law, and I can only subscribe
to that — not only in Yemen. It is absolutely vital that
humanitarian access be granted, and we still face a lot
of problems in that regard.

S/PV. 8672

Several colleagues, including the representatives
of France, the Dominican Republic and Poland, all
mentioned the unresolved issue of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, which represents an increasing threat to the
environment. All those who are in contact with the
Houthis should pressure them into at least allowing
for a United Nations assessment team to have access
to the ship.
Germany continues to be committed to supporting
the Special Envoy. We are ready to support the political
process by facilitating meetings at different levels.
With regard to the provision of financial humanitarian
aid, Germany remains committed and will contribute
substantially to the Yemen humanitarian response
plan. We also appeal to other donors to continue to be
engaged and to disburse their contributions in a timely
manner so that the problem we encountered this year
does not repeat itself.
Finally, I want to come back to Mr. Griffiths’
briefing. At the end, he highlighted his contact with
women leaders, and I fully support that. Others
members have also highlighted the inclusion of youth.
It is important not only to hold separate meetings
with them, but to ensure that women have a seat at the
negotiating table and are able to bring their vision and
point of views to the negotiations process.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Ursula Mueller, for the valuable information
they provided.
Equatorial Guinea has been closely following the
situation in Yemen and remains confident in the work
of the United Nations, which, owing to the relentless
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and the strong support provided by partners of the
United Nations and the entire international community,
continues to seek a successful path for the parties to the
conflict to arrive at a definitive solution and restore the
peace and tranquillity for which the Yemeni population
has yearned for the past five years.
Over the past few months, the Yemeni parties
have been carrying out important initiatives aimed at
reorienting the dynamics of the conflict, both in the
north and south of the country. That demonstrates
their firm commitment to reaching an agreement on a

19-3811713/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

number of measures that would reduce the suffering of
the Yemeni people. One such step was the releasing of
290 detainees by the Houthi movement. The same spirit
was evident in its announcement on 20 September to
suspend all attacks with drones and ballistic missiles
against Saudi Arabia.
We also welcome the diplomatic efforts undertaken
and sponsored by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
which led to the signing of the Riyadh agreement on
5 November with a view to resolving the important
differences between the Government of Yemen and
the Southern Transitional Council. It is urgent that the
parties implement the terms of that agreement, among
other aspects, given that the return of the Government
to Aden and the full functioning of its institutions, the
services of which must reach the country’s citizens, are
reliant on the agreement. In short, the Riyadh agreement
is a step in the right direction in pursuit of a definitive
solution to the Yemeni conflict.
Equatorial Guinea also commends the leadership
of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement, which, together with the two Yemeni
parties to the Stockholm Agreement, succeeded in
establishing the joint operations centre. The existence
of the centre is giving rise to a tangible reduction in
ceasefire violations.
My delegation regrets the terrible humanitarian
situation suffered by the Yemeni population since the
beginning of the conflict, with the civilian population
being increasingly affected. Humanitarian agencies are
having to overcome significant restrictions in addition
to frequent harassment and attempts at interference. In
such difficult conditions, the most needy cannot easily
be reached. Last month, we heard about local authorities
blocking assessments of the humanitarian situation in
Hajjah and Al-Hudaydah, where approximately 12,000
families have been affected by floods. Millions of
people are not guaranteed of their regular food supply
and others do not know where their next meal will
come from.
We therefore echo the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council on 26 September condemning the
ongoing violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian
law in Yemen, including the recruitment and widespread
use of children by the parties to the conflict, sexual and
gender-based violence, arbitrary detentions, the denial
of humanitarian access and attacks on the population
14/18

22/11/2019

and civilian infrastructure, including medical facilities,
missions and their personnel, as well as schools.
Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
full support for the efforts of Mr. Griffiths. We also
encourage all the parties not to abandon the path of
dialogue, since the only way to resolve the conflict is
political through frank, direct and inclusive dialogue
among all parties.
Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, for their briefings. South Africa wishes to
express its support for Special Envoy Griffiths and for
all his efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation
in Yemen. We would like to address the following two
issues in our statement: first, the political situation and,
secondly, the humanitarian situation.
First, on the political situation, South Africa
welcomes the signing of the Riyadh agreement between
the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council. We also note some of the key points in the
Riyadh agreement, which include activating the role
of all the Yemeni State authorities and institutions,
upholding the full rights of all Yemeni people, and the
participation of the Southern Transitional Council in
the Government delegation to consultations on the final
political solution to the conflict in Yemen. It is hoped
that the agreement will be the first step towards creating
a broader and more comprehensive political settlement
for ending the war in Yemen. We also commend the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its role in facilitating the
signing of the agreement.
We further welcome the encouraging signs
of dialogue between the parties, with a view to
de-escalating tensions. We call on all the parties to
urgently engage in talks aimed at alleviating the dire
humanitarian situation in Yemen. It should be possible
for all parties to engage and agree on alleviating the
plight of the people of Yemen caught up in this violent
armed conflict.
We further remind the parties to implement some
key elements of the Stockholm agreements, including
the prisoner swap and resolving outstanding issues
related to the status of local security forces. We hope
that the various ongoing dialogue efforts feed into a
broader United Nations-led process that is inclusive.
Without a concerted effort towards a political solution
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

to the conflict, the humanitarian disaster in Yemen will
continue to worsen and remain a source of instability
not only for the parties involved in the conflict but for
the entire region.
Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, according
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains
the worst in the world. Nearly four years of conflict
and the resultant severe economic decline have
driven the country to the brink of famine and further
imperilled critical health, energy, water and sanitation
infrastructure. An estimated 80 per cent of the
population — 24 million people — require some form
of humanitarian or protection assistance, including
14.3 million who are in acute need. The severity of
their needs is increasing, with the number of people
in acute need a staggering 27 per cent higher than
last year. Two-thirds of all districts in the country
are already suffering pre-famine, and one-third faces
the convergence of multiple acute vulnerabilities. An
estimated 85,000 Yemeni children under the age of five
may have died of starvation.
Furthermore, about 2 million Yemeni children have
stopped attending school since the start of the war and,
according to UNICEF, many schools are damaged or
not in use or have becomes shelters for the displaced.
The armed conflict in Yemen has killed and injured
thousands of Yemeni civilians since it began. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, almost 7,000 civilians have been
killed and more than 10,000 wounded. Thousands more
have been displaced by the fighting and millions suffer
from shortages of food and medical care.
We welcome the decrease in violence, as mentioned
by the Assistant Secretary-General this morning. We
hope that the situation will continue to improve. South
Africa continues to call on the parties to the conflict to
allow the free, regular and unimpeded passage of food
and other humanitarian relief and not to take actions
that would deprive civilians of their rights to food and
health. In that regard, we remind the parties to the
conflict that all necessary measures should be taken to
respect the Geneva Conventions. The unprecedented
humanitarian crisis is a strong indicator of the human
toll of continued military action and conflict, which
necessitates an urgent commitment to a ceasefire and
the pursuit of a negotiated, peaceful and inclusive
solution to the crisis.

S/PV. 8672

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to this conflict will be through
a negotiated, Yemeni-led political settlement that is
inclusive and puts the interests and well-being of all the
citizens of Yemen first.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their briefings.
I, too, would like to welcome the signing of
the Riyadh agreement between the Government of
Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council. We
commend Saudi Arabia for its mediation efforts and its
leadership. We hope that this positive momentum can
be maintained during the next stages in the political
process, which must be inclusive, with the meaningful
participation of women and young people, and reflect
the ethnic, geographical, social and political diversity
of the Yemeni population.
We welcome the de-escalation efforts, although the
civilian population is still suffering disproportionately.
We encourage the continuation of those efforts to
achieve a cessation of hostilities throughout the country.
Humanitarian access remains very difficult,
as Ms. Mueller told us. It is essential that all parties
facilitate access for humanitarian assistance and respect
international humanitarian law. In particular, we call
on the parties to lift all restrictions on humanitarian
access and commercial imports. We encourage the
Government of Yemen to suspend the implementation
of Decree 49 until a lasting solution to the oil crisis
is found. We encourage the Houthis to provide access
to the FSO SAFER tanker in order to facilitate an
assessment of the situation and to prevent a potential
environmental disaster.
In parallel, we continue to call on all parties to
fully implement the Stockholm Agreement, including
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, the agreement on
the exchange of prisoners and the statement of
understanding on Taiz.
Finally, the parties must respect their obligations
and commitments under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

19-3811715/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

The British Government, too, wants to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, the Special Envoy and
their teams for the hard work that they are doing. We
join others in welcoming the Riyadh agreement and
the vital role that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia played
in brokering it. We share South Africa’s point and
emphasis on inclusivity.
With regard to momentum and making the best use
of next year, our colleagues from Indonesia, Germany
and Côte d’Ivoire put it very well, and we, too, share
that sense of hope that something truly meaningful can
be done. I wanted to tell Special Envoy Griffiths that
we welcome his continued facilitation of consultations
between the parties. It is important that the Riyadh
agreement and de-escalation efforts are integrated
into a wider inclusive political process, and we urge
Mr. Griffiths and Saudi Arabia to work closely to
ensure that the respective initiatives are integrated and
enable a holistic approach. The Council and the wider
community need to be ready to support a renewed peace
process, and the Special Envoy can count on the United
Kingdom to do its utmost in that regard. We hope for
broader implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
to continue in parallel with these efforts.
On the humanitarian front, as the Assistant
Secretary-General said, the situation is a very sobering
one. I share the German representative’s concerns on
these issues. The United Kingdom has committed nearly
$1 billion in assistance since the conflict began, and
more than of quarter of this sum has been in the current
financial year. We are contributing to the immediate
food needs of more than 1 million Yemenis each month,
treating 70,000 children for malnutrition and providing
more than 1 million people with an improved water
supply and basic sanitation. We therefore in no way
underestimate the scale and the enormity of the task,
and we applaud all those who work on the ground to
deliver aid to vulnerable people in such difficult and
dangerous circumstances.
The Council needs to be confident that the
assistance provided by the international community is
indeed reaching those in need, and that means that it is
in turn vital that humanitarian access improve across
the entire country, including in Houthi-controlled
areas in the north. The United Kingdom takes this
opportunity to call on the Houthis to engage urgently
and constructively with the United Nations Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator on the
ground, Ms. Lise Grande, to ensure that vulnerable
16/18

22/11/2019

people can be reached and to comply immediately with
resolution 2451 (2018) by facilitating swift, unhindered
and safe humanitarian access.
We know that the operating environment for
humanitarian organizations is almost impossible in the
north — 60 per cent of humanitarian sub-agreements
this year have not been signed by the Houthis, and that
affects 4 million people. This situation is obviously
something that cannot continue. Humanitarian
organizations are ready to save lives. They must be
allowed to do their jobs.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, an issue
that has been mentioned by a number of representatives
today, we share those concerns. We think that the
inaction of the Houthis on this issue is reckless. We call
on them to allow the United Nations team access to the
tanker before it is too late.
I also want to say a quick word about the economy.
The progress that has recently been achieved between
the parties in facilitating fuel imports through the
Red Sea ports is very welcome. It is now vital that
the Government of Yemen and the Houthis engage
constructively with the United Nations to agree on an
effective mechanism for port-revenue sharing. A longterm solution needs to be secured so that sufficient
levels of fuel can enter the Red Sea ports each month.
Finally, I wish to conclude by echoing what the
representatives of Germany and of Belgium said about
the importance of unconditionally implementing
international humanitarian law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and
I wish you and the friendly delegation of the United
Kingdom all the best. I would also like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their
valuable briefings.
The Yemeni Government has expressed its
sincere and serious desire to achieve a just and lasting
peace based on the three agreed terms of reference,
19-38117

22/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8672

namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference, and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015). The Government has sought
to prioritize the interests of Yemen and its people in
the fulfilment of their aspirations to build a new and
federal Yemen based on the outcomes of the National
Dialogue Conference — a new Yemen that would serve
Yemeni interests and play a major role in assisting
our regional partners to combat the terrorism and
sectarianism schemes that seek to spread chaos, destroy
our nation’s aspirations and undermine the foundations
of our society.

of military formations operating beyond State authority
that have prevented the Government from exercising its
full sovereignty and authority in the temporary capital
of Aden.

The Yemeni Government greatly values the
determined efforts of Saudi Arabia, with the King
and the Crown Prince of the country at the helm of
the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, Their
efforts have played a significant role in the signing
of the Riyadh agreement, which is an important step
upon which to build in making future progress on
a comprehensive peace based on the agreed terms of
reference while maintaining the fundamentals of our
national identity.

The Stockholm Agreement is almost a year
old. However, no progress has yet been made on its
implementation. We must reflect on the reasons for
delay and exert pressure on the party obstructing
implementation of the Agreement. The implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, especially its
provisions related to the local security forces, local
authorities and the withdrawal from the port and the
city of Al-Hudaydah, as well as opening humanitarian
corridors, will be an important confidence-building
measure that points the way towards possible
lasting peace.

The agreement seeks to ensure the full restoration
of the Yemeni State with the operationalization of all
of Government powers and institutions in Aden, the
temporary capital, as well as in liberated governorates,
while committing to full citizenship rights for all
Yemenis and to eliminating sectarian discrimination.
The agreement also seeks to place all military
formations outside of State institutions under the
control of the Ministries of Defence and of the Interior
so as to contribute to liberating the governorates
remaining under the control of the Houthi militias and
to solidifying efforts aimed at expediting the disruption
of the Houthi-Iranian scheme in Yemen. The agreement
also seeks to usher in a new era of stability and security
in Yemen and neighbouring countries and to serve
the interests of our country and the Yemeni people
while preventing divisions, creating a united front,
initiating a new era of construction and development
and combating extremist terrorist groups.
The President of Yemen has called for the immediate
and full implementation of the Riyadh agreement and
for the Prime Minister and the Cabinet to return to Aden,
the temporary capital, this week. These steps would
ensure that the root causes of the current problems and
their repercussions are addressed, namely, the presence

We welcome the statements expressing international
support for the Riyadh agreement by our brotherly
and friendly States members of the Security Council,
which we all welcome as a positive step towards lasting
peace in Yemen. We look forward to the support of our
brothers and friends in the international community for
efforts made by the Yemeni Government to overcome
the challenges, improve the economy and consolidate
security and stability.

Any attempt to circumvent the Agreement would
undermine the efforts of the United Nations and hinder
the political process. It would play into the hands of the
party that has undertaken the coup, allowing it to avoid
fulfilling its obligations. We must clearly and decisively
condemn the Houthis for their non-compliance with the
ceasefire and for their continued military escalation.
The foregoing violations unequivocally affirm that the
Houthi militias are not ready for peace. They do not
care about the humanitarian suffering caused by their
unjust war against the Yemeni people, as they use the
humanitarian situation as a tool for blackmail and other
forms of political pressure.
The Yemeni Government condemns the Iranian
regime’s recognition of the representative of the
Houthi coup and its handover of diplomatic buildings
in Tehran belonging to the Republic of Yemen to him.
This handover is in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations, as well as relevant Security
Council resolutions related to Yemen, notably resolution
2216 (2015). We call on the Security Council to condemn
this blatant and flagrant violation of international law

19-3811717/18

S/PV.8672

The situation in the Middle East

as a dangerous precedent in international relations. We
stress that legal action declaring this irresponsible act
null and void must necessarily be taken.
The Yemeni Government is making tremendous
efforts to revive the economic situation in the country.
We have achieved positive results through the
implementation of Decree No. 75 of 2018 and Decree
No. 49 of 2019 on collecting taxes, customs duties and
other legal revenues from the imports of oil derivatives
for the purpose of paying the salaries of civil servants.
During the past month, we have facilitated the entry
of oil derivatives into the port of Al-Hudaydah, which
has generated legal revenues of more than 15 billion
Yemeni rials in just two weeks. The Houthi militias
must deposit these revenues into a temporary account
at the Central Bank of Al-Hudaydah branch under the
supervision of the United Nations in accordance with
the Government initiative. These revenues will be used
to pay the salaries of civil servants in areas under the
control of the Houthi militias. We warn that, as has
happened with past revenues, these revenues might be
diverted and used to enrich warlords engaged in the
conflict at the expense of the suffering Yemenis.

18/18

22/11/2019

The Yemeni Government calls once again on the
international community and the Security Council
to exert continued pressure on the Houthi militias to
allow the United Nations technical team access to
the FSO SAFER oil tanker so that an assessment of
the damage may be conducted, rather than waiting
until a preventable serious environmental disaster for
which the Houthi militias would be morally and legally
responsible takes place.
In conclusion, the Yemeni Government reiterates
its commitment to fully implementing all elements
of the Stockholm Agreement and the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, as well as to releasing prisoners and
detainees as part of its apolitical humanitarian approach.
We also call for lifting the siege on the city of Taiz.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

19-38117
