III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee should com­
memorate the tenth anniversary of the Meeting of the Lit­
toral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, which
took place in July 1979, during its preparatory sessions in
1989;
10. Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee
to continue his consultations on the participation in the
work of the Committee by States Members of the United
Nations which are not members of the Committee, with
the aim of resolving this matter at the earliest possible
date;
11. Also requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Com­
mittee to consult the Secretary-General at the appropriate
time on the establishment of a secretariat for the Confer­
ence;
12. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a full report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ren­
der all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee, in­
cluding the provision of summary records, in recognition
of its preparatory function.

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
43/80.

Israeli nuclear armament

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its previous resolutions on Israeli nu­

clear armament, the latest of which is 42/44 of 30 Novem­
ber 1987,
Recalling its resolution 42/28 of 30 November 1987, in
which, inter alia, it called for placing all nuclear facilities
in the region under International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards, pending the establishment of a nuclear­
weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 487 (1981) of
19 June 1981, in which, inter alia, the Council called upon
Israel urgently to place all its nuclear facilities under In­
ternational Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting that only Israel has been specifcally called upon
by the Security Council to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting with grave concern Israel's persistent refusal to
commit itself not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weap­
ons, despite repeated calls by the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the International Atomic Energy
Agency,
Taking into consideration resolution GC (XX.XII)/
RES/487 of 23 September 1988 adopted by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in which the General Conference strongly condemned the
continued refusal by Israel to renounce the possession of
nuclear weapons and to submit all its nuclear facilities to
the Agency's safeguards in compliance• with Security
Council resolution 487 (1981),
Deeply alarmed by the information with regard to the
continuing production, development and acquisition of
nuclear weapons by Israel,
Aware of the grave consequences that endanger interna­
tional peace and security as a result of Israel's develop­
ment and acquisition of nuclear weapons and Israel's col­
laboration with South Africa to develop nuclear weapons
and their delivery systems,

101

Deeply concerned that the declared Israeli policy of at­
tacking and destroying nuclear facilities devoted to peace­
ful purposes is a part of its nuclear armament policy,
I. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's refusal to re­
nounce any possession of nuclear weapons;
2. Reiterates also its condemnation of the co-operation
between Israel and South Africa;
3. Requests once more the Security Council to take ur­
gent and effective measures to ensure that Israel complies
with Council resolution 487 (1981);
4. Demands once more that Israel place all its nuclear
facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency safe­
guards;
5. Calls upon all States and organizations that have not
yet done so to discontinue co-operating with and giving as­
sistance to Israel in the nuclear field;
6. Reiterates its request to the International Atomic
Energy Agency to suspend any scientific co-operation
with Israel that could contribute to its nuclear capabilities;
7. Requests also the International Atomic Energy
Agency to inform the Secretary-General of any steps Is­
rael may take to place its nuclear facilities under Agency
safeguards;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely Is­
raeli nuclear activities and to report to the General As­
sembly at its forty-fourth session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear ar­
mament".
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
43/81.

Verification in all its aspects
A

COMPLIANCE WITH ARMS LIMITATION AND
DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/38 M of 30 November 1987,
Conscious of the abiding concern of all Member States

for preserving respect for rights and obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law,
• Convinced that observance of the Charter of the United
Nations, relevant treaties and other sources of interna­
tional law is essential for the strengthening of interna­
tional security,
Mindful, in particular, of the fundamental importance
of full implementation and strict observance of agree­
ments on arms limitation and disarmament if individual
nations and the international community are to derive en­
hanced security from them,
Stressing that any violation of such agreements not only
adversely affects the security of States parties but can also
create security risks for other States relying on the con­
straints and commitments stipulated in those agreements,
Stressing also that any weakening of confidence in such
agreements diminishes their contribution to global or re­
gional stability and to further disarmament and arms limi­
tation efforts and undermines the credibility and effective­
ness of the international legal system,
Recognizing in this context that, inter alia, full confi­
dence in compliance with existing agreements can en-

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

102

hance the negotiation of arms limitation and disarmament
agreements,
Believing that compliance with arms limitation and
disarmament agreements by States parties is, therefore, a
matter of interest and concern to all members of the inter­
national community, and noting the role that the United
Nations could play in that regard,
Convinced that resolution of non-compliance questions
that have arisen with regard to agreements on arms limita­
tions and disarmament would contribute to better rela­
tions among States and the strengthening of world peace
and security,
l. Urges all States parties to arms limitation and disar­
mament agreements to implement and comply with the
entirety of the provisions of such agreements;
2. Calls upon all Member States to give serious consid­
eration to the implications of non-compliance with those
obligations for international security and stability, as well
as for the prospects for further progress in the feld of
disarmament;
3. Also calls upon all Member States to support efforts
aimed at the resolution of non-compliance questions, with
a view to encouraging strict observance by all parties of
the provisions of arms limitation and disarmament agree­
ments and maintaining or restoring the integrity of such
agreements;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide Member
States with assistance that may be necessary in this regard;
5. Welcomes efforts by States parties to develop addi­
tional co-operative measures, as appropriate, that can in­
crease confdence in compliance with existing arms limita­
tion and disarmament agreements and reduce the
possibility of misinterpretation and misunderstanding;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Compliance with
arms limitation and disarmament agreements".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
B
STUDY ON THE ROLE OF THE UNITED NATIONS
IN THE FIELD OF VERIFICATION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/152 0 of 16 December I 985,

41/86 Q of 4 December 1986 and 42/42 F of 30 November
1987,
Underlining the important role that the United Nations,
in accordance with its Charter, has to play in the sphere of
disarmament,
Recalling that all the peoples of the world have a vital in­
terest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that,
consequently, all States have the duty to contribute to ef­
forts in the field of disarmament,
Noting that the critical importance of verification of and
compliance with arms limitation and disarmament agree­
ments is universally recognized,
Stressing that the issue of verification of and compliance
with arms limitation and disarmament agreements is a
matter of concern to all nations,
Reiterating its view that:
(a) Disarmament and arms limitation agreements
should provide for adequate and effective measures of

verification satisfactory to all parties concerned in order to
create the necessary confidence and to ensure that they are
being observed by all parties;
(b) The form and modalities of the verification to be
provided for in any specific agreement depend upon and
should be determined by the purposes, scope and nature of
the agreement;
(c) Agreements should provide for the participation of
parties directly or through United Nations organs in the
verification process;
(d) Where appropriate, a combination of several meth­
ods of verification as well as other compliance procedures
should be employed,
Recalling that:
(a) In the context of international disarmament ne­
gotiations, the problem of verification should be further
examined and adequate methods and procedures in this
field should be considered;
(b) Every effort should be made to develop appropriate
methods and procedures that are non-discriminatory and
that do not interfere unduly with the internal affairs of
other States or jeopardize their economic and social devel­
opment,
Conscious of the fact that the United Nations is already
playing a useful role in the field of verification,
Taking note of all proposals that have been fut forward
in the field of verification by Member States, 1 8 including
those by Canada and the Netherlands, France and the
countries of the Six-Nation Initiative, 12
I. Recognizes that the United Nations, in accordance
with its role and responsibilities established under the
Charter, can make a significant contribution in the field of
verification, in particular of multilateral agreements;
2. Notes with satisfaction the completion by the Disar­
mament Commission of its work on the subject of verifica­
tion in all its aspects;
3. Endorses the general principles of verification
drawn up by the Disarmament Commission and con­
tained in its report; 103
4. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake, with
the assistance of a group of qualified governmental ex­
perts, an in-depth study of the role of the United Nations
in the field of verification that would:
(a) Identify and review existing activities of the United
Nations in the field of verification of arms limitation and
disarmament;
(b) Assess the need for improvements in existing ac­
tivities as well as explore and identify possible additional
activities, taking into account organizational, technical,
operational, legal and financial aspects;
(c) Provide specific recommendations for future action
by the United Nations in this context;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a compre­
hensive report on the subject to the General Assembly at
its forty-fifth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session the item entitled "Verification in all its
aspects".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
118 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fifteenth Special
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/S-15/3), para. 60 (para. 6, sect. 111.2 of the

quoted text)
