S/PV.9408

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9408

th meeting
Wednesday, 30 August 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wood. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 3 August 2023 from the Panel of Experts on Mali established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2023/578)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-25619 (E)
*2325619*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9408

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor has for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Given the fact that we trust that we will be
able to make significant progress on the matter we are
here to discuss today, Mr. President, we would like to
ask for consultations before we return to the meeting.

30/08/2023

Council, but this is not a unanimous decision. There
are members who want to have consultations now. Are
you rejecting the request to hold consultations?
The President: We are indeed not objecting to
consultations, but we will have consultations after
the voting.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.

The President: We take note of Russia’s position.
Given the views of Council members and due to the fact
that the text is substantively the same as the one that
passed silence last week, we are proceeding with the
vote as scheduled.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are not asking for consultations after
the voting. We are asking for consultations before the
voting so that we can try to ensure that the voting in the
Council is unanimous. That is the first point.

The representative of China has asked for the floor.

Secondly — and perhaps this is rhetorical — why are
you using rulings, Mr. President, during this American
presidency, that are based on the opinion of some
Member States of the Council — in particular one
penholder — and correspondence between political
coordinators? I would like to remind you that, first of
all, there is not just one penholder. I would like to know
the opinion of the other penholder. Also, there are other
members who have asked to postpone the voting on this
draft resolution. And that was also ignored. How are we
to understand that?

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): We note
that, at the current stage, some Member States are still
making diplomatic efforts. We hope that we can give
those efforts a chance. The purpose of the Security
Council is to resolve problems; and the purpose of
adopting draft resolutions is to resolve them. We should
not impose voting, as that by no means contributes
to resolving problems. We hope that we can respect
the fact that some Member States are still making
diplomatic efforts.
The President: I also take note of China’s position.
But given what I just said about the views that Council
members have expressed and about the text being
substantively the same as the one that passed silence last
week, we are proceeding with the voting as scheduled.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Have I correctly understood, Mr. President,
that you are refusing the request of Member States to
conduct consultations?

The President: As I said, we are prepared to hold
consultations. But as is my prerogative as President,
and after listening to the various views that have
been communicated to my delegation, I am taking the
decision as President — in addition to the comments
that I just made, basically two times — to proceed to the
voting. We are happy to have consultations following
the voting, but we are proceeding to the voting.
The representative of Mozambique has asked for to
the floor.

The President: We are not refusing the request of
members. We have spoken with members, and members
are prepared to proceed with the voting.

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): We wish to commend
your dynamic leadership, Mr. President, of our
proceedings in the Security Council. In fact, we wish
to commend all the work you have done throughout the
month of August.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.

I speak on behalf of the three African members of
the Council (A3).

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to ask you, Mr. President: Whom
do you believe to be members of the Council, and whom
do you not? Two members of the Council have requested
consultations. You are referring to members of the

It is not our tradition to get involved in procedural
issues. But our position in the A3 has always been that,
whenever members of the Security Council wish for
more time in order to engage in consultations, as far as
possible that request should be granted. In the present

2/9

23-25619

30/08/2023

The situation in Mali

case, the A3 would strongly advise the presidency to
allow for some more time for the requested consultations.
We are prepared to take a position. We have a common
position in the A3. But we can accept allowing for more
time for an additional exchange of views on the matter.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not in fact ask for the floor. I actually
wanted to hear your response, Mr. President, to the
proposal by the representative of Mozambique.
The President: Again, as President, given the
discussions that I had with a number of delegations
and the remarks I made earlier about why we wanted to
proceed to the voting, it is still my intention to proceed
to the voting.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Now I am prepared to say a couple of things.
On behalf of our delegation, I would like a
procedural vote on conducting consultations. I would
ask that this matter be put to the vote.
The President: I shall now suspend the
meeting for a few minutes so that we can make the
necessary preparations.
The meeting was suspended at 3.15 p.m. and
resumed at 4 p.m.
The President: I now invite interested Council
members to move to the Consultations Room
for consultations.
The meeting was suspended at 4.05 p.m. and
resumed at 4.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 3 August 2023 from the Panel
of Experts on Mali established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017) addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/578)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

S/PV.9408

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2023/638 and S/2023/639, each of which
contains the text of a separate draft resolution.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/578, which contains the text of a
letter dated 3 August 2023 from the Panel of Experts
on Mali established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017)
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolutions before it. I shall now give the floor
to those members who wish to make statements before
the voting.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
would like to start by thanking all Council members
for their flexibility and engagement throughout the
negotiations on draft resolution S/2023/638 on the
renewal of the Security Council sanctions regime
concerning Mali. We also thank France for partnering
with us as co-penholders and for the extensive work
the country and its team have put into trying to find a
compromise text.
In the past weeks, we have engaged with Mali,
the wider region and Council members several times,
and in submitting the draft resolution, we kept front of
mind the united view of the Council. The Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is central to achieving
lasting peace in Mali.
The Security Council established the sanctions
regime in 2017 (resolution 2374 (2017)) to help respond
to challenges associated with the implementation of the
peace agreement. Indeed, the signatories to the peace
agreement invited the Security Council to fully support
the agreement, to follow its implementation closely
and to take any necessary measures against those who
hinder its implementation.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali informed the Council just two days
ago (see S/PV.9407), the implementation of the peace
agreement is facing difficulty, and the United Nations
continues to believe its implementation is essential. In
addition, we are conscious that the drawdown and the
withdrawal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
are ongoing. The first phase of MINUSMA’s drawdown
has occurred successfully. However, we need to bear
in mind that the second phase is still ongoing, and it
will be important to maintain as stable an environment

23-256193/9

S/PV.9408

The situation in Mali

as possible for the sake of achieving a safe and
orderly drawdown.
In putting the draft resolution forward, we have
paid careful attention to the views of Mali’s transitional
Government, in particular the request for the lifting
of the sanctions regime, as contained in the letter of
the Foreign Minister of Mali dated 15 August 2023
(S/2023/605, annex). We have also engaged with Mali
at all levels to hear its concerns. We think this draft
resolution acknowledges Mali’s request and emphasizes
the Council’s readiness to review at any time the
continuation of the sanctions measures contained in
resolution 2374 (2017).
Today’s draft resolution comes at a critical time for
supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
and supporting the peace and stability of Mali and the
broader region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting was preceded by lengthy
work on a draft resolution on the renewal of the
sanctions regime concerning Mali that would be
acceptable to members of the Security Council and
regional actors. However, we must note that draft
resolution S/2023/638 does not address those issues.
We are convinced that the Council’s adoption of the
draft resolution in its current form, given the fact that
Bamako submitted an official request for the lifting of
the sanctions regime (S/2023/605, annex), would just
undermine the sanctions regime and the Malian peace
process. It would merely further antagonize the parties.
We all remember that the Security Council imposed
a sanctions regime on Mali in response to an official
request of the Malian authorities, the main goal of
which was to help implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. There is no doubt that
attempts to thrust Security Council’s guardianship on
Mali without its consent are futile.
Using the Council’s authority of the Security
Council to push through approaches that Malians
find unacceptable may jeopardize further cooperation
between Bamako and the United Nations, which is
particularly worrisome given the current withdrawal
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We must not allow that
to happen.
Based on those considerations, the Russian
Federation cannot support the draft resolution. We urge
4/9

30/08/2023

our colleagues in the Council to demonstrate wisdom
and pragmatism by supporting our alternative draft
resolution, which takes into consideration the position
of African members on the Council that the sanctions
regime needs to be maintained in order to uphold
the peace agreement. However, it is fundamentally
important that Council sanctions serve only to address
this issue and not be used as a means of foreign influence
in Mali, which the Panel of Experts on Mali established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) has become.
We disagree that the Panel of Experts is the only
United Nations mechanism at the disposal of the
Security Council for supporting these efforts. It is clear
that for one of its parties, for a host of reasons, the Panel
is no longer needed. Moreover, the Council must work
in line with the parameters and resources available.
However, that should be done only with the consent of
the participants in the peace process.
In our alternative draft resolution (S/2023/639), we
propose to disband the Panel of Experts and to make
this the final extension of the sanctions regime.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2023/638,
submitted by France and the United Arab Emirates.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China
The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, 1 against and 1 abstention. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I
Mr. President, for giving me the floor.

thank

you,

The political and security situation in Mali
continues to be of great interest to the African members
of the Security Council (A3) and the wider international
23-25619

30/08/2023

The situation in Mali

community. In support of that engagement, we voted
in favour of the renewal of the mandate, extending the
measures against those who take actions to obstruct or
threaten the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The implementation
of that agreement remains critical for the long-term
peace and stability of Mali.
The A3 has given due consideration to the request
of the transition Government of Mali, but assesses
that, at this stage, the measures should continue. We
believe that the measures established in support of the
effective implementation of the peace agreement would
benefit Mali and the Malian people in their quest for
peace, security and prosperity. With the withdrawal
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and its potential negative
impact on the peace agreement, maintaining the
measures would help mitigate any adverse impacts on
the peace agreement.
We take this opportunity to thank the
co-penholders — France and the United Arab
Emirates — for their continued efforts during the
negotiations to garner consensus. We deeply regret that
a compromise was not found. We further regret that, due
to the use of the veto, draft resolution S/2023/368 could
not be adopted. Now, more than ever, we should support
and encourage an intensification of efforts behind the
implementation of the 2015 peace agreement.
The international mediation team, led by Algeria,
along with regional organizations, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the other
United Nations agencies should be ready to support
the mediation and the monitoring mechanisms
with the concerned parties. The momentum of the
implementation of the Algiers Accord should be
urgently increased. The peace, stability and territorial
integrity of Mali depends, to a large extent, on it.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom thanks France and the United Arab Emirates
for all their efforts on draft resolution S/2023/368.
Despite having to make a number of difficult
compromises, we voted in favour of it because of our
strong support for the renewal of the Mali sanctions
regime and Panel of Experts’ mandate. These are
important Security Council tools in support of peace
and stability in Mali.

S/PV.9408

For that reason, the United Kingdom deeply regrets
Russia’s reckless use of the veto, which will reduce the
Council’s oversight and engagement on Mali’s peace
process at a critical juncture.
Against the backdrop of the withdrawal of United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali from Mali, what we need now is renewed
commitment to maintain the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali in the face of violations of the
ceasefire in Timbuktu and Kidal regions.
The United Kingdom cannot support Russia’s
proposal to dissolve the Panel of Experts on Mali,
or its attempt to predetermine the termination of
sanctions measures. We pay tribute to the dedication
of the members of the Panel, whose rigorous work in
challenging circumstances we firmly support.
We remain deeply concerned about the worsening
political, humanitarian and security situation in Mali.
Despite the outcome of today’s vote, the United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting Mali’s
peace agreement and pursuing accountability for
human rights violations and abuses.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by thanking the co-penholders
for their facilitation and consensus-building efforts. We
also acknowledge the commitment of the members of
the Security Council.
Switzerland voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2023/638) because, like the vast majority of other
members, we believe that it represents an acceptable
compromise. Switzerland regrets that the use of the
veto by one member of the Security Council calls into
question the renewal of sanctions measures, which
are aimed at supporting Mali in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali, especially against the backdrop of growing
insecurity, which is leading to the displacement of the
population, and the withdrawal of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) under tense circumstances.
The purpose of adopting today’s draft resolution
was to maintain sanctions measures aimed at fostering
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. Upholding and implementing the
agreement by all parties is key to achieving longterm stability and security in Mali and the region.
That is also the conviction of Switzerland, which has

23-256195/9

S/PV.9408

The situation in Mali

been present in Mali for more than 40 years. We will
therefore continue to work with the Malian authorities
and all stakeholders to that end.
The progress that Mali has made, together with the
international community, must not be jeopardized. In
the interests of the protection of the civilian population
and peace and security in Mali, Switzerland will
constructively pursue its commitment to finding a
compromise text. It calls on all other members to do
likewise. In particular, we underscore that, when the
Council adapts sanctions measures, its decisions should
take into due account the information provided by the
Group of Experts established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2077), which assesses their implementation,
including the humanitarian, political and security
situation.
In view of the withdrawal of MINUSMA, we call
on the Malian authorities and all stakeholders to harness
their political capital to enable a peaceful transition and
work towards achieving stability in the region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia voted against the draft resolution
(S/2023/638) on extending the sanctions regime on Mali.
Unfortunately, despite the fact that we have repeatedly
called for a constructive approach and a reasonable
compromise, the text submitted completely fails to
take into account the concerns of the Malian side or the
position of the Russian Federation. Before the voting,
we reiterated in detail the reasons and considerations
underlying our decision to vote against it. And neither
did we hide those reasons during the negotiation
process. We worked in complete transparency, on
the basis of concrete proposals aimed at reaching an
acceptable compromise. Until the very last minute, we
had every opportunity to make it work.
However, it is regrettable that the position of the
Russian Federation was not taken into account, or was any
substantive step taken towards Mali’s official request.
Our vote against the draft resolution today hardly comes
as a surprise to anyone. We hope that, in the future, the
penholders on draft resolutions will prioritize basing
their efforts on pragmatism and the interests of the host
country in order to avoid unnecessary confrontations in
the Security Council, especially in a situation in which
a compromise agreement could have been reached if a
number of delegations had demonstrated the political
will necessary.
6/9

30/08/2023

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Albania would like to
thank France and the United Arab Emirates for their
leadership during the challenging negotiations on the
renewal of the sanction regime in Mali. We voted in
favour of the draft resolution (S/2023638), as we see
value in maintaining the targeted sanctions and the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017). While the current text does not address
many of our concerns, we made concessions in the
spirit of compromise.
Discussions within this Chamber earlier this
week (see S/PV.9407) highlighted the fragility of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the
ceasefire violations following hostile activities between
the Malian transitional Government and signatory
armed groups. As the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali departs, it
is imperative that the Security Council maintain its
focus on the situation and the implementation of the
agreement, which remains a crucial instrument for
securing long-term peace and security in Mali. The
sanctions regime and the Panel of Experts have a crucial
role to play in assisting Mali in implementing the peace
agreement. Therefore, we regret that one member used
its veto power today, preventing the Security Council
from achieving unity on this matter.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): The 2015 Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali is the only existing and viable
framework to achieve durable peace and reconciliation
in Mali. Now that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali must withdraw
from Mali, it is imperative to safeguard and promote
the implementation of the agreement. Furthermore,
any action that jeopardizes Mali’s security and
stability is a concern of the Security Council, as they
are inextricably linked to those of the Sahel and West
Africa. Such actions include transnational organized
crime, the obstruction of humanitarian assistance and
abuse and violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law. The Mali sanctions
regime plays a vital role in both regards. Therefore,
Japan deeply regrets that the Security Council failed
to adopt the draft resolution (S/2023/638), owing to the
veto cast by one Council member. I would like to recall
that the members of the Council have a solemn duty to
maintain international peace and security. Despite the
regrettable outcome, we need to keep working for the
sake of the peace and security of Africa, and Japan is
ready to do to do so with other Council members.
23-25619

30/08/2023

The situation in Mali

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China’s
position on the issue of Security Council sanctions has
been consistent and clear. China continues to believe
that sanctions are a means to an end, not an end in
and of themselves. Sanctions imposed by the Security
Council should not be indefinite but should be reviewed
periodically and adjusted or lifted in time, while taking
into account the situation of the countries concerned.
The Council established the sanctions measures in
2017 at the request of the Government of Mali. The
relevant measures played an important role, given the
circumstances at that time, in monitoring the ceasefire
and supporting the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In recent years, the
situation in Mali has continued to evolve. The Minister
for Foreign affairs of Mali, Mr. Diop, recently wrote to
the President of the Security Council, expressing the
view that the sanction measures were no longer needed
in view of the situation and the dissatisfaction with the
work of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017).
I would like to underscore that, on this occasion,
the Security Council had the chance to conduct
in-depth discussions and make reasonable adjustments
to the relevant sanctions measures. China also
actively interacted with the parties concerned and
suggested constructive proposals and called for giving
diplomatic consultation a chance and more time. It
is, however, regrettable that some members pushed a
draft resolution (S/2023/638) through the Council that
disregarded the wishes and efforts of other members to
continue mediation efforts on the process, which is an
outcome that neither contributes to the resolution of the
Malian issue nor helps the Council play a positive and
constructive role.
Lastly, I would like to reaffirm once again that
maintaining peace and stability in Mali, and in the region
as a whole, is in the shared interests of the international
community. The international community and the
United Nations should continue to provide assistance
and support, based on respect for the sovereignty and
leadership of Mali. China will continue to support Mali
in safeguarding its sovereignty, territorial integrity,
national security and stability and will continue to
make further contributions to the peaceful development
of Mali through bilateral and multilateral channels.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

S/PV.9408

The United States is disappointed by the outcome
of today’s voting. Once again, Russia has imposed its
will on the Security Council in the face of opposition
by countries from the region. The Council’s failure to
agree on the urgent and necessary renewal of Mali’s
sanctions regime due to Russia’s actions threatens peace
and security not just in Mali, but in the entire region.
We voted in favour of the text (S/2023/638) because
the Panel of Experts’ reporting is a central source of
information on the situation in Mali. The travel ban
and assets freeze remain necessary to stem the illicit
financial transfers and ill-gotten gains both from Mali
and into a region in which numerous malign actors
operate and, sadly, have proliferated. Too many people
continue to suffer from the ongoing violence and, due
to Russia’s actions, the Council has failed to renew
some of the most important international initiatives for
addressing the crisis.
The provisions of the draft resolution remain
critical to peace and security in Mali. The United
States is committed to working constructively with
its Security Council colleagues in the coming days to
achieve a mandate renewal that accurately reflects the
dire situation on the ground and the Council’s primary
role to maintain international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
next draft resolution before it.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
We find the Russian draft resolution for the sanctions
regime (S/2023/639) disingenuous and lamentable.
First, Russia’s draft resolution was introduced with
no opportunity for discussion or negotiation. Although
the text calls for maintaining the travel ban and assets
freezes, the draft resolution ends the Panel of Experts’
reporting mandate. One must also question why Russia
seeks to renew the sanctions for only six months and
then add a sunset clause. The situation in Mali requires
our sustained support. The text Russia put forward falls
lamentably short in that objective.
Following the withdrawal of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the Panel of Experts is the only United Nations
mechanism left to monitor and report on human rights

23-256197/9

S/PV.9408

The situation in Mali

abuses, as well as to facilitate efforts to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The
Panel’s elimination — as called for by Russia — would
render the regime ineffective and not useful for Mali.
Russia seeks to eliminate the Panel of Expert’s mandate
to stifle publication of uncomfortable truths about the
Wagner Group’s actions in Mali, which require attention.
Russia is putting its own interests above those
of the region. Russia’s repeated refusals to engage
in negotiations followed by its submission of an
alternative text at the eleventh hour are egregious
breaks in procedure that fail to respect the integrity and
transparency essential to Council deliberations.
It is for those reasons that the United States must
oppose the Russian-drafted draft resolution. We urge
others to do so as well for the sake of the Malian people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not intend to take the floor, but there is one
clarification that I must make following the statement
you made, Mr. President, in your national capacity.
As we have already said, we urge Security Council
colleagues to demonstrate wisdom and pragmatism by
supporting our alternative draft resolution (S/2023/639),
which takes into account the position of African States
and the African members of the Council that the
sanctions regime be maintained for a certain period of
time. The United States delegation said that it was a sixmonth period, but is in fact for approximately one year.
I want to make it clear for the members of the
Council: the sanctions regime would be maintained in
order to try to harness it to help implement the Algiers
accords. But it is of fundamental importance that the
sanctions be aimed specifically at resolving the issue,
and not turned into an instrument for placing external
pressures on Mali’s internal political problems.
The potential of the Panel of Experts has long been
exhausted, and it should therefore be closed. We closed
the Panel of Experts on Guinea-Bissau, for example,
and nothing dramatic happened after that.
We once again call on the members of the Council
to heed our words and vote in favour of our draft
resolution. I would also like to say once again to the
8/9

30/08/2023

representative United States, into the microphone this
time, that if our draft resolution is not adopted, then
there will be no opportunity for further discussions on
the matter.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2023/639,
submitted by the Russian Federation.
In favour:
Russian Federation
Against:
Japan
Abstaining:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 1
vote in favour, 1 against and 13 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): France deeply regrets Russia’s veto of the
draft resolution renewing the sanctions regime in Mali
(S/2023/638). Together with the United Arab Emirates,
France worked tirelessly in recent weeks to present
a balanced text at the end of a process of in-depth
consultations, while listening to the views of each of
the members of the Security Council. We welcome the
unanimous support expressed today by the African
members of the Council in particular.
While Russia regularly stresses the importance of
cooperation between States on an equal footing, we
regret that it submitted a draft text (S/2023/639) that
has not been discussed by the members of the Security
Council on such an essential subject and at such a critical
time for Mali, for the region and for the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Russia’s choice cannot fail to raise questions,
moreover, just a few days after the participation of
Wagner Group mercenaries in the fighting in Ber and
the air strikes in Anefis, which are jeopardizing the
ceasefire and the peace agreement. I would remind
members that the Panel of Experts’ mandate included
23-25619

30/08/2023

The situation in Mali

investigating human rights violations committed
throughout Mali by all those guilty of such crimes.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
emphasize that China voted to abstain in the voting on
the draft resolution submitted by the Russian Federation
(S/2023/639) only for technical reasons, because we
have not received instruction from our capital.
I must underscore that China certainly understands
and supports some of the content and elements contained
in the Russian draft resolution.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): Malta delivers this explanation
of vote in the light of the two draft resolutions presented
to the Security Council (S/2023/638 and S/2023/639).
Malta thanks France and United Arab Emirates for
their tireless efforts and extensive consultations on the
first text towards an outcome that continues to support
Mali’s security and stability. We believed that the draft
prepared by the co-penholders reflected that, hence
why we voted in favour of it. Our position also reflects
our steadfast support for retaining the sanctions regime
and the mandate of the Panel of Experts at a time when
it is needed the most.

23-25619

S/PV.9408

We deeply regret that the co-penholders’ text was
vetoed by the Russian Federation and that an alternative
text was put forward by the Russian Federation. We
abstained in the voting on the second draft resolution,
as it seeks to eliminate the same measures that would
have assisted Mali on its path towards genuine security
and stability. In the light of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali’s departure from the country, the sanctions
regime plays a critical role as the sole source of the
United Nations for monitoring the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. That approach also aligns with the Security
Council’s duty to uphold peace and security in Mali
by enforcing measures against any actor hindering the
agreement’s implementation.
As the situation in Mali remains deeply concerning,
we urge the Malian authorities and all parties to the
agreement to respect it. We condemn all violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as violence against women
and children. Given the outcome during this meeting,
we resolve to continue engaging in discussions to find
the way forward.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

9/9
