S/PV.8178

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8178th meeting

Thursday, 8 February 2018, 9.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Coleman

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2018/80)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-03588 (E)
*1803588*

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2018/80)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General,
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/80, which contains the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering that threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I would like to start by expressing my solidarity with
the people and Governments in areas where there have
been recent terror attacks. The list is long and includes
Afghanistan, Cameroon, Iraq, Nigeria, the Philippines
and Somalia. Our prayers are with the victims and
survivors of those heinous attacks. I also call on all
Member States to redouble their efforts to strengthen
international cooperation in order to address terrorism
and violent extremism conducive to terrorism and to
bring those responsible for terrorist acts to justice.
Thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering that threat (S/2018/80). The report was
prepared with the input of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical
2/22

08/02/2018

Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and in
close collaboration with the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and other United Nations entities
and international organizations.
The fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) is entering a new phase. The SecretaryGeneral’s sixth report shows that despite the significant
military setbacks that ISIL experienced in Iraq, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the southern Philippines
last year, the group and its affiliates continue to pose
a significant and evolving threat around the world.
The report states that ISIL is no longer focused on
conquering and holding territory. It has been forced
to adapt and focus primarily on smaller and more
motivated groups of individuals who remain committed
to inspiring, enabling and carrying out attacks. It is
now organized as a global network with a flat hierarchy
and less operational control over its affiliates.
Although it is difficult to assess with confidence
the number of foreign terrorist fighters who remain
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, the flow of
fighters to both countries has nearly come to a halt.
However, returning foreign terrorist fighters, and those
who relocate to other regions, continue to present a
considerable threat to international security. The report
indicates that the structure of ISIL’s global propaganda
machinery, and the quantity and quality of its output,
continue to deteriorate. However, ISIL members
and sympathizers are still able to use social media,
including encryption technology and communication
tools within the dark web, to communicate, coordinate
and facilitate attacks.
ISIL’s ability to generate revenue has been
considerably weakened, largely owing to its loss
of control over oil and gas fields in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Its revenues have fallen by more than
90 per cent since 2015. However, it is still able to
generate income through extortion and the control of
checkpoints. One of our key concerns is how to enable
much-needed reconstruction and stabilization funds to
flow into areas liberated from ISIL while preventing
them from ending up in ISIL’s hands. ISIL continues
to fund its affiliates, who are increasingly looking for
ways to diversify their income and become financially
independent. Money services, including exchange
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

houses and money couriers, continue to be a preferred
method for ISIL and its supporters to move funds
across borders. With regard to ISIL’s evolving threat
outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, its affiliates
in Egypt have shown considerable resilience and pose
a growing threat. ISIL remains determined to rebuild
its capabilities in Libya, and continues to carry out
sporadic attacks.
In West Africa, ISIL-related groups continue to
operate in Mali and its neighbours. In East Africa, ISIL
affiliates operating in Puntland and southern Somalia
complicate the threat posed by Al-Qaida’s affiliate
Al-Shabaab. Despite having been further degraded
by Afghan and international military operations, ISIL
continues to mount aggressive attacks in Afghanistan,
especially in Kabul. ISIL affiliates have suffered
significant setbacks in South-East Asia, notably the
loss of the city of Marawi in the southern Philippines.
The rapidly evolving and transnational threat
posed by ISIL presents a difficult challenge for
Member States and the international community and
underlines the vital importance of sharing information
on the identity of returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters. The ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions
list remains one of the key global instruments in
that regard. I welcome the Council’s efforts in recent
months to adopt several resolutions to help counter
terrorist narratives, prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons, address the issue of accountability for crimes
committed by ISIL in Iraq, disrupt human trafficking
carried out by terrorist groups and address the issue of
foreign terrorist fighters through measures on border
security, information-sharing and criminal justice.
The focus should now be on implementing those new
global norms.
Member States, the United Nations and
international, regional and subregional organizations
continue to strengthen the existing tools while also
developing new ones to address the evolving threat
posed by ISIL. Innovative partnerships between
Government agencies and private-sector actors have
strengthened the sharing of sensitive information on
terrorism financing patterns and suspect individuals.
Many Member States are paying increasing attention
to prosecution strategies and rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes.
The
United
Nations
capacity-building
implementation plan for countering the flow of

S/PV. 8178

foreign terrorist fighters continues to evolve to
address the full life cycle of fighters — 35 of the 50
projects in the plan have either been completed or
are being implemented. However, this is no time for
complacency. We need to stay one step ahead of ISIL
as it continues to adapt and evolve. I would like to make
four concluding observations.
First, we already have a strong international
framework for countering the threat from ISIL
through the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, various General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, 19 international counter-terrorism
conventions and many regional instruments. The
international effort to combat ISIL would be greatly
enhanced by effective implementation of those existing
resolutions and legal counter-terrorism instruments,
conventions and protocols. The United Nations stands
ready to provide assistance to Member States in that
regard when needed.
Secondly, the international community should
address the deficit in counter-terrorism cooperation
at the global, regional and national levels. In June,
the Secretary-General will convene the first-ever
United Nations summit of heads of counter-terrorism
agencies of Member States, with the aim of enhancing
cooperation and the timely and secure exchange of
information, and developing new, innovative ways to
tackle terrorism.
Thirdly, addressing the threat posed by ISIL requires
addressing the underlying conditions that cause young
men and women to be lured by violent extremism. Most
new recruits to terrorist organizations are between 17
and 27 years old. Extremist groups exploit feelings of
disillusionment and alienation, offering a twisted sense
of purpose to disaffected young people. The summit
will therefore also discuss how to engage and empower
young people to help prevent violent extremism.
Fourthly, this is the first report of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by ISIL since the
establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Last week, the Secretary-General approved the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact, which will help deliver one of the key
priorities, that is, strengthening the coordination
and coherence of the counter-terrorism efforts of the
United Nations system. We are committed to stepping
up our capacity-building support to all Member States
to enhance the implementation of the United Nations

18-035883/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Security Council resolutions.

relevant

present a grave threat that the spread of terror will be
expanded to communities around the world.

The fight against ISIL and its affiliates is far
from over. While there have been significant military
successes over the past eight months, this remains a
genuine global challenge that demands an urgent
and concerted multilateral response. The SecretaryGeneral welcomes the focus that the Security Council
has put on the matter, and urges it to continue its efforts
to further enhance multilateral cooperation to address
the threats and challenges set out in the report.

We see those despicable attacks happening already.
Just a few weeks ago, ISIS claimed responsibility
for a cowardly attack in Afghanistan against Save
the Children, a humanitarian non-governmental
organization that helps more than 700,000 Afghan
children. Last fall in Egypt, ISIS claimed responsibility
for a despicable attack against a mosque that reportedly
killed more than 300 people, in the middle of prayers.

The President (spoke in
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.

and

08/02/2018

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his briefing,
especially because it is his first briefing on this threat
since the Office of Counter-Terrorism was established
last year. The United States looks forward to its
continued cooperation with him and his team to help
Member States fight terrorism.
The maps of the territory occupied by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in Iraq and Syria
tell a powerful story. In 2013 and 2014 ISIS was on
the march. It had seized large portions of Syria and
Iraq for its self-proclaimed caliphate of terror. Some of
the region’s largest cities, such as Mosul, had fallen to
ISIS. Those terrorists committed unspeakable human
rights abuses against the people of Iraq and Syria in the
areas ISIS controlled, while they used their safe haven
to plan attacks around the world.
Today, in 2018, the maps tell a different story. The
territory ISIS controls has collapsed. Iraq has been
liberated from ISIS. The United States led a decisive
coalition of Member States that helped to significantly
weaken ISIS, together with partners across Syria and
Iraq. Our resolve for an enduring defeat of ISIS will
not falter. We will continue the fight until the maps no
longer show ISIS territory at all.
But even then our work will not be done. That is
because ISIS is adapting its tactics. ISIS is losing its
so-called State, but its remaining fighters will try to
undermine stabilization and reconstruction in Iraq and
Syria. ISIS foreign terrorist fighters will also try to
return to their homes and take their fight to new fronts.
Together with Al-Qaida, ISIS cells and affiliates
4/22

Even as we roll back ISIS on its core territory, the
need for all of us to be vigilant and to work together
to defeat this evil is obvious. As the fight against
ISIS enters a new phase, much of the work will fall
to our dedicated law enforcement and intelligence
professionals, who will need to pool their resources
and information to stop attacks from happening in the
first place. There is no time to waste in looking for
ways to deepen our cooperation on that front. We have
introduced vital tools here at United Nations that can
help such efforts.
First of all, Member States must step up their efforts
to crack down on the sources of financing for ISIS and
Al-Qaida. In the coming months, we fully expect that
ISIS will try to infiltrate legitimate businesses in Iraq
and Syria to look for new ways to raise money. All
Member States have an obligation to freeze the assets
of all terrorists on the list of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
including those of ISIS and Al-Qaida. Member States
must take that obligation seriously and implement their
obligations comprehensively. The United States will
exercise maximum vigilance to locate and disrupt the
funding networks for ISIS and Al-Qaida.
We must all enhance our efforts to disrupt the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters across borders. They
constantly look for ways to break our defences and evade
capture. That is why resolution 2396 (2017), which we
adopted in December, is so important. It includes crucial
measures aimed at strengthening border security and
information-sharing, as well as provisions to improve
judicial and law enforcement cooperation. Resolution
2396 (2017) sets high standards for how States should
improve their border-control tools. It also strongly
encourages Governments to develop prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, alongside
civil society, to help break the cycle of terrorism. The
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

United States urges all Member States to implement
their obligations under this resolution as soon as
possible, and United Nations counter-terrorism bodies
to be prepared to assist Member States in that task.
There should be no doubt about the need to use all
the tools we have established under the Security Council
to fight ISIS. To that list we should also add resolution
2379 (2017), which established an investigative
mechanism to document crimes committed by ISIS in
Iraq. Accountability for atrocities committed by ISIS
is a crucial part of recovering from the group’s reign
of terror. The final deadline for agreeing to the terms
of reference for the ISIS investigative mechanism is
coming up tomorrow. We hope that Iraq and the United
Nations can reach agreement so that the resolution can
be fully and rapidly implemented.
The United States is proud of our steadfast effort
to stand up to ISIS and rally a global response to defeat
the threat. It is true that the threat posed by ISIS is
adapting in new and dangerous ways. When we look
back at what our campaign has achieved so far, we
should use that success to strengthen our resolve for
this new chapter. When we all looked at those maps
of ISIS expanding in 2014, it was hard to imagine that
three years later we would see such a dramatic change
for the better. Through the strength of our collective
will, we have turned the tide. We will do the same in
the years to come until ISIS is defeated for good and
consigned to the dustbin of history, where it belongs.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first warmly thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov, who is leading our counter-terrorism efforts,
for his very illuminating briefing on the sixth report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by Da’esh
(S/2018/80).
As the report underscores, Da’esh has suffered
major military defeats in the Levant over the past
six months, owing in particular to the efforts of the
international coalition. Although the group has lost its
territorial anchorage, the fight against Da’esh in Syria
and in Iraq is not over. We must therefore continue our
efforts, including on the military front, to prevent the
emergence of safe havens, especially in Libya, West
Africa. Afghanistan and South-East Asia. But above
and beyond our necessary military efforts, I would
like to underscore four areas for action that France
considers to be priorities, which broadly meet those
outlined by Mr. Voronkov.

S/PV. 8178

First, changes in the flows of foreign terrorist
fighters should prompt us to constantly adapt our
legislation and plans. Beyond the need to continue
to prevent radicalization and block departures, we
must anticipate the risks posed by potential returnees
and by fighters who decide to travel to a third State.
That requires that we improve our detection tools
and strengthen information-sharing, especially with
INTERPOL. We must also design appropriate legal
responses. It is an exceedingly complex undertaking,
given the diversity of the people involved, and, in the
case of France, the large number of women and children.
With regard to the last point, France attaches
great importance to specific care for children. The
adoption of resolution 2396 (2017) in December is
an important milestone in that regard, as it requests
that Member States redouble their efforts and adopt
additional measures to address the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Secondly, combating the financing of terrorism
must remain an absolute priority. As we have
sadly witnessed, little money is required to kill
indiscriminately in the streets of Paris, New York,
Bamako, Kabul or Baghdad. But it takes significant
resources to lead a terrorist organization, establish its
networks, disseminate its hate narratives and maintain
its fighters, while also purchasing their weapons and
sometimes even their allegiance.
Significant work has been carried out over the
past 20 years to dry up terrorists’ resources, in the
United Nations and other entities, such as the Financial
Action Task Force. But terrorist groups have proved
their resiliency and resourcefulness in raising and
transferring their respective financial resources and,
as we are aware, have used a wide range of options,
including common and online crime, organized fraud,
kidnapping, extortion and trafficking in arms and
narcotics, to list just a few.
Although we have secured results by freezing
terrorists’ assets, controlling official and unofficial
financial flows and maintaining the integrity of the
financial system, all the techniques for transferring
money are vulnerable. Our work in that regard
must not falter, and that has led the President of the
French Republic, Emmanuel Macron, to convene an
international conference on the financing of terrorism,
to be held on 26 April in Paris, to facilitate the needed

18-035885/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

sharing of expertise and to call for renewed political
commitment in the area.
Concerning our third priority, we must continue
to counter the spread of this barbaric ideology, in
particular on the Internet. While confronting terrorists
who use digitization to their advantage, we must also
adapt our means of reacting, in full respect for human
rights and basic freedoms. Combating Da’esh on the
Internet is a new frontier in our struggle. The Internet
must not become the last refuge for Da’esh following
the fall of its strongholds on the ground.
At President Macron’s initiative, France is at
the forefront of the struggle, seeking to lead a frank
discussion with the major Internet companies on ways
to counter Da’esh’s deadly propaganda. At the United
Nations, in September 2017, we co-hosted a high-level
event on the sidelines of the General Assembly, together
with Italy and the United Kingdom, as well as with
companies from the private sector. In the framework
of the Group of Seven, the Interior Ministers adopted a
strongly worded joint communiqué in Ischia in October
2017, which recalls the need to fight with resolve the
use of the Internet for terrorist ends. In the framework
of the European Union, France is actively supporting
the work initiated by the European Commission in the
framework of the European Union Internet Forum,
which is leading a dialogue with the major digital
technology companies.
As evidenced by the establishment of the Global
Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism in the summer of
2017, the private sector has grasped the stakes involved,
but we must do more and better. Beyond the needed
commitment of Government stakeholders and Internet
companies, the effectiveness of our action also depends
on the mobilization of civil society in terms of counternarratives so as to expose the contradictions of terrorist
groups. Civil society efforts must be encouraged and
supported. France is committed to continuing its work
to combat the use of the Internet for terrorist ends,
which is a major pillar in combating Da’esh.
Lastly, and our fourth priority, there cannot be an
effective and sustainable fight against Da’esh without
a fight against impunity for the crimes that it has
committed. Too many civilians, including women and
children, have been victims of crimes that, in addition
to constituting acts of terrorism, may well constitute
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Justice must
be part of the response to that scourge. That is why
6/22

08/02/2018

France supported the establishment of the Independent
International Mechanism of Inquiry on crimes
committed in Syria, which also applies to crimes
committed by Da’esh, and the Security Council’s
establishment of the international Investigative Team
for crimes committed by Da’esh in Iraq. France
promotes investigative efforts and prosecutions
conducted in accordance with the rule of law and
human rights, and recalls, in that regard, its steadfast
opposition to the death penalty wherever and no matter
the circumstances.
In conclusion, I will emphasize the unique role
that the United Nations must continue to play in
the multifront struggle that we are waging against
terrorism, in particular against Da’esh. With the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations now
has all the tools it requires to analyse threats, assess
the implementation of Security Council resolutions,
identify the priority needs of States and provide them
with appropriate technical assistance. France reiterates
its full support for United Nations entities in their work
and will fully engage in the sixth United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy review next June to ensure
that our collective response remain commensurate to
the threat.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov for his briefing and
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/80).
Since 2014, Da’esh has lost 98 per cent of its
territory, and the global coalition has liberated more
than 7.7 million people from its rule in Iraq and Syria.
The United Kingdom is proud of the role that it has
played in conducting more than 1,600 air strikes in Iraq
and Syria, training more than 60,000 members of the
Iraqi security forces and supporting counter-Da’esh
operations, with approximately 1,400 United Kingdom
personnel in the region. In addition to winning the
war, we are working to win the peace by supporting
stabilization and the humanitarian response. The
United Kingdom has committed $3.4 billion to the
Syrian crisis since 2012. In Iraq, we have committed
$320 million in humanitarian aid, $418 million in
loan guarantees through the World Bank to support
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8178

fiscal stability and economic development, and nearly
$35 million to support stabilization.

to the particular challenges posed by women and
children returnees.

However, we cannot afford to be complacent. As
the Secretary-General’s report highlights, Da’esh has
been weakened and fragmented, but around the world
we continue to face a grave threat from individuals
and cells affiliated with, or inspired by, Da’esh. The
continued threat of terrorism is unfortunately something
that we have felt personally in the United Kingdom. As
we think of the victims of terrorism around the world,
we must redouble our efforts to defeat Da’esh for good.

Thirdly, the United Kingdom remains committed
to enhancing aviation security to counter terrorism,
building on the Council’s resolution 2309 (2016).
To do that, the United Kingdom is investing in the
development of new technology as well as working
with partners around the world. We also welcome the
agreement last October on the Global Aviation Security
Plan of the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), and we call on ICAO and all States to ensure
that the plan is fully implemented.

First, we must continue and step up our efforts to
tackle terrorist misuse of the Internet. We are already
making strides in that fight online. The event last
September led by Prime Minister Theresa May, together
with President Macron and Prime Minister Gentiloni
Silveri, was a landmark achievement in bringing States
and industry together to tackle the threat. The output of
Da’esh propaganda has fallen by more than half since
its peak, and sympathizer accounts are being taken
down faster than ever before. The United Kingdom’s
first-of-its-kind terrorist-content referral unit has
worked with technology companies to take down over
300,000 posts.
But we need to do much more to ensure that we
have the tools and technology to remain ahead of the
terrorists. Building on the establishment of the Global
Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, we are seeking to
encourage technology companies to take the initiative
in tackling terrorist content uploaded to the Internet.
We need to ensure that terrorist content is taken down
rapidly and limited in its circulation, and to prevent it
from being made available in the first place. Larger
companies need to support and spread best practices to
smaller companies.
Secondly, we must strengthen our collective ability
to counter the threat of returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters, which was rightly highlighted by the
Secretary-General’s report and is a focus of resolution
2396 (2017). We are encouraged that more than 60
countries are now working to build on INTERPOL’s
global database currently tracking 43,000 fighters,
but there is more that States around the globe must
do to strengthen border security, including work on
advanced passenger information, passenger name
records and biometrics. We must also do more work
on developing effective prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies, while paying special attention

Finally, I want to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
support for the Secretary-General’s reform of the United
Nations counter-terrorism architecture and for the
Office of Count-Terrorism (OCT) under the leadership
of Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. We welcome
the initial steps taken to enhance coherence within the
United Nations system, especially the commitment to
work closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and Executive Director Coninsx.
We look forward to OCT developing greater ability to
support States, in particular in areas where the United
Nations can add unique value, such as in the prevention
of violent extremism.
As the report outlines, the threat of terrorism is
pervasive and evolving. But in the same way the global
coalition brought so many of us together against a
common enemy in Da’esh, we must remain united to
meet these new threats. This is a global threat and it
will require global action.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of today’s meeting and thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Head of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, for his comprehensive
briefing. We wish to express our support for him and our
willingness to work with him in a coordinated manner.
Our experience in the fight against terrorism leads
us to highlight the need to unflaggingly confront it in
all the many and changing areas in which it operates.
We therefore welcome the fact that the Organization is
being proactive in its response to terrorism. Its efforts
includes the recent establishment of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the renewal of the mandate of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, as well
as the sixth biennial review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the summit of heads of counterterrorism agencies convened by the Secretary-General.

18-035887/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Peru therefore welcomes the significant progress
noted in the most recent report on the implementation
of resolution 2368 (2017) on combating the socalled Islamic State and its affiliated organizations
(S/2018/80). With the support of the Organization and
the Security Council, the international community has
succeeded in liberating the greater part of the territory
that they had come to control.
However, the threat remains latent, as Da’esh
changes its tactics or makes them more sophisticated
so as to further undermine international peace and
security. It is necessary to act intelligently and
strengthen international cooperation in order to
prevent and respond effectively to its new forms and
manifestations. I shall discuss to three specific points.
First is the challenge posed by the return of foreign
terrorist fighters to their countries of origin and/
or their relocation to third countries. We consider it
urgent to identify those terrorists. We are relying on
the Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions list for that, but
we need to make greater use of biometric information
through INTERPOL and such instruments as advance
passenger information systems and Passenger Name
Record data gathered by the International Civil
Aviation Organization.
Comprehensive strategies must also be devised
to investigate, prosecute and punish such terrorists,
with full respect for the rule of law and human rights.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts to operationalize the Investigative Team for the
crimes committed by Da’esh in Iraq. Accordingly, we
underscore the need to incorporate a gender perspective
to support women victims and promote the integration
of young people so as to draw them away from the path
of violent extremism.
Secondly, as the relationship between terrorism,
transnational organized crime and the misuse of
cyberspace becomes increasingly tangible, the
networks established by Da’esh to finance its activities
reflect a worrying reality. It is essential to deepen our
knowledge and cooperation with respect to a dynamic
that includes networks of illicit trafficking in people,
arms, natural resources, drugs and cultural property,
as well as various money-laundering schemes. The
use of information and communication technologies,
in particular the Internet, by terrorist groups is
also a matter of concern. As it loses physical space,
Da’esh has maintained its presence in virtual space,
8/22

08/02/2018

particularly in social networks. That allows them not
only to coordinate attacks but also to raise funds and
attract supporters.
Thirdly, the need to address the root causes of
violent extremism leading to terrorism is undoubtedly
an issue that exceeds the remit of the Security Council.
However, we believe it is important to recall, in line
with the concept of sustainable peace, that peace and
security, development and human rights are mutually
reinforcing and vital for the implementation of an
effective and integrated approach to counter-terrorism.
The Secretary-General has reminded us in an important
speech in London that in the face of obscurantism
we must build a new age of enlightenment. In that
connection, we welcome initiatives to combat terrorist
narratives and promote peaceful and inclusive societies
capable of preventing violent extremism. We believe,
based on our own experience in the fight against
terrorism, that greater participation by women and
young people in public life is key to confronting and
preventing this scourge.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks the SecretaryGeneral and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
their leadership. We would also like to thank their staff,
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Monitoring Team for their
work in composing the most recent report on the threat
posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
(S/2018/80).
As was pointed out by other Council members
before me, the report indicates that the threat posed by
ISIS and its affiliates remains real. The women, men
and children around the world who have fallen victim
to atrocious acts by ISIS are a sad reminder of that. I
would like to focus on three important elements: the
threat, accountability, and additional action.
First, the threat. Although Raqqa has been liberated
and ISIS has lost territories in Iraq and Syria, the myth
of ISIS has not been unraveled. Less territory does
not necessarily mean more security, and in countries
such as Yemen, Egypt and Mali, the threat posed by
ISIS remains high, as pointed out in the report. And in
Afghanistan, ISIS affiliates continue to commit attacks.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about
the increasing number of foreign terrorist fighters, and
their families, returning from Syria and Iraq and those
relocating to other conflict zones. As Mr. Voronkov
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

has just mentioned, through adaptation to a global
network of motivated individuals, ISIS remains threat
to all of us. That is why we must increase our efforts to
prosecute and detain foreign terrorist fighters.
However, we can stop terrorists only if we spot
terrorists. In December, the Council adopted resolution
2396 (2017), on returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters. One of the key elements of the
resolution is the obligation to collect passenger name
records to enhance the detection of foreign terrorist
fighters. We encourage Member States to make a top
priority of developing the capability for that approach,
and we encourage the United Nations to provide
assistance where needed.
Enhancing detection of terrorists enhances
prosecution of terrorists, which brings me to my
second point, that is, accountability. For those men
and women who commit terrorist acts, our message is
clear: accountability is neither optional nor negotiable,
and all victims deserve justice. To that end, we support
the ongoing work and objectives of the International,
Impartial, and Independent Mechanism for Syria, as
established by the General Assembly.
With regard to Iraq, resolution 2379 (2017) requests
the formation of an investigative team to support
domestic efforts to hold ISIS fighters accountable for
their actions. We call for the swift establishment of the
terms of reference of that team, and we underline that
domestic efforts should be pursued in accordance with
international law and United Nations best practices. We
continue to call on both countries to become party to
the Rome Statute or accept the exercise of jurisdiction
by the International Criminal Court.
Let me turn to my third and final point: additional
action by the United Nations and its Member States.
It is essential that countries lacking the necessary
capacities to implement resolutions receive technical
assistance. Their security is our security. CTED plays
a crucial role in the assessment and analysis of such
needs. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
role that Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and his
Office play in the subsequent coordination of capacitybuilding.
Prevention is key in the work of all United Nations
entities involved. Member States should be provided the
tools to create an environment that balances repressive
and preventive counter-terrorism measures. To make
our fight against terrorism and violent extremism

S/PV. 8178

sustainable, we must better understand root causes and
involve local communities in addressing them.
In conclusion, we welcome the progress made in the
fight against ISIS and compliment the United Nations
on its valuable contribution to that end. However, we
have a long road ahead of us in order to further diminish
the threat and achieve full accountability.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
to do its share, including as an active member of the
Global Coalition and as a strong supporter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to express
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
his briefing on the sixth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2018/80). We
found the report very comprehensive and informative.
We also thank the Secretary-General for making
counter-terrorism one of his highest priorities. This
is indeed very appropriate, and we wish to urge the
Secretary-General never to relent and continue to
prioritize counter-terrorism, more so now than ever
because the temptation might be too great to lessen the
focus on efforts to address the challenge.
The analysis of the threat contained in the report
indicates that military pressure has resulted in strategic
setbacks for ISIL in the main battleground. As a result,
ISIL has lost its focus on conquering and holding
territory, and its global propaganda machinery continues
to deteriorate. Its revenues have fallen considerably
since 2015, and new recruitment and travel of foreign
terrorist fighters have now diminished. All this is very
much welcomed, and the matter has been underlined
by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. We believe,
nonetheless, that it is only wise not to go overboard
and declare victory over terrorism. Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov is right in saying that complacency
should be avoided.
In this regard, what should be of serious concern is
the fact that ISIL and affiliated groups continue to inspire
a range of attacks outside the conflict zone. Foreign
terrorist fighters, ISIL members and sympathizers are
still able to use social media, including encryption
technology and communication tools within the Dark
Web, to communicate and coordinate and facilitate
attacks. Of particular concern is the willingness of

18-035889/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

some members of the ISIL and Al-Qaida networks to
support each other.
Returnees and fighters relocated from conflict
zones to other regions now present a considerable
threat to international security. All of this shows that
although notable progress has been made in defeating
ISIL on the battlefield, significant challenges remain to
counter the threats that persist, all of which require the
proper implementation of United Nations resolutions
and, more importantly, collaboration and cooperation
at all levels among States and non-State entities.
We note from the report the ever-growing
threat posed by ISIL, foreign terrorist fighters and
sympathizers in the Middle East, Africa, Europe,
Central and South Asia and South-East Asia. In
that context, the response by States Members of the
United Nations and other stakeholders in the areas of
countering the financing of terrorism; law enforcement
and judicial cooperation; the protection of refugees
and asylum-seekers; prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration; managing the spread of violent extremism
in prisons; and countering terrorist narratives are all
very important.
Africa remains highly affected by terrorism and
violent extremism. In fact, according to the African
Union, 2017 witnessed devastating terrorist attacks
in different parts of Africa. We are seeing what is
happening in North and West Africa, the Sahel region
and East Africa, where ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates
and sympathizers continue to pose serious threats to
peace and security.
With regard to East Africa, Al-Qaida-affiliated
Al-Shabaab remains an important threat to peace and
security in Somalia, in the Horn. But we are also seeing
the emergence of ISIL affiliates operating in Somalia
that are controlled and directed from the central
command in Puntland, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General. ISIL continues to recruit through
facilitators based in Libya, Europe and Somalia. There
are also interesting reports by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development that reinforce these findings
and provide useful insights.
Although ISIL in Libya is said to have been
weakened after losing a significant portion of the
territory it controlled, its threat persists in the country
and the wider region. More concerning is the fact that
other ISIL affiliates in Africa are reported to have sent
fighters to Libya to support and gain cooperation from
10/22

08/02/2018

ISIL cells located in the country, as well as the potential
movement of Boko Haram members to other States of
the region across Libya’s western and south-eastern
borders, all of which require that greater attention be
paid to the situation in Libya.
In West Africa, Boko Haram and ISIL are active,
and the threat posed by ISIL-related groups and
Al-Qaida affiliates continues to spread into the States
of the region. Restoring peace and stability in Libya,
Mali and the Lake Chad basin is indeed critical to
deny ISIL and other terrorist groups safe haven. That
is why enhancing the capacities of the countries of
the region, the Group of Five for the Sahel and Lake
Chad, continue to be very important in countering ISIL
and its affiliates operating in the wider region. That is
also why it is so critical that we get the management
of security in Somalia right as we embark on the
transition from the African Union Mission in Somalia
to the Somalia security forces.
The enormous challenge we face in the fight
against terrorism should compel us to forge meaningful
cooperation at all levels. The full implementation of
existing international legal frameworks against ISIL
and foreign terrorist fighters by all Member States
is vital to strengthening international cooperation.
However, developing countries will continue to face
huge difficulties in properly implementing those
legal frameworks because of limitations in various
areas related to capacity. Any shortcomings that
might be observed are not, by and large, the result
of a lack of commitment, but are due to a lack of the
resources required and of technical and other related
capacities — too many to list here.
Therefore, in addition to forging the necessary
bilateral, regional and international cooperation, the
delivery of capacity-building and technical assistance
will be critical for the effective implementation of
those legal frameworks. We also agree on the need for
enhanced coordination between the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate as well as among all
relevant Security Council- and General Assemblymandated bodies in their efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threats posed by terrorism and
violent extremism.
But, and this is what I wish to underline before
I conclude, it is our view that there is still a lack of
the necessary level of cooperation and coordination,
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

commensurate with the magnitude of the challenge we
face in this area, among States that are in a position to
make a huge difference in this fight, which we continue
to believe should continue to be regarded as of the
highest priority for us all.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov for his informative
briefing. The fact that we now have a dedicated UnderSecretary-General for Counter-Terrorism to brief us
on such matters and to help us to move forward on
the all-of-UN approach to counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism is very welcome.
In addition to the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
as well as the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, are
key partners in that work.
As we heard from Mr. Voronkov this morning, the
list of countries recently struck by terrorist attacks is
long. Despite the strategic setbacks in Syria and Iraq,
thanks to the resolve of the global coalition, to which
we proudly belong, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) remains a serious threat to international
peace and security. The ongoing transformation of the
group from having territorial ambitions to a networked
global organization, with less control over its affiliates,
is a clear trend. That will present new challenges
to combating its activities. At the same time, the
organization remains locally embedded in a number of
protracted conflicts, for example, in Afghanistan and
Libya, as we have heard this morning.
Adapting to the changing nature of the threat from
ISIL will be essential if we are to respond successfully.
The Security Council has been proactive in that
regard by adopting last year a significant number
of resolutions with a bearing on counter-terrorism,
including resolution 2396 (2017), on foreign terrorist
fighters. However, as Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov stressed, in order to have the desired effect,
such resolutions must be fully implemented. In that
regard, we welcome the support being provided by
the United Nations to Member States, particularly in
relation to capacity-building.
The fight against terrorism is integral to the Security
Council delivering on its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. The link between
terrorism and conflict is clear. Of the 22 countries

S/PV. 8178

most impacted by terrorism in 2016, all were defined
as being in conflict. In addition, it is worth recalling
that since the year 2000, 99 per cent of deaths resulting
from terrorism have taken place in countries either
in conflict or with a high level of political instability.
Efforts to combat terrorism cannot therefore be viewed
in isolation but must be seen within the broader context.
Fully implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the sustaining peace agenda should
be seen as a core part of our efforts.
Preventing violent extremism remains critically
important and must be viewed as a long-term endeavour.
For instance, as underlined in the report (S/2017/1125),
it is essential to manage the spread of violent extremism
in prisons. Sweden has worked on that issue both at
home and abroad, including in Somalia, where staff
from the Swedish Prison and Probation Services have
been seconded to support the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the Somali prison authorities
in reintegrating convicted Al-Shabaab prisoners and
in reducing the likelihood of them returning to violent
extremism after release.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
ongoing and unwavering commitment to the important
prevention of violent extremism agenda, in line
with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism. It is essential that
relevant agencies and organs, including the Security
Council, pay increased attention to the need to prevent
violent extremism.
There are three more concrete issues that I
would like to address regarding our response to the
terrorist threat.
First, on accountability, we must hold perpetrators,
organizers and sponsors of terrorism to account. In
doing so, it is of course important that the prosecution
of suspected terrorists be carried out with full respect
for human rights and the rule of law. We look forward
to an agreement as soon as possible on the terms of
reference for the investigative team for Da’esh crimes
in Iraq, consistent with the United Nations procedures
for sharing evidence. The prosecution of terrorismrelated offences and war crimes in Swedish courts
is increasing. We were among the first countries to
prosecute suspected perpetrators of war crimes in
Iraq and Syria, based on the principle of universal
jurisdiction. Last year, an individual was also sentenced

18-0358811/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to prison for using social media to provoke members of
the public to commit a terrorist offence.
That incident underlines how the use of information
and communications technology and social media by
terrorists is a great concern. We can, and must, deal
with that phenomenon very seriously but without
impinging on respect for human rights or on the rule
of law. That is the challenge before us: protecting our
citizens while simultaneously safeguarding global
connectivity and the open, free and secure flow of
information. The same rights that people have offline
must also be protected online, including the freedom
of expression.
Secondly, special attention is needed with regard
to the gender dimension in counter-terrorism. Women
play multiple roles in relation to terrorism, including
those of perpetrator, supporter, facilitator, victim
and preventer. In a recent study of 15 countries, the
Women’s Alliance for Security Leadership concluded
that women’s rights groups were often the first to
warn about the signs of increasing violent extremism.
We welcome the attention paid to that issue in the
Secretary-General’s report.
We also note with satisfaction that, in the wake of
resolution 2395 (2017), we are already seeing the issue
of children and the rights of the child increasingly
reflected in the work of CTED and in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
Finally, looking forward, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to hold a meeting of the heads of
Member State counter-terrorism agencies in June. The
transnational nature of many terrorist activities makes
the prevention of terrorist acts by any one country alone
more difficult. My Ethiopian colleague just mentioned
that. The meeting will therefore be an important
opportunity for our respective operational agencies
to meet. Let me also underline the importance that we
attach to the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which is set to take place in June. We hope
that the negotiations will be productive and will result
in strengthened cooperation.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Kuwaiti
presidency for holding this most timely meeting. We
express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov for his informative briefing.
Despite the military pressure and the successful
anti-terrorist operations of the international coalition
12/22

08/02/2018

against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in Syria and Iraq, which have recovered vast territories
held by the terrorist organization, the activities of
Da’esh are still a major global threat. That is further
aggravated by the return of foreign terrorist fighters
to their countries of origin, who, under the instruction
of their instigators in Syria and Afghanistan, commit
terrorist acts and create satellite networks. The
ideologists of terrorism actively seek safe havens,
potential recruits and religious radicals to conduct
heinous acts directly on the territory of their States.
At the same time, we see a change in the tactics,
forms and methods of actions by ISIL, who, under the
new and changed conditions, are conducting terrorist
attacks outside the conflict zones, with deliberate
attempts to expand and strengthen the network of cells.
Those cells operate undetected, with a certain degree
of autonomy, thereby making it difficult for Member
States to identify them. It is therefore most critical
to establish an effective mechanism for the exchange
of information, at the international level, on foreign
terrorist fighters, returnees and those who relocate.
The transfer of terrorist threats to other regions
and the Security Council measures to counter them
were therefore among the key topics on the agenda of
the visits by the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, to Malaysia and Singapore in August 2017
and to Afghanistan in October 2017.
Notwithstanding the many measures taken by the
international community to identify and block extremist
Internet resources, the fighters and supporters of
Da’esh continue to use the Internet and social networks,
including th Dark Web encryption technology and
communication tools, to disseminate, coordinate and
conduct terrorist attacks and to promote their narratives.
A stricter, well-coordinated regulation of the use of the
Internet is therefore needed to identify and to prevent
the spread of terrorist content. Complacency is harmful
to our collective efforts to contain the spread of Da’esh
propaganda via the Internet.
While the revenue of ISIL has decreased by 90 per
cent compared to 2015, the group nevertheless continues
to profit from the illegal sale of oil. Kazakhstan therefore
recommends further comprehensive measures to block
channels for the illegal transportation of hydrocarbons.
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We note with satisfaction the special attention paid
by the Secretary-General to Afghanistan. Kazakhstan
is concerned about the emergence of terrorist groups,
particularly ISIL, in the north of the country, which
can pose a security threat to the States of Central Asia
and beyond. We strongly condemn the recent terrorist
attacks in Kabul and Jalalabad. Kazakhstan fully
shares and supports the Secretary-General’s vision,
priorities and efforts to reform the United Nations in
order to prioritize its preventive agenda. That was the
reason behind our initiative in organizing the Security
Council’s visit to Kabul last month. We wanted to enable
Council members to get first-hand information on the
current situation and consider the preventive measures
needed to address the root causes of these issues, in
particular, as Kazakhstan has proposed, by linking the
achievement of peace and security with sustainable
development, through regional partnerships with all
of Afghanistan’s neighbours and the establishment of
effective collaboration with United Nations agencies
on achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Kazakhstan has intensified its interaction with
the relevant authorities of the other States of Central
Asia in order to implement the Joint Plan of Action
for implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in Central Asia. The Action Plan
has also been incorporated into the framework of the
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization’s regional
anti-terrorist structure and the Anti-Terrorism Centre
of the Commonwealth of Independent States. We
support Mr. Voronkov’s proposal for a summit of heads
of intelligence organizations and hope it will be a step
in the right direction for countering terrorism. We
have achieved real results in pursuing and detaining
people involved in terrorist activities. In 2017 alone,
in cooperation with the special services of Russia,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, more than 40
persons implicated in terrorist and extremist activities,
were found, detained and handed over to partners in
the region. Working together with the border agencies
of our neighbouring countries, we have exchanged
information on the issues of terrorist and extremist
threats and their impact on border security. As a
result of measures taken in 2017, more than 20 people
have been detained for involvement in terrorist and
extremist activities.
Kazakhstan attaches special importance to
implementing resolution 2368 (2017) at the national
level. In accordance with the resolution and our

S/PV. 8178

national legislation on counteracting money-laundering
in order to combat illicit trafficking and terrorism
financing, we have frozen terrorists’ assets in our
country, in compliance with the list of organizations
and individuals related to the financing of terrorism
and extremism. The travel ban included in the Security
Council Sanctions Committees’ lists is policed and
monitored by INTERPOL through search registries of
regional counter-terrorist structures and Kazakhstan’s
relevant ministries. We work diligently to confiscate
weapons, ammunition and explosives from terrorists’
accomplices in order to prevent them from falling into
the hands of radicals.
Kazakhstan is implementing large-scale measures
to neutralize potential risks by strengthening its
national security and thereby preventing extremism
and terrorism in any form. We have updated our
legislative standards on migration and on arms
circulation and security and toughened our criminal
penal code for terrorist and extremist activities. Taking
into account the recommendations of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Security Council’s relevant decisions and resolutions,
including resolution 2368 (2017), as well as other
countries’ positive experiences, we have drafted a
State programme for countering religious extremism
and terrorism in Kazakhstan for the period from
2018 to 2022 that is currently awaiting approval. The
programme envisages measures for actively involving
the non-governmental sector in the prevention of
religious extremism and terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Kazakhstan’s full commitment to countering
international terrorism as part of broader multilateral
efforts. In that regard, I would like to point out that
recently, with the participation of more than 100
Member States, Kazakhstan launched a code of conduct
for achieving a terrorism-free world, and we hope to
cooperate actively through that initiative in order to
streamline our collective efforts to combat terrorism
internationally, since coordination and collaboration
are still lacking.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov for his briefing, and the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2018/80) on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of

18-0358813/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering that threat.
There have been terrorist attacks recently in
Afghanistan, Iraq and Egypt, among other places, that
have resulted in enormous casualties. As humankind’s
shared enemy, terrorism has ramifications that extend
beyond national borders and that countries cannot deal
with single-handedly. The international community
should work to effectively implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017) and join in combating the
evolving threat of terrorism in line with its new trends
and features.
First, we must forge an international consensus
against terrorism, which poses a threat to the whole
of humankind. The international community should
support a unified standard and take a zero-tolerance
and non-discriminatory approach in implementing a
firm crackdown. The world’s counter-terrorism efforts
should respect the sovereignty of the countries affected
and their ownership in the fight against terrorism,
adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and make full use of the leading
role of the United Nations and its Security Council.
Secondly, we should eliminate terrorism’s breeding
grounds. Terrorism grows out of wars, conflict, ethnic
hatred, poverty and backwardness. The international
community should be committed to helping Member
States to reduce and eradicate poverty, increase efforts
to reach political solutions to regional issues, promote
the concept of inclusive, equitable and balanced
development, foster dialogue and equal and peaceful
relations between different civilizations and regions,
and resist linking terrorism to specific ethnicities
or religions.
Thirdly, we should work to break up terrorists’
transboundary networks. Terrorist organizations have
recently sustained major defeats in Iraq, Syria and the
southern Philippines, but the international movements
and return of terrorist fighters still pose a serious threat
to countries of origin, transit and destination and their
security and stability. The countries concerned should
strengthen their border controls and cooperation in law
enforcement, share intelligence, improve their capacitybuilding and curb terrorist fighters’ movements.
Fourthly, we should crack down on terrorist
organizations’ use of the Internet in order to engage in
terrorist activities. The Internet and social media are
14/22

08/02/2018

increasingly becoming the means by which terrorist
organizations incite and recruit fighters and plot
attacks. The international community should work
to create synergies aimed at eliminating the channels
used to propagate extremist ideas though social media,
strengthen the regulation of cyberspace and prevent
terrorist organizations from using the Internet for
propaganda and financing activities.
In the past few years, China has engaged
intensively with multilateral cooperation mechanisms
that include the United Nations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, and has made significant
contributions to the international fight against
terrorism. China supports the Counter-Terrorism
Committee,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive Directorate and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, among others, in their efforts
to strengthen their cooperation with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism. We will continue to join
and promote multilateral and bilateral cooperation
against terrorism and provide assistance to developing
countries, including materials for countering terrorism
and building capacity, to the best of our ability. China
is ready to join all countries of the world in a concerted
response to terrorism and violent extremism in order to
maintain world peace and tranquility.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s briefing. We are pleased to
welcome Mr. Voronkov, who is now directing the work
of preparing the Secretary-General’s strategic reports
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL).
We studied the report presented today (S/2018/80)
with interest. Its conclusions about the military and
material suppression of the group’s core in Syria and
Iraq inspire cautious optimism. With regard to the
regional aspects of this threat, we are still concerned
about the increasing strength of ISIL’s outpost in
northern Afghanistan. We must not underestimate the
potential of the international terrorist adherents who
are gathering there. As the report says, Central Asia
is also under threat, and natives of that region have
already been observed in terrorist attacks in Turkey,
Russia, European countries and the United States.
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We concur that the volume of money and other
material resources entering ISIL’s coffers has
significantly decreased. That does not mean, however,
that reports should consider the issue of ISIL’s
financial and material support a lower priority. As a
result of successful operations of the Syrian armed
forces, the support of Russia’s Aerospace Forces, ISIL
fighters have lost access to critical oilfields as well as
transportation and sales routes. According to our data,
towards the end of 2017 ISIL’s income from illicit oil
and gas trading was not more than $2 million a month,
while its total revenues in the Middle East had fallen to
$3 million.
Given the situation, ISIL has actively sought
new sources of support, honing its skills in the use of
modern technologies. For example, in one of Syria’s
neighbours, terrorists’ henchmen are swindling
ordinary civilians by setting up fake Internet shops,
while the caliphate’s fighters are not above making
money from online casinos. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report rightly notes, ISIL’s adherents are
proactively using couriers and the hawala system to
transfer funds. Besides that, these criminal proceeds
are being deposited increasingly often in accounts
at reputable banks in countries in the Persian Gulf,
Europe, the Middle East and Central Asia, and Russia
recently provided detailed information on this issue to
the Financial Action Task Force. When we discussed
the Secretary-General’s previous report (S/2017/467),
many delegations drew attention to ISIL’s attempts to
invest in legitimate businesses abroad. But it also turns
out that some Western companies themselves are not
averse to doing business with terrorists. We believe that
such issues deserve the close scrutiny of the authorities
of the countries concerned.
Today more than ever before the issue of subjecting
terrorists to criminal prosecution is an urgent one.
In accordance with key Council resolutions, anyone
who provides direct or indirect assistance to ISIL,
not to mention the fighters themselves, should be held
accountable. We witnessed yet another failure to abide
by that obligation in early January, when the authorities
in Syrian Kurdistan made a unilateral decision to
pardon some 400 former members of ISIL, including
field commanders and caliphate officials, 120 of whom
ended up the ranks of the Syrian Democratic Forces.
The fact that events such as these can still go virtually
unnoticed testifies to the double standards that persist
with respect to terrorists.

S/PV. 8178

Unfortunately, resolutions 2253 (2015) and 2368
(2017) are not being fully implemented, particularly
where observance of the arms embargo regime is
concerned, something that is well confirmed in open
information sources. We trust that those issues will
be taken into account when the Secretary-General’s
seventh report on ISIL is being drafted. Furthermore,
with regard to consideration of the situation on the
ground and current trends in the fight against ISIL,
we would like to draw attention to the consolidated
assessment of future terrorist threats prepared for the
annual meeting, held in Russia, of heads of special
services, security agencies and law-enforcement
organizations. The next edition will be published
shortly as an official document of both the Council and
the General Assembly.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefing by
the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov
and for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/80).
The settings in which terrorism operates today
have transcended local and regional dimensions to
become a global problem. The threat of terrorism
and violent extremism is one of the largest, most
complex and constantly evolving challenges facing
the international community, particularly because
terrorist groups and organizations have developed their
capacities for financing their activities and recruiting
people remotely by various means and with different
narratives. This evolving threat now has a diverse group
of recruits, especially notable for the large numbers
of women and young people of diverse ages, social
groups, educational profiles, professions and countries,
to which we must add the growing phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, who continue to represent a
particular threat to international peace and security. In
that regard, we want to highlight the work of the new
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, which
has been collaborating with various Member States
to combat terrorism and prevent violent extremism.
We believe that its efforts to combat terrorism and
promote the capacity-building of Member States
should continue.
We should also be aware that terrorist organizations
and groups are using the new communication
technologies and the Internet, as well as social networks,
as platforms for spreading their radical ideology and
disinformation in order to recruit fighters and become

18-0358815/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a global threat. According to the Office of CounterTerrorism, at least 40,000 foreign terrorist fighters
from more than 110 countries may have travelled
to join terrorist groups in the Syrian Arab Republic
and Iraq. According to the Office’s study Enhancing
the Understanding of the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Phenomenon in Syria, the most influential factors in
attracting foreign terrorist fighters may be related
to the socioeconomic situation, including promises
of material and personal benefits, and ideological
or religious claims. Nevertheless, we should insist
that terrorism cannot and must not be linked to any
particular religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. Such characteristics should not be used to
justify measures to combat or prevent terrorism, in
accordance with resolution 2354 (2017) on narratives
to combat terrorism.
While the threat from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) is still there, it has lessened, and the
situation today differs from that in previous months,
thanks to the ongoing defeats that ISIL has suffered
in Iraq and Syria. According to the twentieth report
(S/2017/573) of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolution 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, submitted in August 2017,
the number of fighters returning to their countries of
origin or moving from conflict zones to other countries
may be increasing. We are concerned that in the shortor medium-term this situation could produce a kind of
reorganization or emergence of new terrorist groups
in third countries with weak governance or in regions
dealing with political and institutional instability. To
that end, coordination between the various committees
and subsidiary organs of the Council with the Office of
Counter-Terrorism is crucial to preventing the spread
of this threat to other parts of the world.
We believe that the various initiatives of
Governments and agencies, along with the relevant
Council resolutions, aimed at freezing assets linked to
financial transactions related to economic resources and
income-generating activities that benefit individuals,
groups, companies and entities included on the list of
sanctions against ISIL and Al-Qaida, are important
measures in the quest to put an end to this human
scourge. We should also point out that they often obtain
assets through money-laundering and so-called tax
havens, where regulations are reduced or non-existent,
especially when it comes to investment in the tertiary
16/22

08/02/2018

sector. In that regard, we believe that it is the lack of
adequate mechanisms for exchanging information
that is hampering countries’ efforts to address this
threat. The international community should therefore
focus its efforts on encouraging a fluid and effective
exchange of information about such individuals both
between States and international organizations such as
INTERPOL, as well as through judicial cooperation
and exchange of information.
We also believe that there is a pressing need to
implement programmes with a comprehensive approach
to gender and children’s issues in order to fight against
terrorism and to counter foreign terrorist fighters who
are returning to or travelling to other countries. In
that regard, part of the challenge will be to implement
clear and targeted rules that enable us to deal with
minors who return to their countries of origin, as well
as rehabilitation and reintegration initiatives based on
inter-institutional and multidisciplinary models.
In conclusion, many speakers in this Chamber have
indicated that it is important to tackle the structural
causes of the rise of terrorism and in particular of
groups such as Da’esh. Those causes unquestionably
include the imposition of regime-change policies,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
of other States. The situations in Iraq and Libya are
clear testimony to the fact that such actions and policies
are causes of terrorism.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Vladimir Voronkov of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism for presenting
the sixth report of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by Da’esh to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering that threat (S/2018/80).
The report underscores the continuing terrorist threat
and calls on the Security Council and all Member
States to exercise constant vigilance and to strengthen
and fully implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions in order to combat this scourge.
The problem of terrorism, which exists among
most of the peoples of the States Members of our
Organization, continues to be a difficult challenge for
States, despite the crushing defeats recently endured by
Al-Qaida and Da’esh in Iraq, Syria and the Philippines.
With more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters from
more than 100 States, Da’esh has posed one of the biggest
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8178

threats that the international community has faced in
recent years, as the report emphasizes. Through its
adoption in September 2014 of resolution 2178 (2014),
in the presence of Heads of State and Government, the
Security Council showed its determination to tackle
this scourge. Côte d’Ivoire would like to commend
the multifaceted efforts undertaken by the United
Nations and the international community to strengthen
our ability to combat this evil, which undermines the
development efforts of many States and affects the
lives of thousands of people.

We call on the Security Council to give special
attention to the most sensitive regions, specifically the
West African region, which has been plagued by the
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon and by violent
extremism. Côte d’Ivoire would like to once again
urge the Security Council to support the initiatives of
the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel and
the efforts of the Lake Chad countries. We also call
for solidarity among States in helping to build the
capacities of less affluent countries to deal with the
evolving challenges presented by this ongoing threat.

Côte d’Ivoire applauds the reforms undertaken to
restructure and improve the United Nations counterterrorism architecture, including the establishment, at
the initiative of the Secretary-General, of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, whose mission is to breathe new
life into the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In the same vein, my delegation welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2354 (2017), based on the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and accompanied by guidelines and good practices.
Adherence to these principles and practices should
enable States to effectively combat the ways that
Da’esh and Al-Qaida incite and lead people to commit
acts of terrorism.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to recall
the responsibility incumbent on us all to cooperate
at the regional and international levels in the fight
against Da’esh and its associated groups. For its part,
Côte d’Ivoire is determined to work with all bilateral
and multilateral partners to counter this scourge, in
particular in West Africa and the Sahel. To that end,
I would like to announce that beginning in July, my
country will host a regional counter-terrorism school,
with the assistance of France. The school will be used
to train army officials, and members of special forces
involved in the fight against terrorism in particular.

We also welcomed the Council’s adoption in
December 2017 of resolution 2395 (2017), renewing the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), which remains a linchpin in the
counter-terrorism architecture, for a further four-year
period, until December 2021. We would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the new Executive
Director of CTED, Ms. Michèle Coninsx, and to assure
her of the determination of the Côte d’Ivoire authorities
to collaborate with her Committee in order to enable
it to fulfil its assigned tasks. We look forward to her
forthcoming visit to Côte d’Ivoire in March and assure
her of our readiness to work for her mission’s success.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): It is with great pleasure that, on behalf of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, I take the floor
at this meeting on the presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/80) on the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our deepest condolences to, and solidarity with, the
countries that have become victims of terrorist acts and
all those who have lost loved ones as victims of terrorist
attacks, among them our own country. We would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov,
Head of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, for the substantive and strategic briefing he
has just delivered on strengthening coordination and
coherence in the efforts of the United Nations.

The fight against Da’esh and its associated groups
appears to be a long-term endeavour, owing to these
criminal groups’ new ways of operating. In this respect,
my delegation stresses the need for all Member States
to work for the common goal of strengthening regional
and international cooperation mechanisms. We also
urge CTED to support States in formulating national
legislation that translates into concrete measures that
will enable them to fully implement their obligations
under the relevant United Nations resolutions.

This is the first time that the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is participating in this very important biannual
meeting. Like all the other Member States represented
in the Chamber, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes that the problem of terrorism is fundamental
and requires special attention. To that end, we recall
the Millennium Declaration, which emphasizes peace
and security for the peoples of the world, and in
particular notes the need to adopt effective measures
against international terrorism, given that criminal

18-0358817/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

acts driven by political reasons, designed or planned
to provoke a state of global terror over the population
in general, a group of people or particular persons, are
unjustifiable under all circumstances, whatever the
political, philosophical, ideological, racial, religious
or ethnic nature may be, or any other reason used to
justify them. The fight against terrorism therefore must
always remain a global priority.
It is very encouraging that there are both
international cooperation and military pressure
currently being applied in the context of several
groups of international terrorists, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh, Al-Qaida,
the Taliban and other terrorist groups, such as Boko
Haram and Al-Shabab. Such collaboration and pressure
are reducing the expansion and ability of those
terrorist organizations to continue to conquer and
control territories.
Although according to the report that has just been
presented to us Da’esh still has the capacity to continue
perpetrating attacks internally in some of the countries
where it is present, the international community’s effort
has managed to significantly limit its presence in urban
areas, its financial capacity, its ability to take over and
hold territorry, its mobility and its ability to recruit
and train new members. The new phase that the report
describes, which has been achieved through many
sacrifices that have ultimately increased the number
of strategic military setbacks for Da’esh in most of the
world’s regions, presents another type of threat insofar
as Da’esh cells are becoming more autonomous.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea recognizes the
efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
in reforming and strengthening the architecture of
the United Nations to tackle the serious threat of
terrorism. In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea joins the call of the Secretary-General,
and of all the other Member States present in the
Chamber, for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions — including resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267
(1999), 2395 (2017) and 2396 (2017). In that regard,
we appreciate the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in updating the
Technical Guide to the Implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178
(2014) and other relevant Council resolutions and
decisions to bolster the efforts of Member States to
counter a broad range of terrorist threats.
18/22

08/02/2018

The existence of new and innovative global
strategies and initiatives to combat terrorism,
together with the implementation of the resolutions
I mentioned, are the essential instruments to combat
terrorism from all possible angles — the financial
aspect; international cooperation in the area of law
enforcement; the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters returning
to their countries or relocating to third countries; the
prevention and eradication of the spread of violent
extremism in prisons and through digital technology;
and the protection of the human rights of all those
affected by terrorism, especially children, refugees,
migrants and asylum seekers.
Despite the various initiatives and the advances
made, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains quite
concerned about the chain of threats posed by terrorism
and other groups associated with it, since many Member
States and subregions lack the tools to face those threats,
namely, a system of biometric data — fingerprints,
photographs and facial recognition technology, as well
as other means or relevant instruments for gathering
such information. That creates blind spots in areas such
as protecting porous marine and terrestrial borders in
many regions, such as in Central Africa. As called for in
the report, it is extremely crucial to prevent contact and/
or collaboration among the various existing terrorist
groups. For that reason, collaboration, cooperation,
training and the transfer of advanced technology are
critical to effectively fight terrorists.
Another significant threat to national and
international peace and security is the return of foreign
fighters to their countries of origin, which could have
very serious consequences, such as the organization and/
or reorganization of terrorist cells or the radicalization
of vulnerable people and those susceptible to terrorist
propaganda. Preventing the movement of foreign
fighters is both essential and very difficult. As the
report also notes, in some Member States judicial
institutions do not laws available to prosecute their
nationals who had once travelled abroad to fight for
Da’esh or some other terrorist group, or they are unable
to prosecute due to a lack of evidence and collaboration
among different sectors. In that regard, we encourage
Member States to support relevant efforts to ensure
the implementation of the plan for capacity-building
for countering the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, in
accordance with resolution 2396 (2017).
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism does not recognize borders nor
nationalities, nor does it distinguish between religions,
the rich or the poor. The fight against terrorism
therefore requires greater cooperation. Only through
a collective and shared effort and commitment among
Member States, in collaboration with public-private
alliances, non-governmental organizations and other
groups, can we sustain the progress made against
terrorism, including against groups such as Da’esh and
their ilk, and arrive at lasting solutions.
The African continent is being bled dry at the
hands of the crimes committed by terrorist groups,
such as Boko Haram in north-east Nigeria, which is
also affecting its neighbouring countries of the Niger,
Chad and Cameroon — also neighbouring countries of
Equatorial Guinea. There is also the case of Al-Shabaab
in the East of the continent. Countries such as Mali
are falling victim to groups supported by Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb. All those phenomenoa lead to
enormous damage and serious challenges to the life
and economies of the countries most directly affected
and, to a lesser extent, to their neighbours, and, by
extension, to all of Africa.
Because terrorism results in internally displaced
persons, damage to infrastructure and the tourism
sector and harm that is difficult to quantify with
accuracy, combating it is vital to our survival as States.
As the Council knows, there was a recent attempted
terrorist attack in our country, whose aim was to
violate and undermine its independence and stability
and destroy its legitimate institutions. Fortunately,
it was quickly neutralized by our national security
forces, with the cooperation and support of the sisterly
Republic of Cameroon. That example demonstrates
that cooperation is necessary and beneficial in the area
of security and in the fight against terrorism.
In recent years, Equatorial Guinea has meaningfully
participated
in
multilateral
counter-terrorism
mechanisms, including through the United Nations and
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Economic Community of West African States
joint mechanism. Equatorial Guinea stands ready to
continue to participate in and promote multilateral and
bilateral cooperation in the fight against terrorism and
to improve sharing of counter-terrorism information.
A good example is Operation Obangame in the Gulf
of Guinea, in which various States of the subregion,
including Equatorial Guinea, fight to prevent piracy,
which could be used by terrorists or potential terrorists.

S/PV. 8178

Equatorial Guinea is willing to work with all countries
to provide a collective response to the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism and to maintain international
peace and stability.
Nonetheless, the situation requires more in-depth
reflection. There is an increasing number of conflicts
and victims. To ease the situation, the Security Council
must continue to work with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, redouble its efforts to
adopt policies that promote conflict-prevention and
use all the instruments, mechanisms and methods
established by the two organizations.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir
Voronkov
for his briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/80) on the threat posed by Da’esh to
international peace and security. Allow me to share a
few thoughts.
As a result of coordinated combat operations, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has lost
a significant part of the territory it once controlled.
Although international coalition efforts have decreased
ISIL’s revenue, terrorist groups such as ISIL and its
affiliates operating around the globe remain capable of
conducting terrorist attacks. We look forward to this
year’s Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review. We
firmly believe that capacity-building and countering
and preventing violent extremism should be given the
highest priority.
Let me express my appreciation for the input of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. Their efforts to provide strategic levelreports that reflect the gravity of the threat are
important. We welcome the fact that the recent report
of the Monitoring Team emphasized threat assessment,
information-sharing and the strengthening of crossborder monitoring of the movement of individuals. We
reiterate the importance of strengthening wide-scale
cooperation between the United Nations and the
regional bodies of the Financial Action Task Force,
bearing in mind the growing threat of new terroristfinancing technologies that make possible the
anonymous acquisition of funds. We are fully aware
that advances in technology mean that funds-gathering
and recruitment by terrorists is a more complex
challenge facing the international community. ISIL
members and sympathizers can still use social media,

18-0358819/22

S/PV.8178

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

including encryption technology and communication
tools in the Dark Web, to communicate, coordinate and
facilitate attacks.
We cannot forget about the traditional methods
of terrorism financing — which remain simple and
effective and are popular among returning foreign
terrorist fighters — such as the robberies that took place
in Mosul and Al-Arish. Developing hypothetical trends
with regard to terrorist financing and possible terrorist
attacks should be a priority for Member States. We can
today address only preventive measures when we face
specific actions undertaken by terrorists. However, it
seems that we are not adequately prepared to swiftly
respond to the creativity of terrorists, whose methods
continue to change. It is therefore critical to understand
methods and trends in order to predict the potential
financial trajectory and activities of terrorists.
Terrorism is a cross-border phenomenon. Therefore,
the further strengthening of cooperation among the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
and States remains key for its effective eradication,
in particular when addressing accountability. As a
member of the international coalition, Poland is ready to
cooperate closely with the United Nations in that area.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give a
statement in my national capacity.
We would like to express our thanks and appreciation
to Mr. Vladimir Voronkov for his insightful briefing.
We take this opportunity to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s reform by establishing the Office of CounterTerrorism in June 2017. It is one of the initial steps taken
by the Secretary-General to implement institutional
reform. Our view is that the reform will to a great
extent enhace the coordination of efforts and activities
to counter terrorism in the framework of the United
Nations and beyond, as well as to build the capacity
of Member States to combat this looming threat.
The United Nations and its agencies coordinate with
international organizations in their significant efforts
to counter terrorism. They take precautionary measures
to eliminate the terrorist groups. Those efforts,
combined with the efforts of the international coalition
to eliminate terrorism, succeeded in defeating terrorist
groups in some places. However, Member States face
challenges in their efforts to counter terrorism because
those groups have developed new ways and techniques.
That requires the Security Council and the Member
States to redouble their efforts, through dialogue,
20/22

08/02/2018

information- and experience-sharing. We must also
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
and work with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Analytical Support Group and other United Nations
bodies, along with relevant international organizations.
Kuwait welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/80), including its evaluation and analysis of
Da’esh, and the role of the international coalition
to combat its proliferation. Member States have
established control measures leading to the loss by
Da’esh of its capabilities and financial resources. At the
same time, the report underscores that Da’esh has the
ability to adapt itself to new situations notwithstanding
the scarcity of its resources, Da’esh is looking for
new resources and creating terrorist groups and cells
by using new methods. The report underscores the
importance of international cooperation with the
United Nations and its bodies to combat this scourge.
Terrorism persists and poses a threat to
international peace and security. That is why Kuwait
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of its motivation. Terrorism is a criminal
act and should not be linked to any religion, identity,
culture or ethnicity.
Fighting terrorism requires mobilization of all
international efforts in order to address this criminal
scourge. Measures must be adopted to strengthen
commitment to international humanitarian law, respect
of human rights, good governance and peaceful
coexistence among various religions. There should
be respect for the symbols of religions and their holy
places. Conditions leading to the proliferation of
terrorism, hatred and all manifestations of extremism
and violence should be addressed.
Moreover, we reiterate the importance of issues
involving youth and women with respect to international
peace and security within the context of terrorist
acts. We must increase women’s participation in the
strategies pertaining to counter terrorism and violent
extremism that leads to terrorism. On 13 February, and
as part of the efforts that the State of Kuwait makes
at the international level, we will host a ministerial
meeting of the global coalition against Da’esh, with
the participation of 70 countries and four international
organizations. Its goal is to establish a strategy and
guidelines for combating terrorism. The conference
18-03588

08/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8178

will be the first such event since the defeat of Da’esh
in Iraq.

combating terrorism and stopping terrorist threats
throughout the world.

In conclusion, we reiterate Kuwait’s firm and
absolute condemnation of acts of terrorism in all
their forms and manifestations and regardless of their
motivation, location and perpetrators. They constitute
a deliberate threat to international peace and security
and a blatant violation of international law. At the same
time, we underscore the fact that strengthening the
culture of tolerance and coexistence among peoples
and nations is one of Kuwait’s foreign policy priorities.
We fully support all international efforts aimed at

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations in order to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

18-0358821/22
