A /69/PV.57

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

57th plenary meeting

Thursday, 20 November 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Antoine
(Grenada), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 37
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/540)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.20)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.20.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): It is an honour for my
country to introduce this year’s draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/69/L.20). The year 2014
has been marked by seminal developments in Afghan
domestic and foreign politics, and the draft resolution
before us today reflects all the facets of those key
developments in Afghanistan.
Despite the variety of topics worthy of our
attention, I will limit myself today to briefly
highlighting a few key developments. Afghanistan has
successfully concluded its presidential and provincial
council elections. For the first time in the country’s
history, power was peacefully transferred from one
Administration to another by a democratic process.
On 29 September, President Ghani was inaugurated
and, together with Mr. Abdullah, the Chief Executive
Officer, will form a Government of national unity.
The Afghan people — men and, most encouragingly,

millions of women — have shown tremendous courage
in making use of their constitutional right to cast their
vote, defying the Taliban’s threats to attack the election
process. We commend the United Nations and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
critical support they provided to the Afghan electoral
institutions during that process. Germany, along with
other partners from the international community, also
supported the process with substantial contributions.
It is now essential that both Afghanistan’s President
and its Chief Executive Officer continue to work
together closely, on a basis of mutual trust, to tackle
the many challenges that lie ahead for Afghanistan.
Electoral reform and the strengthening of electoral
institutions, along with constitutional reforms, are at
the core of the agreement on establishing a Government
of national unity and must be addressed in a timely
manner. Economic reforms must be tackled swiftly
in order to foster economic growth and create job
opportunities for the benefit of the entire population.
Severe budgetary constraints and a volatile security
situation demand effective decision-making processes
on the part of the Government. As Germany’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier,
underlined during his recent visit to Afghanistan, all
actors in the Government of national unity must embrace
their responsibility for the future of Afghanistan and
continue to set aside personal ambitions.
Secondly, the draft resolution reflects the remarkable
shift in the security transition that Afghanistan and
its international partners are approaching. In less
than six weeks, the International Security Assistance

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-64064 (E)

*1464064*

A/69/PV.57

Force mission will come to an end, and the Afghan
national security forces will assume full responsibility
for providing security to the Afghan people. Since the
transition process began, the Afghan National Army
and the Afghan Local Police have continued to improve
their capacities and have proved increasingly capable of
responding to security challenges, albeit at a high cost.
Challenges still remain, and the achievements attained
so far are not yet irreversible.
The draft resolution therefore underlines the
international community’s resolve to further support
the Afghan security forces beyond the transition.
At the NATO Wales Summit, NATO and its partner
countries renewed their commitment to continuing
their support to the Afghan national security forces.
At the beginning of 2015, at the invitation of the
Government of Afghanistan, they will establish the
Resolute Support Mission for training, assisting
and advising the national security forces. They will
contribute to the financial support of the Afghan
security forces and have committed to strengthening
the long-term enduring partnership with Afghanistan.
The German Government has also offered to continue
supporting the Afghan security forces. We commend
the new Government of Afghanistan for expeditiously
signing a bilateral security agreement with the United
States and a status-of-forces agreement with NATO,
both necessary preconditions for the international
community’s continued support.
Later this year in London, Afghanistan and its
international partners will meet to refresh the long-term
commitment of the international community throughout
the transformation decade. That commitment, declared
by the Government of Afghanistan and its international
partners at the Bonn Conference of 2011 and reaffirmed
at the Tokyo Conference in 2012, rests firmly on the
principle of mutual accountability. Building on that
unique framework, the international community
has pledged $16 billion through 2015 in support of
Afghanistan’s economic and political stabilization. In
addition, it has committed to sustaining its support at
or near the levels of the past decade through 2017, in
line with the principles of aid effectiveness. In return,
the Afghan Government has committed to working
more determinedly to achieve its governance and
development goals.
During the past decade, Afghanistan has indeed
made remarkable progress in a variety of areas,
including health, education and infrastructure.

2/26

20/11/2014

However, continued efforts are of paramount importance
for protecting and advancing the gains made in past
years. As the draft resolution reflects, preserving and
consolidating gains in the protection and promotion of
human rights and the equal participation of men and
women in all spheres of Afghan life remain critical.
Good governance and the fight against corruption must
be strengthened, a goal that the new Afghan President
committed his Administration to in his inaugural
speech. Finally, the Istanbul Heart of Asia process,
aimed at enhancing regional cooperation and dialogue,
took a step forward at the most recent Ministerial
Conference, held in Beijing in October. As a supporting
country to the process, Germany is looking forward to
seeing progress in tapping its full potential to foster
trust and cooperation in the region between now and the
next Ministerial Conference, which the Government of
Pakistan has generously offered to host.
Those watershed developments suggest that the
long-term partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community is evolving. It is essential to
understand, however, that the very redefinition of the
relationship should reinforce it. That is also the core
message of the draft resolution before us today.
The new Afghan Government assumed its duties
only a few weeks ago. It faces tremendous challenges,
and the Government of national unity has clearly stated,
and already demonstrated, its determination to tackle
those challenges with vigour. We are confident that
that resolve to improve the lives of Afghan citizens will
guide the new Government in its work. By adopting
this draft resolution today and once again by consensus,
the General Assembly will reaffirm its commitment
to a prosperous and peaceful future for Afghanistan
and send a strong message of support to the Afghan
Government and people.
In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude
to all the delegations that participated in this year’s
informal consultations, and in particular to my
colleague Ambassador Tanin and his team for their
dedication and close cooperation.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As we come together
in the General Assembly to adopt this year’s draft
resolution on the situation in Afghanistan (A/69/L.20),
I would like to thank all the Member States that have
participated in its negotiation. I would also like to thank
Ambassadors Braun and Thoms, and their team at the
Permanent Mission of Germany to the United Nations,

14-64064

20/11/2014

particularly Daniel Schemske, for their hard work in
facilitating the negotiations.
At the end of this year, the Government of
Afghanistan will take full responsibility for the
country’s security. The mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force, authorized by the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, is set to expire on 31 December, and
Afghanistan will then move towards a more normalized
international status as a sovereign nation. We have been
striving to reach that moment for the past decade. It is
a major accomplishment and an important step towards
achieving a peaceful, sovereign and prosperous
Afghanistan.
While NATO’s combat role will end, Afghanistan
and NATO remain committed to a long-term strategic
partnership. NATO will continue to train, advise and
assist the Afghan national defence and security forces
beyond 2014 through its Resolute Support Mission, on
the basis of the NATO-Afghanistan status-of-forces
agreement and the security and defence cooperation
agreement between Afghanistan and the United States
of America. We welcome the Assembly’s message of
support for the new mission. I would also like to take
this opportunity to express my Government’s profound
gratitude to all the international civilian and military
men and women who have served shoulder to shoulder
with their Afghan partners in working for a better
future for the people of Afghanistan. The Afghan
people will always remember and honour their sacrifice
and dedication.
Afghanistan has emerged from a historic election
that marked its first democratic transfer of power
from one President to the next, an important milestone
in Afghanistan’s multifaceted transition. While the
challenges that arose during the election period tested
our resolve, the wisdom of the country’s leadership and
the support of its friends and partners have enabled us to
overcome the difficulties and move towards a unified,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous future. The
establishment of a Government of national unity has
created an atmosphere of broader political inclusivity
and participation. It will enable Afghans from all walks
of life to contribute to the country’s economic and
social development, to the sustainability of the Afghan
State and its security forces and to peace and security
in Afghanistan and the wider region.
The newly elected President of Afghanistan, His
Excellency Mr. Mohammad Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai,

A/69/PV.57

together with the national unity Government,
is vigorously pursuing a comprehensive reform
programme aimed at delivering on the campaign
promises and promoting peace, stability and prosperity
across the country. I would like to highlight three key
components of that comprehensive reform agenda.
The first is eliminating corruption. Corruption
corrodes State effectiveness, security, public faith
in Government and progress towards peace and
prosperity. It feeds insurgency, patronage and illegal
interests. Tackling corruption is crucial to the
Government’s reform agenda. In his inaugural address,
President Ghani stressed his policy of zero tolerance
for corruption. As soon as he assumed the presidency,
he ordered the Supreme Court to reopen an inquiry into
the Kabul Bank fraud case. Since then, the Court has
sentenced the bank’s executives to 15 years in prison,
ordered the payment of substantial fines and frozen the
assets of those accused of corruption. Other suspects
will now be investigated for their involvement in the
$900 million embezzlement scandal. That courageous
step demonstrates the Government’s firm commitment
to eradicating corruption and ending impunity.
On strengthening democratic accountability,
governance and the rule of law, Afghanistan’s leadership
is in the process of establishing a functional, meritbased cabinet as part of a wider commitment to building
effective governance at every level. In addition, we
will reform electoral institutions, electoral processes
and the relevant laws, as well as adopt the necessary
amendments to the Constitution. The Government
will also focus on reforming the judiciary and all lawenforcement institutions, inter alia by taking concrete
actions to expand access to justice and uphold the
rights of all Afghan citizens, particularly women and
girls. I would like to call attention to the Government’s
recent adoption of the Afghanistan national action plan
for women, peace and security, which represents an
important step in that regard.
With regard to promoting economic growth and
social development, the national unity Government is
committed to economic reforms that stimulate growth
and tackle poverty, inequality and unemployment.
They include strengthening cooperation between the
Government and the private sector, removing obstacles
to investment and trade, promoting sustainable
livelihoods, reinvigorating counter-narcotics efforts
and using aid effectively to reinforce development and
stability. The continuing implementation of the Tokyo

14-640643/26

A/69/PV.57

Mutual Accountability Framework remains central to
those efforts, and we look forward to the next Ministerial
Meeting on Afghanistan to be held in London next
month. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the United Kingdom for hosting that important meeting.
The Afghan people have been the victims of
terrorism and violence for almost 40 years. The violence
perpetrated by terrorists, extremists and illegal armed
groups continues to have daily, devastating impacts on
all civilians, particularly women and children, and poses
the greatest obstacle to political, economic and social
progress in the country. The Afghan National Security
Forces continue to demonstrate professionalism and
courage in protecting the Afghan people. Moving
forward, the national unity Government will work
tirelessly to continue to strengthen the capacity of the
Afghan national security forces to uphold the security
of the nation and to preserve the achievements of the
last decade. The continuing support of our international
partners, in particular through the new NATO mission,
is crucial to the success of those efforts.
But the country will not achieve peace through
military efforts alone. President Ghani has called on
all armed opponents of the Government to enter into
political talks and play their part in building a strong
and successful Afghanistan. The Government of
Afghanistan is working to establish a wider, inclusive
political framework for lasting peace, including a new
outreach to the armed opposition and efforts at national
reconciliation. This is an Afghan-led and Afghanowned process, but, at the same time, we recognize the
important role of regional and neighbouring countries,
particularly the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, in
contributing to our efforts to end the conflict. President
Ghani initiated serious efforts to further a political
settlement during his recent visits to Saudi Arabia, China
and Pakistan and in his meetings and conversations
with the leaders of neighbouring, regional and partner
countries.
Regional cooperation is key not only to peace and
security but also to prosperity in Afghanistan and the
wider region. In that connection, the Government of
Afghanistan is committed to deepening cooperation
with its neighbours and regional partners. Last week,
President Ghani paid a historic visit to the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, where the leaders of the two
countries opened a friendly, forward-looking dialogue
and made concrete agreements relating to improving
bilateral economic, trade and investment relations. The

4/26

20/11/2014

visit generated an unprecedented surge of optimism and
set the groundwork for long-term cooperation between
the two nations.
In October, President Ghani conducted another
historic State visit to the People’s Republic of China,
where bold steps were taken towards increasing
cooperation in the areas of economic development and
stabilization. The visit coincided with the annual Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference in Beijing on 31 October,
which reaffirmed commitments to strengthen regional
security and cooperation for a secure and stable
Afghanistan. We are grateful to the Government of
China for its leadership and for hosting the meeting,
and we thank the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for
agreeing to host the next ministerial meeting of the
Istanbul process in 2015. The President of Afghanistan
looks forward to furthering regional engagement and
will therefore attend the upcoming summit of the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation at the end
of this month in Kathmandu.
Deepening regional cooperation will open the
doors to a flourishing continental economy in the heart
of Asia. Afghanistan has great potential to enhance
the development and prosperity of the entire region by
unlocking the country’s capacity to serve as a hub for
connectivity and trade across Asia. That will entail key
energy and power projects, such as the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline and the Central
Asia-South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project, as well as the building of a wide regional
transport network, including railways and highways.
All regional partners can play a role by working
together and engaging chambers of commerce and
business communities in joint and coordinated action
to turn potential into reality.
As the new Government focuses on renewed
regional cooperation, our long-term partnerships
with the wider international community remain the
backbone of our efforts for peace, security, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan. The support of the
international community has allowed us to build a
new Afghanistan and will continue to be crucial in
the transformation decade ahead. The President’s
upcoming visit to London to attend the London
Conference on Afghanistan and his upcoming visit to
the United States will be important steps in refreshing
and furthering our mutual cooperation and partnership
with the international community.

14-64064

20/11/2014

The past 13 years have seen the international
community’s unprecedented engagement in supporting
the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to build
peace and stability. While the goals set over a decade ago
have not been fully realized, Afghanistan is determined
to bring sustainable peace, security and prosperity
to the country with the support of our international
partners. The Government of Afghanistan’s ambitious
agenda of reform, the collaboration of all Afghan
political forces and the support of the Afghan people
will enable us to put an end to the destructive narrative
of toxic extremism and to reach the beginning of an
era of peace. In doing so, we will change the course
of history in the heart of Asia to the great benefit of
our people, our neighbours, the wider region and the
international community.
The Acting President: I call on the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland,
Serbia and Albania; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement. I would like to thank all delegations
that have participated in the consultations on the draft
resolution (A/69/L.20) and particularly the German
team for so ably facilitating the negotiations. We would
also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
Let me start by reiterating the European Union’s
full support for the continued important role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and all the United Nations agencies
that support the Afghan people and coordinate
the international community’s assistance. As the
International Security Assistance Force mission
comes to an end and the international combat troops
are withdrawn, the role of the United Nations will be
even more important in assisting the Afghan authorities
in their efforts to ensure that the gains achieved are
safeguarded and used as the foundation for further
progress.
The international community will soon meet
in London at the Conference to be co-chaired by the
Governments of Afghanistan and the United Kingdom.
The Conference will be an occasion for the new
Afghan Government to set out a serious and ambitious

A/69/PV.57

reform programme and to begin a process for reaching
agreement on the refreshed mutual accountability
framework that will be finalized at next year’s Senior
Officials Meeting.
The London Conference will also be an opportunity
for the international community to restate its longterm commitment to support Afghanistan and to
reaffirm existing financial commitments through 2017,
underpinned by the principle of mutual accountability.
It will also be an opportunity to consider the progress
made in the commitments set out in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, agreed at the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan in July 2012. Afghanistan
has been the beneficiary of unprecedented levels of
international assistance, but it is vital that assistance
be sustained over the coming years, since it is critical
that Government revenues increase in the future. The
European Union is pleased to welcome the formation
of the Government of national unity and has recently
signed an agreement to provide up to €1.4 billion over
the next seven years in development assistance. That
money will be used, in line with the common EU
strategy, to strengthen Afghanistan’s institutions so as
to enable Afghans to be responsible for securing the
gains made over the last 13 years, as well as to make
it possible to continue developing national institutions
in line with the needs of the women and men of
Afghanistan.
Gains can be secured only if the new Government
commits to enacting and implementing the critical
reforms needed to improve economic and political
governance in the country, including by tackling the
widespread problem of corruption. Urgent action is
needed to put in place the measures necessary to improve
the economic growth outlook and attract investment.
Only in that way can Afghanistan both create the jobs
and increase the revenue that the country needs to truly
stand on its own two feet. But investors are unlikely to
risk their capital, if Afghanistan does not improve the
ease of doing business in the country and, in particular,
the enforceability of contracts through a strengthened
rule of law. Serious reforms are also needed with
regard to tackling illicit narcotics, which contribute to
sustaining the illicit economy.
The failure to remedy injustice, both real and
perceived, has been one of the greatest failings of the
previous Afghan Administration and has provided
an easy target for those opposed to the Government.
The new Government has taken the welcome step of

14-640645/26

A/69/PV.57

reopening the investigation into the corrupt practices
that led to the collapse of the Kabul Bank. The European
Union also welcomes the appointment of a new Chief
Justice and a new Attorney-General. It is vital to
maintain that reform momentum and to encourage
all parts of the justice system to work together in a
constructive way to address systemic failures.
Afghanistan has made good progress since 2001 in
addressing the legacy of discrimination from the Taliban
regime. While the European Union is fully supportive
of a national reconciliation process in Afghanistan, we
must guard against the Taliban returning to its previous
unacceptable practices. We need to see a democratic
process that fully promotes and respects human rights
and the rule of law, including the right of women and
girls to education and full participation in Afghan
society. For its part, the European Union will extend
the mandate of its European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan and continue to support capacity-building
of the Afghan police and the rule of law. Much of the
legal framework needed to recognize the equality of
men and women is now in place, but far greater and
more systematic action is required in order to ensure
full and adequate implementation, as well as women’s
equal participation in decision-making processes across
the country.
In conclusion, all those challenges will require a
strong commitment from both the new Government and
the international community. The European Union and
its member States will remain a steadfast partner, as set
out in the new comprehensive strategy for Afghanistan,
which was endorsed in June. We applaud the role
played by UNAMA and reiterate the importance of the
Mission’s maintaining the countrywide presence that is
so necessary for the ongoing delivery of international
assistance.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am honoured to take the floor on behalf of
the States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO): the Republic of Armenia, the
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan,
the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan.
The Afghan people have just completed a very
important stage in their history: the transfer of power
from one elected head of State to another through
the mechanism of elections. We hope that the newly
elected national leader will guide efforts towards
achieving peace and progress in the country, and we
6/26

20/11/2014

wish all Afghans, as well as the new leadership, success
and strength in tackling the problems before them.
Unfortunately, there are many.
Each of our countries supports close, friendly
relations with Afghanistan, based on mutual
consideration and equitable cooperation. We all have
a stake in seeing that a pessimistic prognosis for the
country’s prospects for development, along with its
security and stability, is not borne out. We consider
the 30 September signing of the bilateral security
agreement between Afghanistan and the United States
and the accord with NATO on the status of forces to
be the sovereign right of the Afghan Republic, which
must in no way be disputed. It is our hope that those
documents will help strengthen security in the country.
We note, moreover, that the new mission, which has been
agreed with the Afghan leadership and strengthened by
the corresponding resolution of the Security Council,
will become an integral part of the framework of
international cooperation.
We are very concerned by the situation in the area
of security and view with alarm the trend involving
increasingly terrorist, extremist and other radical
elements that are striving to broaden their spheres of
influence, not only through far-reaching operations but
also through contemptible terrorist attacks, which we
decisively condemn. Further grounds for concern is the
information on the establishment of contacts between
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and the Afghan
armed opposition, aimed, inter alia, at joint acts of
sabotage in the north of Afghanistan.
In realistically assessing the situation, the CSTO
is taking measures to strengthen its own capacity
for collective reaction to the threats and challenges
emanating from Afghanistan. We intend to counter the
dangers stemming from the infiltration of destabilizing
elements into Central Asia, the spread of fundamentalist
ideas and the recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters.
Radicals from groups affiliated with Al-Qaida have
noticeably stepped up their activities along the borders
of the Afghan Republic with the neighbouring countries
of Central Asia. Increased instability in Asia and the
Middle East makes the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters all the more urgent.
In the context of the Afghan situation, the question
of achieving intra-Afghan reconciliation also takes
on increased importance. The member States of the
CSTO support the efforts of the Afghan leadership
in that regard. In that context, we hope that the new
14-64064

20/11/2014

Afghan authorities will proceed with redoubled energy
to advance that key aspect of the normalization of the
situation in the country. Naturally, that can happen
only with Kabul playing the leading role and on the
basis of the well-known triad of principles, namely
that the terrorists lay down their arms, recognize the
Constitution of Afghanistan and completely sever their
ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations, in
strict compliance with the relevant Security Council
sanctions regime. The CSTO States are prepared
to strengthen their cooperation, both within their
organization and with foreign partners, in particular
with the Afghan authorities, with a view to curtailing
further threats throughout our region.
The countries of the CSTO express serious concern
with respect to the sharp increase in the narco-business
in Afghanistan. Since the June meeting of the Security
Council on Afghanistan, CSTO member States have had
a unified position on that score. The agreed approaches
concerning the narco-threat, in particular with regard
to Afghanistan, are contained in the CSTO’s draft
anti-narcotics strategy for 2014-2020. We must point
out that, in spite of the efforts of the international
community and local authorities, Afghan drug cartels
continue to increase production, and that is a challenge
that can be considered a threat to international peace
and security. Without tough measures to get rid of the
crops and the laboratories, it will not be possible to
reverse current trends and achieve a positive result. The
international community and the Afghan Government
have the shared responsibility to curb the illicit
production of and trafficking in drugs.
We note the courageous efforts and partial success
of the Afghan security forces and law-enforcement
bodies in curbing the narco-business. We honour the
dead and those wounded in that difficult and at times
unfair fight. We believe that stopping the expansion of
drug trafficking is one of the measures that will ensure
security in Afghanistan and forms an integral part of
our collective efforts to stand up to terrorist threats. For
that purpose, the CSTO States are prepared to continue
to provide assistance aimed at strengthening the ability
of the Afghan National Security Forces. Moreover,
our organization already has significant experience
in countering the illicit trafficking in Afghan opiates,
including as part of Operation Canal, which in
September 2008 received the status of a permanent
regional counter-narcotics operation.

A/69/PV.57

The mechanisms to counter smuggling have been
functioning on the northern routes from Afghanistan
into Europe. The practical challenges involved in
blocking the channels used in smuggling narcotics
from Afghanistan, as well as in curbing the work of
transnational drug traffickers using the territory of the
States of Central Asia for smuggling of Afghan drugs
have been handled this past year as part of the special
Canal-Southern Rim and Canal-Valley operations,
thanks to which we removed 17.5 tons of hard drugs and
psychotropic substances from circulation. In addition,
5,300 crimes were identified and 25,200 criminal cases
opened. We welcome the participation of the Afghan
National Security Forces as observers in those special
operations. We call on NATO and the contingent of
forces in Afghanistan to become really involved in the
fight against illegal production and illicit drugs.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
willingness of our countries to actively participate in
large regional projects aimed at ensuring sustainable
economic development in Central Asia and Afghanistan.
In particular, that involves implementing the Central
Asia-South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project and building the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanTajikistan railway. We are also prepared to look at the
possibility of providing assistance to create conditions
enabling the successful implementation of the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline
system and the construction of railway lines and roads
for automobiles. It is important to step up cooperation
with the regional organizations and mechanisms
involved in those projects.
We express the hope that the new leadership of
Afghanistan will get down to the business of building
an independent, self-sufficient, democratic and neutral
dynamically developing State, one effectively fighting
terrorism and narcotics. For our part, the CSTO
countries are prepared to use all the capabilities that we
have and to do everything we can to help, working both
bilaterally and on a multilateral basis in various arenas
to deal with those challenges.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Afghanistan is on
the cusp of a historic change. In that context, today’s
debate and this year’s draft resolution on Afghanistan
(A/69/L.20) are most timely. Pakistan appreciates the
facilitation of the draft resolution on Afghanistan by
Germany. Pakistan is a sponsor of the draft resolution.

14-640647/26

A/69/PV.57

We wish to pay tribute to the outgoing Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
on
Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, who did an outstanding
job as a leader, as a mediator and as a conciliator. His
benign presence and wise counsel in Afghanistan
raised the stature of the United Nations and helped that
country move towards democratic transition, peace and
stability. We also wish to thank him for working very
closely with the leadership of Pakistan. We wish to
congratulate Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his appointment
as the new Special Representative, and we look forward
to working with him. I also wish to thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for his very positive,
constructive and forward-looking statement today.
We congratulate the people of Afghanistan on
the elections and the peaceful democratic transition.
That was a historic first. Pakistan supported the
electoral process in Afghanistan by strengthening
security along the border with Afghanistan. Pakistan’s
relationship with the new Government of national unity
in Afghanistan has started on a high note. President
Mamnoon Hussain attended the inauguration of
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai. Mr. Sartaj Aziz,
Adviser on National Security and Foreign Affairs,
visited Kabul to set the tone for a comprehensive and
enduring partnership. President Ghani’s visit last
week to Islamabad marked a holistic renewal of our
relationship. I agree with Ambassador Tanin that the
visit generated an unprecedented surge of optimism. A
peaceful, stable, united and prosperous Afghanistan is
in Pakistan’s vital interest. Our nations are joined by
the bonds of common faith, kinship and history.
Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif outlined
his vision of a multi-tiered bilateral engagement on
the political, security, economic and cultural levels.
Pakistan and Afghanistan have resolved to forge robust
economic partnerships by expanding trade, promoting
investment, improving infrastructure, building road
and rail links and generating energy. We also envisage
collaboration with Afghanistan on reconstruction,
border security and defence, capacity-building,
education and parliamentary exchanges. We envision a
peaceful neighbourhood, connected by trans-regional
initiatives like the Central Asia-South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project and the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline. I have shared
details on the recent engagement between Pakistan and
Afghanistan in order to reassure the Secretary-General
that our two countries are, in his words, “resetting” our

8/26

20/11/2014

relationship and increasing the space for cooperation
in all areas, particularly in the areas of security and
counter-terrorism, which includes the activation of
interaction on the military and intelligence tracks.
The focus is now rightly shifting to a managed
security transition in Afghanistan so as to pave the
way for internal stability and economic development.
The past mistakes of abandoning Afghanistan should
not be repeated. We welcome Afghanistan’s bilateral
security agreement with the United States and the
status-of-forces agreement with NATO. We agree with
the Secretary-General that Afghanistan’s security
institutions will require substantial assistance for years
to come. In that context, sustaining the Afghan forces is
important. The Secretary-General has highlighted the
plight of civilians who are caught in the crossfire, with
an increased number of deaths and injuries.
In the post-2014 period, domestic and international
terrorist networks, insurgents and criminal groups
should not be allowed to push Afghanistan towards
deeper internecine strife. Intra-Afghan reconciliation
remains the keystone for creating the conditions needed
for sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan. An
inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
process, which the new Government is initiating, is
imperative for national unity and progress. Pakistan
stands ready to support that process.
Pakistan and Afghanistan both face the threats
of terrorism, violent extremism and transnational
crime, and a precarious security environment. We will
counter those threats with a strong common resolve
and coordinated endeavours. Non-State actors should
not be allowed to dictate Pakistan-Afghanistan bilateral
relations. Our relationship must be based on mutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and
marked by trust and cooperation. On our side, we are
prosecuting Operation Zarb-e-Azb to take out terrorists
and take down their networks. There is zero tolerance
for them. Our nation and our valiant armed forces are
determined to fight that war to the finish.
There are no bad or good terrorists. Terrorists
are criminals, plain and simple. Action is being taken
against them, without distinction and differentiation.
The soil of Pakistan will be cleansed of the scourges
of terrorism and violent extremism. Action on the other
side of the border would help to ensure the annihilation
of the toxic ideology of terrorism and the operatives who
implement its dark agenda. In that regard, we appreciate

14-64064

20/11/2014

the steps being taken by the Afghan Government for
simultaneous operations on the Afghan side of the
border to address specific security situations.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on Afghanistan
(A/69/540) expresses grave concern at the economic
situation, especially a precipitous drop in growth and
a decline in investor confidence. We hope that the
pledges made under the Tokyo Mutual Assistance
Framework will materialize in order stimulate growth
at the local, regional and national levels. That is critical
for continued stability in Afghanistan. We look forward
to continued international commitments to Afghanistan
at the London Conference next month. The SecretaryGeneral’s report also refers to the booming illicit
economy in Afghanistan, which is both a symptom and
a source of uncertainty. We hope that the international
community will assist the Government of Afghanistan
and other regional countries to counter the narcotics
trade and promote development priorities to strengthen
its licit economy.
We are encouraged by President Ghani’s decision
to give priority to refugees. More than 3 million
documented and undocumented refugees continue to
live on Pakistan’s soil, while the international assistance
for them has been dwindling over the years. We are
hosting the largest, single-country, chronic refugee
caseload. Despite constraints on Pakistan’s resources,
we have extended the refugees’ stay in Pakistan until
the end of 2015. Three steps are necessary to deal
with the refugees in Pakistan: first, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees must
increase its assistance; secondly, the international donor
community, which seeks to help the new Government
rebuild and reconstruct Afghanistan, should earmark
resources for the rehabilitation and repatriation of
refugees; and thirdly, the Afghan Government itself
should, in its planning, pay special attention to the
livelihoods and housing of returning refugees so that
they can be reabsorbed in Afghanistan.
We are committed to regional stability through
cooperation and connectivity. We commend China for
the successful meeting of last month’s Heart of Asia
process. Pakistan will have the pleasure of hosting the
next meeting in 2015. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif
conveyed to President Ashraf Ghani last week that
Pakistan would stand by Afghanistan to support its
endeavours for peace and progress as it begins its decade
of transformation. In 1930, Pakistan’s philosopherpoet Allama Iqbal characterized Afghanistan as

A/69/PV.57

Qalb-e-Asia, or the “Heart of Asia”. He wrote, and I
translate:
“Asia is comparable to a living body. The heart
that beats inside the body is the homeland of the
Afghans. The destruction of Afghanistan would
be the destruction of Asia. In its progress and
prosperity lies the well-being of Asia”.
More than eight decades later, those verses still
hold true. The people of Afghanistan are masters of
their own destiny. Today, they are defining it for a
bright future. We wish them and their new Government
all success.
Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): The United Arab Emirates reiterates its
full support for the draft resolution before the General
Assembly today on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/69/L.20), and reaffirms its sponsorship of the draft
resolution. The United Arab Emirates recognizes the
importance of joining efforts to support the Republic
of Afghanistan and its people along a prosperous and
stable path that will eventually lead to sustainable
economic development and to all-inclusive and effective
social progress for all members of Afghan society.
We also welcome the new President of Afghanistan,
Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai. We wish him success in
his presidency.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the importance
of the international community’s continued support
for Afghanistan as it assumes responsibility for its
share of the outcomes of the various international
conferences, including the Kabul, Bonn, Tokyo,
Istanbul, Lisbon and Chicago Conferences. We also
look forward to the London Conference to be held next
month on the recovery of the Afghan economy. We
reaffirm our commitment to supporting Afghanistan,
which translates into stability for the region as a whole,
including for the United Arab Emirates itself.
My country commends the recent political progress
and the electoral experience in Afghanistan. We also
commend the role of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
in supporting an Afghan-led political process. We
reaffirm the importance of supporting the Afghan-led
political process and the Afghani forces as they take over
security responsibilities, by providing training, funding
and necessary support. The security and stability of
Afghanistan are of vital importance in ensuring that

14-640649/26

A/69/PV.57

country’s economic recovery and development. We
also stress the importance of the national reconciliation
process, which will bring together all elements of
Afghan society, including women, in order to hold a
peaceful dialogue.
On the humanitarian and development fronts, the
United Arab Emirates has continued to implement
projects in Afghanistan through a committee that works
to coordinate the efforts of all United Arab Emirates
donors and charity institutions within a framework
designed to help to meet the Afghan people’s basic
needs in areas such as nutrition, health care, assistance
to orphans and people with special needs. We have also
continued to implement various infrastructure projects,
such as roads, schools and mosques, throughout
Afghanistan.
The United Arab Emirates also continues to
assist the Afghan people, through cooperation with
various other States and institutions, in implementing
projects with long-term benefits aimed at improving
Afghanistan’s economy and enhancing its workforce.
In a unique project, we launched the Fatima bint
Mohammed initiative for producing carpets in
Afghanistan, an industry whose production had shrunk
but, since the launch of the initiative, now accounts
for 20 per cent of the country’s gross domestic
growth, providing job opportunities for more than
4,000 people, 70 per cent of them women, furnishing
a daily income that meets Afghan families’ needs and
exceeds Afghanistan’s average per capita income. The
project is now opening the door to global markets for
the carpet industry, as part of the implementation of
the sustainable development plan of the United Arab
Emirates, which includes combating unemployment
in rural Afghanistan. The United Arab Emirates
has also implemented health projects, such as a joint
venture with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for
vaccinating children in Afghanistan, to which we have
allocated $33 million, as well as contributing to global
efforts to eradicate polio by 2018.
Afghanistan has long been a victim of terrorism and
extremism. In that regard, the United Arab Emirates
stresses the importance of redoubling international
efforts to combat terrorism and extremism, which
have a direct negative impact on the development of
societies. We have consistently pursued a policy that
includes coordinated efforts to strengthen our national
legislation, laws and regulations, including establishing
a list of designated terrorist organizations, such as

10/26

20/11/2014

Al-Qaida, based on the provisions of our 2014 Federal
Act Number 7 on countering terrorist activities. In that
context, we will continue to work with other partners
in the framework of our membership in the Global
Counterterrorism Forum and our hosting of the the
Hedayah Centre in Abu Dhabi, the first international
centre of excellence aimed at countering extremism and
terrorism.
We have also consistently raised awareness about
moderation in Islam by training Afghan imams, a
programme — to which we have allocated to 44 million
emirati dirhams — consisting of two phases, the first
of which has successfully trained 11,000 mullahs,
while the second, to be completed in 2015, aims to
train another 20,000, 1,500 of whom will be women.
Moreover, several hundred of those trainees will be
qualified to train other participants, which itself will
make an effective contribution to creating a moderate
and sustained environment in Afghanistan for decades
to come.
In conclusion, we emphasize the readiness of
the United Arab Emirates to provide the required
support for the Afghan people, and we look forward
to continuing dialogue and discussions between our
two countries designed to enhance cooperation and
coordination on security and development.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the report submitted to the General Assembly
by the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/69/540) and supports the Assembly’s adoption today
of draft resolution A/69/L.20, on Afghanistan.
After several decades of war and turmoil, the
Afghan people have entered a crucial, three-pronged
phase of transformation in the political, economic
and security areas, with new opportunities to achieve
unity, stability, peace and reconstruction, while at the
same time tackling difficult tasks. The Afghan people
aspire to unity, stable growth and peace with their
neighbours, all of which are in the collective interests of
the international community, and it is our unshirkable
responsibility to help to resolve Afghanistan’s problems
as soon as possible. China supports a continued leading
role for the United Nations in coordinating international
assistance to Afghanistan in order to ensure that all
stakeholders’ efforts are complementary, mutually
reinforcing and synergetic.
I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we must respect the Afghan people’s right to make

14-64064

20/11/2014

independent choices. The country has a unique history
and specific national conditions, and it is up to the
Afghan people to independently explore the road that
lies ahead of them, taking their current circumstances
into account. During President Ghani Ahmadzai’s recent
visit to China at the invitation of President Xi Jinping,
both sides issued a joint communiqué on deepening
their strategic cooperation partnership. China would
like to reiterate its support for Afghanistan’s position
on maintaining its national independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, fully reflecting the Chinese
people’s respect for the Afghan people’s right to decide
for themselves. At the opening ceremony of the fourth
Ministerial Meeting of the Istanbul Process, China’s
Premier, Li Keqiang, also emphasized that China
believes that the Afghan people have the capability and
wisdom to enable them to handle their own affairs and
ultimately achieve peace and stability.
Secondly, we must make every effort to promote
the process of peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
In order to achieve peace and stability, it is vital that the
country establish a broad political base and inclusive
political reconciliation. As President Xi Jinping pointed
out during his meeting with President Ghani, all sides
should support an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
and reconciliation process. China hopes that every party
in Afghanistan will participate in that process and that
the international community will provide constructive
assistance for it.
Thirdly, we must support Afghanistan in its efforts
to achieve national security and stability. Afghanistan’s
current security situation is still troubled. The
international community must back the country’s
efforts to increase the capability of its security and
police forces in addressing threats of all kinds so that it
can rehabilitate itself and rebuild.
Fourthly, we should help Afghanistan to speed
up its national social and economic development.
Poverty and backwardness provide a breeding ground
for extremism. We must therefore help Afghanistan
to develop its economy so that the Afghan people can
live happy lives. The international community should
honour its aid commitment to help Afghanistan achieve
sustainable economic development.
Fifthly, we should support Afghanistan’s
integration into regional cooperation. Afghanistan
cannot achieve development and prosperity without the
support and assistance of the international community,
especially the countries in the region. The international

A/69/PV.57

community should support Afghanistan’s development
of its foreign relations, especially with regard to
enhancing the mutual trust and cooperation in various
areas with the countries in the region, based on mutual
respect and benefits, so that it can better engage in
regional economic cooperation and achieve common
development.
The Chinese Government has long supported and
promoted peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan.
China will resolutely pursue a policy of friendship
with that country and continuously move its strategic
partnership ahead. China will continue to help
Afghanistan in its capacity-building and enhance
its cooperation with that country in such fields as
infrastructure, agriculture, hydropower and the
exploitation of mineral resources. We also plan to offer
more training and assistance in education, security and
other fields.
Not long ago, the Chinese Government hosted in
Beijing the fourth Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul
Process on the question of Afghanistan, which has
played a positive role in advancing the Istanbul Process
and in facilitating the early resolution of Afghan issues
and the achievement of lasting peace, stability and the
economic and social development of the region. China
will continue to lend its full support to Afghanistan in
its efforts to improve its relations with its neighbours,
enhance regional security and facilitate its engagement
in regional cooperation. We welcome the participation
of Afghanistan in building the Silk Road Economic
Belt.
At a time when the Afghan people, who have suffered
a great deal from war, look ahead with aspiration and
hope, nothing is more important and precious than
the understanding, support and help of the country’s
neighbours and friends. China will continue to provide
the necessary assistance and support to Afghanistan, do
what it can as a neighbour and assume the responsibilities
of a big developing country. China will work with the
international community and make unremitting efforts
to help bring about sustained developmentand security
and the prosperity of Afghanistan and the region.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, let me
thank the President for organizing this discussion
on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to
commend the German delegation for coordinating
the intergovernmental negotiations on the issue in
an excellent manner, which has led us to this annual
General Assembly draft resolution (A/69/L.20). India

14-6406411/26

A/69/PV.57

is happy to co-sponsor this draft resolution, as we have
done in the past several years, which is traditionally
adopted by consensus.
I wish to congratulate the people of Afghanistan
on their new Government of national unity, led by
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah.
The Afghan people have shown great patience and
forbearance during the recent months. That gave much
needed political space and time to the two presidential
candidates and their supporters to work through the
elements that have made the national unity Government
agreement possible. That patience and forbearance is
yet another testimony to the strong public support in
Afghanistan for a democratic political system. It will
preserve the gains in political reconstruction made
over the past 13 years. It is also testimony to the
fierce determination of the Afghan people to vanquish
terrorism and extremism. We have no doubt that both
President Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah will keep that in mind as they undertake the
difficult tasks that lie ahead of them. They include
the rapid formation of a new Afghan Government in
keeping with the national unity Government agreement
and also the task of electoral reforms and organizing
a constitutional Loya Jirga that they have set for
themselves.
Despite the great efforts and sacrifices of both
international troops and the personnel of the Afghan
national security forces, the evil scourge of terrorism
and extremism has continued to threaten Afghanistan’s
peace and stability. That such terrorist and extremists
groups continue to survive, despite the immense
military pressure brought on them, only underscores
the fact that they continue to benefit from support from
beyond Afghanistan, and they also access resources
from transnational terrorist and criminal networks.
It is only if that support stops and the linkages with
networks are broken that the scourge of terrorism will
be defeated.
The reconciliation of members of the erstwhile
Taliban regime is an integral part of the efforts to achieve
national reconciliation that are being undertaken by
the Government of Afghanistan. A successful national
reconciliation programme must be transparent, led by
the Afghan Government and owned by the Afghan
people, and it must respect the Afghan Constitution
and the international red lines. That will require sincere
cooperation on he part of all parties concerned.
12/26

20/11/2014

Afghanistan is also entering a new phase in its
economic transition. In today’s global economic
situation, when our Government budgets are strained
and when the sentiment of aid fatigue exists in most
traditional donor countries, a successful Afghan
private sector holds the key to a successful economic
transition in Afghanistan. As a lead country in the
confidence-building measures based on investment in
trade and commerce, which are being undertaken under
the Istanbul Process, India has gained some experience
on that issue. One of the consistent messages that we are
receiving from private-sector businesses serious about
entering the Afghan market is that, while security is
an issue that can at times be managed, Afghanistan’s
lack of connectivity to seaports and to faster-growing
economic regions of Asia is a significant constraint.
India has been in discussions with the Governments
of Iran and Afghanistan to see how we can collaborate
on a project to develop Iran’s port of Chahbahar, which
would improve Afghanistan’s access to the sea and
provide a significant boost to economic reconstruction
activities in the western parts of Afghanistan. We hope
that other similar connectivity-enhancing projects for
Afghanistan will be undertaken by the international
community and will henceforth be seen as a priority
area in our collective efforts to assist Afghanistan’s
economic reconstruction programme. President Ghani
Ahmadzai has taken the lead in that respect, and his
efforts need reciprocation in full measure.
This is a critical decade of transformation for
Afghanistan. India is proud to call itself Afghanistan’s
first strategic partner. We share the Afghan people’s
vision of a strong, independent, united and prosperous
Afghanistan, for which so many Afghans have
sacrificed so much. India will do whatever is possible
within our capacities and our means to work with the
Afghan Government and its people to realize their
vision. Afghanistan also needs the unwavering support
of the international community.
Ms. King (Australia): Draft resolution A/69/L.20
appropriately recognizes the major milestones
reached this year in Afghanistan. It also recognizes
the continuing security, economic and development
challenges, and the continuing vital importance of
effective partnerships between Afghanistan and the
international community.
The September inauguration of President Ghani
Ahmadzai and the establishment of a Government
of national unity with Mr. Abdullah Abdullah as

14-64064

20/11/2014

Chief Executive Officer marked the first democratic
transfer of power in Afghanistan’s history. Australia
applauds the millions of Afghans who demonstrated
their dedication to a democratic future and who braved
a very real threat of violence to vote in two election
rounds. That was a truly historic achievement. We
urge President Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive
Officer Mr. Abdullah to continue to work in a spirit
of cooperation, as a stable, committed and inclusive
Government is in the interests of all Afghan people and
is essential to protect the gains of the past decade.
The Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF)
assumed the lead role for providing security over a year
ago now and is on track to assume full responsibility
for security by the end of 2014. The ANSF delivered
security for Afghanistan’s elections and now leads
99 per cent of conventional and special operations.
An effective and sustainable ANSF is fundamental
to Afghanistan’s long-term stability, but continued
assistance will be required to build their capacity.
The NATO-led non-combat Resolute Support Mission
will continue to train, advise and assist those forces.
Australia will participate in Resolute Support and will
contribute $100 million a year from 2015 to 2017 to
sustain the ANSF. We look to the Afghan Government
to ensure that the support from the international
community is used effectively.
As Afghanistan moves towards greater selfreliance, economic growth must be a priority for the
Government. Growth must be broad-based, the widening
inequality should be addressed and women should
be empowered to participate fully in Afghanistan’s
economy. Importantly, economic growth will need
to be underpinned by sound policies that facilitate
commerce and investment and a regulatory framework
that provides transparency and confidence. The new
Government has already started to deliver on much
needed reforms. The reopening of the investigation into
fraud committed by the Kabul Bank is an early and
important demonstration of the new Administration’s
strong stance against corruption.
Afghanistan has also come a long way on human
rights. The Afghan Constitution now enshrines equal
rights for men and women. Three million Afghan girls
now attend school, compared to virtually none in 2001.
In this year’s elections, millions of Afghan women
exercised their right to vote, and many were nominated
for office. Australia welcomes the recent establishment
of Afghanistan’s National Women’s Advisory Council.

A/69/PV.57

That positive momentum must continue. We look to
Afghanistan to ensure full implementation of the law
on the elimination of violence against women and
to finalize and implement a national action plan on
women, peace and security, so as to ensure that women
have a role in the peace and reconciliation process.
As a strong supporter of Afghanistan’s Independent
Human Rights Commission, we were pleased by recent
news that the Commission has retained its “A” status
following a review by the International Coordinating
Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights.
Since the fall of the Taliban in 2001, much has
been achieved by Afghanistan with the support of the
international community. We look to Afghanistan to
continue to build on its security, political and economic
transition achievements and to continue improvements
in human rights. The international community remains
committed to supporting Afghanistan in that endeavour.
The signing of the bilateral security agreement with the
United States and the status-of-forces agreement with
NATO provides the legal instruments that will allow
the Resolute Support Mission to continue supporting
the national security forces as they provide security to
the Afghan people. In addition, the upcoming London
Conference will provide an important forum to discuss
continued development cooperation with Afghanistan
within the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
Also, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan has a strong mandate to continue providing
support to Afghanistan.
Afghanistan faces significant challenges on the
road to a more peaceful and secure future. Australia,
along with the international community, is committed
to supporting Afghanistan. And we look to do that in
close partnership with a responsive, transparent and
accountable Afghan Government. We express our
thanks to Germany for coordinating the draft resolution
A/69/L.20 on Afghanistan and to Ambassador Tanin
for his important contribution. With over 80 sponsors,
including Australia, the draft resolution sends a
strong message of continuing international support
for Afghanistan. We look forward to its adoption by
consensus.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I should like to express my
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Harald Braun of
Germany and his colleagues for guiding consultations
on draft resolution A/69/L.20 on Afghanistan. I
should also like to thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin of

14-6406413/26

A/69/PV.57

Afghanistan for his comprehensive statement at the
beginning of this debate, as well as for his constructive
engagement towards achieving consensus.
As a sponsor of the document, Japan is pleased
to offer its support for the draft resolution at hand.
I should also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and, in particular, to its former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, who led the Mission ably
during his tenure. In that connection, I wish to extend
my congratulations to Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and my countryman, Ambassador
Tadamichi Yamamoto, as the new Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Under the
new leadership, I expect that UNAMA will continue to
play a central role in supporting an Afghan-led political
process and socioeconomic development.
Japan welcomes the induction of Mr. Mohammad
Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai as the new President of
Afghanistan and Mr. Abdullah Abdullah as the new
Chief Executive Officer. They are assuming their new
posts at a very crucial juncture. As the country embarks
on the transformation decade aimed at achieving peace
and stability, supported by sustainable finances and
a viable economy, the new Government must tackle
numerous challenges. In that regard, I should like to
touch upon three points of particular importance,
namely, advancing the political process, improving
public order and safety, and finally, continuing efforts
to achieve sustainable development.
First, with regard to the political process, Japan
congratulates the Afghan people on their first
democratic transition of power. The electoral process
was a testament to the political will and courage of
millions of Afghan men and women. We are pleased to
have supported that process through, among others, the
provision of polling materials and capacity-building for
the Independent Election Commission. Nevertheless,
we note with disappointment the numerous delays
that the presidential electoral process experienced.
Furthermore, it is regrettable that more than 50 days
after the inauguration of the President, key Government
posts have yet to be filled.
We call on the new leadership to form an inclusive
cabinet without delay and to respond to the calls of the
Afghan people to advance the political process. We look
to the new Government to carry out its commitments on
14/26

20/11/2014

the campaign against corruption and narcotics, as well
as on political reform. We also hope to see advancement
in the political reconciliation process with the Taliban.
Moreover, in anticipation of future elections, such as
the Wolesi Jirga or the House of the People in 2015,
lessons from past elections must be utilized to reinforce
the democratic process and make it more transparent.
Secondly, I would like to address the issue of public
order and safety. The conclusion of the International
Security Assistance Force’s (ISAF) mission at the end
of 2014 will mark a watershed in Afghanistan’s path
towards self-sufficiency. In that regard, we welcome
Afghanistan’s recent signing of the bilateral security
agreement with the United States and the status of forces
agreement with NATO. We also highly commend the
courageous efforts of ISAF in having provided security
assistance to Afghanistan since its inception in 2001.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the NATO
mission Resolute Support will continue to provide
assistance for Afghan security forces and institutions
beyond 2014. Public order and safety constitute the
foundations of Afghanistan’s development process
and the international community’s engagement in it.
In order to prevent the country from ever becoming a
seedbed for terrorism again, it is imperative that the
international community continue its engagement with
Afghanistan.
In that regard, Japan has provided more than
$1 billion to the Law and Order Trust Fund for
Afghanistan, operated by the United Nations
Development Programme. For example, this month
Japan is providing financial and technical assistance
for the training of approximately 200 female Afghan
police officers in Turkey. We expect our contribution to
the Fund to be utilized with appropriate oversight and
to strengthen Afghan law enforcement capabilities.
My third point concerns the achievement of
sustainable development. At the 2012 Tokyo Conference,
Afghanistan and the international community
established the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, which reaffirms their partnership for
economic growth and development through a process
of mutual accountability. At the London Conference on
Afghanistan, to be held next month as a follow-up to
the Tokyo Conference, we look to Afghanistan to renew
its commitments on governance and development.
Correspondingly, we look forward to the international
community manifesting its continued support for
Afghanistan.
14-64064

20/11/2014

Japan is the second-largest aid donor to Afghanistan.
It has contributed approximately $5.4 billion since
2001 and has already disbursed over $2 billion of
the $3 billion commitment it made at the 2012 Tokyo
Conference. But that is also a commitment based
on mutual responsibility. With the understanding
that the new Afghan Government will deliver on its
commitments, Japan will continue to carry out the aid
commitments it made at the Tokyo Conference.
Japan’s assistance to Afghanistan is a testament
to our support for the people of Afghanistan on their
path towards achieving sustainable development. As
Afghanistan makes the crucial transition towards selfreliance, peace and prosperity, Japan stands ready to
offer its support in cooperation with the international
community.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to express my delegation’s
appreciation to Ambassador Tanin and to align myself
with the statement made by the delegation of the
European Union.
Over the past 13 years, the international community,
in conjunction with Afghanistan, has undertaken a
massive economic and human effort. Progress has been
remarkable. However, it remains fragile.
On the political front, the constant terrorist attacks
and economic difficulties have not prevented a historic
peaceful transfer of power. Spain welcomes the rapid
finalization of the bilateral security agreement between
the new Afghan Government and the United States
and the status-of-forces agreement with NATO, which
will allow for support and advice to be provided to the
Afghan forces.
In 2014, Afghanistan is completing the transition
phase and beginning a decade of transformation. At
its conclusion, the country should have its own solid
and effective mechanisms to ensure comprehensive
security. The core of the decade of transformation
is the international community’s partnership with
Afghanistan, which, from this point on, will be deployed
on the basis of the commitments declared at the recent
Wales Summit and the Bonn and Tokyo Conferences,
the conclusions of which, we hope, will be confirmed
at the upcoming London Conference to be held on 3 and
4 December.
In that context, Spain wishes to emphasize in
particular the need to ensure progress in the area of
women’s rights, which are enshrined in the Constitution

A/69/PV.57

of Afghanistan. I wish to congratulate the Afghan
Government on the adoption of the National Action
Plan on Women and Peace and Security in Afghanistan
in October 2014. We encourage Afghanistan to work
tirelessly in the new phase that is just beginning towards
a future in which women achieve full participation in
all areas of political, economic, social and cultural life
in Afghanistan, on an entirely equal footing with men.
The progress made over the past 13 years could also
be compromised by economic problems. We therefore
welcome the determination that has been expressed
repeatedly by Afghanistan’s new Government of
national unity to undertake the necessary reforms
as soon as possible and to fulfil the commitments
undertaken in those areas. We also encourage the
efforts by the Government towards a deep and lasting
reconciliation within Afghan society. Without full
reconciliation, there is no hope for the future of
Afghan — or any other — society.
I wish to conclude by reiterating Spain’s firm
commitment to the stabilization and transformation
of Afghanistan, the country’s long-term progress
and the construction of a peaceful, democratic and
prosperous society for all Afghans. In that regard,
we welcome the general support once again for this
year’s draft resolution (A/69/L.20), which Spain once
again sponsored and which we will adopt today. The
draft resolution is a key document on the international
commitment to Afghanistan.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to express my delegation’s thanks
and appreciation to the President of the General
Assembly for organizing this meeting to discuss the
situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/69/540).
The Islamic Republic of Iran is indeed eager to see
a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour.
We continue to do everything in our power to that end,
since security in Afghanistan directly and indirectly
affects security in the region, including my country.
We commend the Afghan people for their broadbased participation in the presidential election despite
the threats by extremist and terrorist groups. We also
welcome the formation of the Government of national
unity, with Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai as its President
and Mr. Abdullah Abdullah as its Chief Executive
Officer.

14-6406415/26

A/69/PV.57

We trust that all political entities will work together
in accordance with the Afghan Constitution and with
the aim of strengthening Afghanistan’s sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity
in order to achieve a peaceful and prosperous future
for the entire Afghan people. The new Government
represents the true will of the Afghan people and should
enjoy the due respect and support of the international
community.
On the important question of security arrangements,
all General Assembly resolutions concerning the
situation in Afghanistan, including today’s draft
resolution (A/69/L.20), are emphatic that all measures
to support the training, equipping, financing and
development of the Afghan National Security Forces
beyond 2014, including the Resolute Support mission,
should be undertaken in consultation with and with
the consent of the Government of Afghanistan, which
reflects the strong commitment of the international
community to respecting the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.
We continue to support Afghanistan and the Afghan
people. Iran has hosted millions of Afghan refugees for
more than three decades. The remaining Afghans in
our contry use our Government-subsidized schools and
higher education, health and social security services.
Based on the information provided by our Ministers
of Education and Higher Education, in this year alone
more than 320,000 Afghan students were enrolled in
our schools, and more than 7,000 in our universities.
We continue to expand our bilateral cooperation,
particularly on security matters and counter-narcotics
efforts, while developing projects and economic
cooperation in the fields of infrastructure, agriculture
and finding durable solutions for Afghan refugees.
The continuing engagement among Afghanistan,
its neighbours and its regional partners in the areas of
trade, economic exchanges and development projects
must be further supported and strengthened. We firmly
believe that greater economic ties will bring about peace
and reinforce security and stability in the country.
On counter-narcotics efforts, we are particularly
concerned about the reports indicating that opium
poppy cultivation in Afghanistan has almost doubled
since 2012, which is a real threat for the region and
beyond and should be addressed by the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community. We
welcome the initiative taken by the Afghan Minister
on Counter-Narcotics to organize a good-neighbourly
16/26

20/11/2014

relations declaration conference in Kabul in January
2014, with the participation of ministers or heads of
anti-counter-narcotics institutions from China, Iran,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
With the strong support and commitment of
international donors, Afghan authorities and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the menace of
drug cultivation and drug trafficking, a main source
of income for extremist and terrorist groups, could
be curtailed to a great extent. In that regard, the
international community should support the Triangular
Initiative on counter-narcotics enforcement among
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, which is essential
not only to strengthening the security and stability of
Afghanistan but also to alleviating the serious concerns
of neighbouring States and the transit and destination
countries of drug trafficking.
We support the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and United Nations agencies
in their efforts to provide development assistance for
the reconstruction of the country through a robust
regional engagement on issues such as border security,
immigration, the return of refugees and drug control
measures. The role of UNAMA should be further
strengthened in the light of the developments expected
in Afghanistan this year. The future role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan is going to grow, due to the
multifaceted and increasingly complex challenges. We
therefore regret to learn about the reduction of resources
available to it.
I would take this opportunity to express my
appreciation to Mr. Ján Kubiš, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNAMA, for his dedication and outstanding service
to Afghanistan. We wish him success and good luck
in his future assignment. I also wish to welcome his
successor, Mr. Nicholas Haysom.
In conclusion, the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran wishes to once again reiterate its
sustained support for the promotion of security,
stability and sustainable development in Afghanistan
and extends our full support to the country’s new
Government.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join other Member States
in sponsoring the draft resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/69/L.20). The text renews the
international community’s commitment to supporting

14-64064

20/11/2014

the people and the Government of Afghanistan as they
work to expand security, freedom and prosperity in the
country.
The year 2014 has already featured Afghanistan’s
first democratic, peaceful transfer of power and the
formation of a Government of national unity under
President Ghani’s leadership. The determination of
the Afghan people showed in voting in such large
numbers despite security risks, and the two presidential
candidates’ choice of unity over division demonstrated
the depth of Afghans’ commitment to continuing their
country’s democratic development and its progress
towards lasting stability. As the new Government
takes on formidable challenges, including preparing
for parliamentary elections, considering constitutional
reform, combating corruption and illicit drug trafficking
while developing the licit economy, it will continue to
need the strong support of the international community.
By adopting this draft resolution, the General
Assembly will affirm its commitment to meeting that
need. It cannot and should not be forgotten that Afghans,
with the support of the international community,
continue to develop their country under the constant
threat of attack by illegal armed groups whose attacks
on civilians demonstrate their sheer brutality. Afghan
forces have performed courageously and every day are
growing more capable of protecting the Afghan people
from harm.
The United States and its partners remain
committed to supporting their continued development
after the International Security Assistance Force
concludes its mission at the end of the year. In the near
term, NATO and its partners, at the invitation and in full
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan, will
train, advise and assist Afghan forces with the ultimate
goal of developing professional, self-sustaining security
forces capable of securing Afghanistan.
As important as security and political progress is,
lasting stability in Afghanistan will not be possible
without sustained socioeconomic development and
growth. The Afghan Government must facilitate
development by taking on corruption and doing so
vigorously and upholding the rule of law so Afghans
and their trading partners can engage in commerce in a
predictable and fair legal environment. It is encouraging
that President Ghani has made combating corruption a
clear priority for his Government from the outset.

A/69/PV.57

But again, international support can play an
important role in promoting development not only
through the provision of development assistance, but
also through efforts, particularly by Afghanistan’s
neighbours, to integrate Afghanistan into the regional
and global economy. Events like the recently concluded
Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in China as well
as the upcoming London Conference offer occasions for
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to focus on that critical ingredient for a
stable Afghanistan. The United States encourages
all participants to take maximum advantage of those
opportunities.
The United Nations has been, and will continue to
be, an important focal point for international support for
Afghanistan. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and other United Nations elements played
a critical and commendable role in this year’s election
audit and will continue to be called upon for advice on
electoral and legal issues, inter alia. In those efforts, the
United Nations will continue to enjoy the support and
the partnership of the United States of America as we
work with it and all of our partners to support Afghans’
efforts to transform their country.
The progress of the past decade has been real
and tangible. Afghans have seen improved access to
education for all children, including girls. Fewer than
1 million students were enrolled in school in 2001, none
of them girls. Today more than 8.3 million students
attend school, one third of whom are girls. In 2001
there was virtually no independent Afghan media, only
Taliban propaganda. Today Afghans can listen to 175
FM radio stations, watch 75 television channels and read
hundreds of print publications. The progress we have
witnessed has changed people’s lives for the better and
offers a sound foundation on which the Afghan people,
with international support, can — and will — build a
brighter future for their country.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea welcomes the first democratic transition of
power in Afghanistan’s history. We believe that the
recent inauguration of the new Afghan President, based
on the political agreement to form a Government of
National Unity, signals a new era of Afghan-led efforts
towards peace and prosperity.
In particular, we appreciate the courage and
determination of the Afghan people, especially Afghan
women, who actively participated in elections despite

14-6406417/26

A/69/PV.57

violence threatened by the Taliban and other terrorist
groups. The support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and of global electoral observers
during the electoral process is also commendable.
The new Afghan Government faces a multitude of
challenges, including issues of security, governance
and human rights. Given the Afghan National
Security Forces’ assumption of full responsibility for
security and the International Security Assistance
Force’s withdrawal at the end of this year, continuous
international assistance is critical. In that regard,
we appreciate the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) leaders’ Wales Summit declaration in
September, which envisages the establishment of the
short-term Resolute Support Mission to train, advise
and assist the Afghan forces, and their commitment
to continuously finance the Afghan National Security
Forces beyond 2014. We also welcome the conclusion
of the bilateral security agreement between the United
States and Afghanistan and the status-of-forces
agreement between NATO and Afghanistan.
My delegation recognizes that the transition
requires not only a process to improve the security
situation, but also the full assumption of Afghan
leadership and ownership over governance. The decision
of the international community to muster long-term
support depends on the Afghan Government’s progress
in key areas under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. The London Conference on Afghanistan
in December will serve as an important opportunity
to review the progress made and to reaffirm the
international community’s commitments.
The Afghan Government must redouble its efforts
in the promotion of human rights, especially those of
women, as well as good governance, including its fight
against corruption and the illicit economy. We call for
the full implementation of the law on the elimination of
violence against women and the anti-money-laundering
law in that regard.
Enhanced regional dialogue and confidence-building
measures are also important to ensure lasting peace
and security in Afghanistan. We note the fourth Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference, held in Beijing on
31 October, and the Beijing declaration, which furthered
the Istanbul Process.
National reconciliation owned by Afghans and
led by Afghans will be essential for lasting peace and
security in Afghanistan. We look forward to further

18/26

20/11/2014

progress on political dialogue and peace negotiations
among all the relevant stakeholders under a newly
launched Afghan Government of unity.
Today’s draft resolution (A/69/L.20), to be adopted
by consensus, embodies the political will of all Member
States to support the Afghan people in their political
and national reconstruction process. The Republic of
Korea has actively taken part in the global contribution
to reconstruction and stability in Afghanistan since
it joined the ISAF contributing nations in 2010. As
part of such efforts, our provincial reconstruction
team operated in Parwan province until June, with
a focus mainly on four key areas — medical and
health, education, governance and rural development.
Moreover, my Government has contributed $250 million
in financial assistance to date, for both the sustainment
of the Afghan National Security Forces and the
socioeconomic development of Afghanistan, since it
pledged in 2011 to provide $500 million to Afghanistan.
We will continue our support to Afghanistan,
including financial contributions beyond 2014, so that
the Afghan Government and its people can achieve a
prosperous, stable and democratic Afghanistan for all
Afghans.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): At the outset, allow
me to thank Germany and other States for preparing
the draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/69/L.20). Lithuania looks forward to its adoption by
consensus.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
This year has presented a number of challenges
for the Afghan nation, which it has successfully met.
The presidential elections marked the first democratic
transition in the modern history of Afghanistan.
Moreover, the elections took place at a time when
the Afghan National Security Forces assumed their
responsibilities for safeguarding the country. Although
the situation remains fragile, the successful completion
of those processes proves the willingness and capability
of Afghanistan to continue on its path towards creating
a stable, peaceful and prosperous country where every
man, woman and child can feel safe and secure.
Afghanistan now urgently needs a fully functioning
Government of national unity that is able to implement
the necessary and pressing reforms. A particular focus
needs to be placed on improving the rule of law, dealing
with the security situation, protecting human rights,
14-64064

20/11/2014

fighting corruption and combating drug production
and trafficking. Illicit opium production threatens the
security and development of the country and the whole
region, as the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2014 shows a
worrying trend of increasing opium poppy cultivation.
We call on Afghanistan and the international community
to intensify their joint efforts in supporting alternative
livelihoods and fighting organized crime.
Lithuania has been a firm partner of Afghanistan,
a supporter and contributor in achieving its main
goals. Our political and development cooperation,
including support for institutional capacity-building,
civil society, economic growth and social development
and promotion of regional initiatives, will continue, as
stated at the Chicago Summit, the Tokyo Conference
and other meetings.
Lithuania, which has undergone a radical
transformation over the past several decades, is
ready to share its experience in a number of areas
of State-building, including strengthening regional
cooperation. In our view, regional cooperation is of
crucial importance for strengthening stability and
facilitating the development of Afghanistan and the
entire region. We support regional initiatives involving
Afghanistan such as the Istanbul Process, the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference and others. The
future of Afghanistan also depends on the positive
engagement of its neighbours.
As the International Security Assistance Force
mission winds down, the sustained capacity-building
of the Afghan National Security Forces is essential for
the maintenance of security and stability in the country.
Lithuania will continue supporting the Afghan National
Security Forces with financial contributions as well as
through participation in the Resolute Support Mission.
This non-combat mission, aimed at training, assisting
and mentoring the Afghan National Security Forces,
builds on the results achieved by the International
Security Assistance Force.
The invitation extended by Afghan Government
to continue to train, advise and assist the Afghan
National Security Forces, and the signing of the United
States-Afghanistan bilateral security agreement and
the NATO-Afghanistan status-of-forces agreement
offer a solid legal basis for the new mission. We urge
Afghanistan to ratify both agreements so that future
security assistance can continue unhindered. Lithuania
would also welcome a Security Council resolution,

A/69/PV.57

which should be prepared in consultation with the
Afghan Government.
Another area in which Lithuania contributes to
the efforts of Afghanistan’s Government is through
its participation in the European Union Police Mission
in Afghanistan (EUPOL). The decision to extend
EUPOL’s mandate in Afghanistan until the end of 2016
is a welcome one. Lithuania is planning to continue
its participation in this important Mission, which has
provided much-needed training for the Afghan civilian
police and support to the Afghan authorities at the
strategic level.
The presence of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been of
crucial importance to the advancement of human
rights, democratic processes and the country’s
overall development, and as Afghanistan starts its
transformation decade, UNAMA’s role will become
more prominent and essential.
I would now like to turn to the situation of Afghan
women. Violence against women in Afghanistan
remains underreported, especially in rural areas. We
call on the Afghan Government to step up efforts to
fully implement the recommendations of the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
the country’s law on eliminating violence against
women and its recently adopted national action plan for
women, peace and security. Involving women genuinely
and meaningfully in the peace, reconciliation and
development processes, ensuring the safety and dignity
of women public servants and recruiting, training and
retaining women for the Afghan National Security
Forces are all essential for the future Afghanistan. The
prominent role that the First Lady of Afghanistan is
willing to take will, hopefully, produce positive results,
including in engaging women and strengthening their
rights. We hope this progressive momentum can be
sustained. Afghanistan needs to find solutions suited
to the Afghan way of life and yet able to improve the
female population’s situation.
In conclusion, as Afghanistan enters its transformation
decade, the support of the international community
and countries in the region will be essential. The
National Unity Government, the Afghan people and
the international community must work in unison for a
better future for Afghanistan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, I would
like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-

14-6406419/26

A/69/PV.57

General for his comprehensive report on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/69/540), and to thank the Permanent
Mission of Germany for conducting consultations and
introducing today’s draft resolution (A/69/L.20).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of the Russian Federation
on behalf of the States members of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization. However, I would also
like to make a statement in my national capacity.
The Kyrgyz Republic supports the efforts of
Afghanistan to establish peace and security in the
country, build effectively functioning State institutions
and develop its economy to further the prosperity of the
Afghan people. We respect the Afghan people’s right
to choose their own path to political development and
emerge successfully from a transitional period. In that
regard, we congratulate Afghanistan on its completion
of elections and establishment of a Government of
National Unity. The peaceful and democratic transition
of power from one President to the next creates a solid
foundation for the country’s peaceful and sustainable
development.
In a message congratulating the new President of
Afghanistan, Mr. Ashraf Ghani, President Almazbek
Atambaev of the Kyrgyz Republic expressed his
readiness to further strengthen brotherly relations
between Kyrgyzstan and Afghanistan and the two
countries’ cooperation in areas of mutual interest.
The Kabul Embassy of the Kyrgyz Republic, which
officially opened in February, is actively promoting
the development of bilateral relations and becoming an
important link in the joint promotion and implementation
of regional projects.
We are still seriously concerned about the
persistently unstable security situation in Afghanistan.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
insurgent groups, international terrorists and associated
networks took advantage of the prolonged political and
electoral crisis to mount major assaults around the
country. Kyrgyzstan condemns the continued attacks
on innocent civilians, particularly women and children,
and is of the view that the transfer of responsibility for
security should be gradual and orderly so as to ensure
the overall stability of the country and in the region as
a whole.
Achieving full national reconciliation is one of
the main preconditions for ensuring lasting peace in
Afghanistan. We support an Afghan-led and Afghan-

20/26

20/11/2014

owned inclusive peace and reconciliation process,
which should be implemented by the Afghan people
themselves and in the interests of all Afghans. A
comprehensive peace process should be open to all
interested parties ready to reject violence, break off
links with international terrorism and respect the
Constitution of Afghanistan.
According to the most recent report of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — the Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2014 — the opium crop in Afghanistan
will hit a new high this year. It is a serious threat to the
national security both of Afghanistan and the countries
of Eurasia. Despite the activities being conducted in
the framework of national and regional anti-narcotic
strategies and programmes, we have not fully stopped
the flow of drugs from Afghanistan via the so-called
northern drug-trafficking route. The situation is
worsened because revenues from illicit drug production
and trafficking serve as a major funding source for
terrorist and extremist groups. That in turn undermines
the security system both in the country and in the
region as a whole. We therefore call on our regional
partners and the relevant United Nations bodies to step
up further joint efforts to counter the illicit production
and trafficking of drugs in and around Afghanistan.
Sustained and comprehensive economic development
in Afghanistan is crucial not only to combating the
challenges the country faces today, but also to its
achievement of long-term security and stability. In that
regard, there is an urgent need to pay special attention
to rebuilding Afghanistan’s economic infrastructure
and to fully implement the considerable commitments
to Afghanistan’s reconstruction and economic
development that have been made at major international
and regional conferences.
We believe that involving Afghanistan in regional
cooperation and promoting its trade and economic
relations with neighbouring States will play a strong
part in ensuring peace, stability, development and
trust in the region and beyond. As a participant
in several regional organizations, Kyrgyzstan is
ready to contribute to that process. It is important
that Afghanistan be involved in regional economic
integration through the implementation of joint social,
economic and infrastructure projects. Kyrgyzstan
fully supports measures aimed at promoting regional
economic cooperation by developing infrastructure in
the areas of energy, transport and communications. We
are very interested in implementing projects exporting

14-64064

20/11/2014

energy to Afghanistan through the framework of the
Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project and by establishing a tripartite
agricultural consortium between Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan
and Afghanistan, as well as by constructing railroads
that connect Afghanistan with its neighbours.
In conclusion, I would like once again to reiterate
the Kyrgyz Republic’s principled position of respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of
Afghanistan, and its readiness to assist Afghanistan
in achieving lasting peace, sustainable security and
economic development.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): The Maldives delegation
welcomes the comprehensive report submitted to the
Assembly by the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/69/540).
My delegation follows the situation in Afghanistan
with much interest, and often with deep concern. For
a number of years, the country remained in a constant
state of civil war, with low productive capacity and
failed governance arrangements. In April, hope dawned
on Afghanistan — hope for a fresh start and progress
for the better. After remaining deadlocked for nearly
four months, the leaders of Afghanistan finally showed
maturity and reconciled the differences that had
emerged after the presidential election. The Maldives
welcomes the efforts made by both parties that had
contested the election to reach a resolution and put
their differences aside. We furthermore congratulate
the leadership for their willingness to put the interests
of the Afghan people ahead of personal or political
agendas and join hands in a unity Government. The
solidarity shown by both leaders is commendable and
demonstrates their commitment to take the country into
a new phase of prosperity and development.
Our own experience with democratization is that
the hard work does not stop with elections. That is
just one step. The real task involves cultivating norms
and values that bolster democratization. It involves
changing people’s perceptions and way of thinking.
Institutions and systems need to develop slowly and, we
ardently believe, organically. We therefore call on the
international community to allow Afghanistan the time
and patience to find its own path towards democracy
consolidation.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report,
insurgent groups and international terrorist networks
are taking advantage of the country’s dire security

A/69/PV.57

situation resulting from the protracted political and
electoral crisis. The Maldives welcomes the continuous
efforts by Afghanistan to combat the insurgency and the
terrorist activities. In particular, we note the enactment,
in June, of two landmark statutes in Afghanistan to
combat money laundering and terrorist financing. We
are also encouraged by the expansion of the security
initiative of the Afghan local police overseen by the
Ministry of the Interior. Those developments give rise
to hope for stability and security for the Afghan people.
As Afghanistan endures security challenges,
political crises and economic hardship, those that suffer
the most are the vulnerable populations. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights some of the key issues
faced by vulnerable populations, including women
and children, and notes the Government’s actions in
addressing those issues.
The Maldives welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the 2011 action plan for preventing
underage recruitment, including age verification,
screening of new recruits and the training of Afghan
security forces in respect of children in armed conflict.
My delegation furthermore welcomes the continuing
efforts by the international community, especially
the United Nations, in providing the Government of
Afghanistan with technical support and advice on the
elimination of violence against women.
The Maldives acknowledges the challenges faced
by the Government of Afghanistan in addressing
some of those human rights issues and calls on all
stakeholders — including the Government, private
institutions and the international community — to
continue increased efforts towards the protection and
promotion of human rights in the country.
The Maldives believes that increased regional
integration is of the utmost importance and contributes
to confidence-building, which in turn greatly benefits
the stability and prosperity of Afghanistan. In that
regard, it is heartening to note that Afghanistan has
continued to engage its neighbours in promoting
regional cooperation. As a fellow member of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation,
the Maldives takes this opportunity to reinforce its
brotherly affection by calling upon all of our regional
members to maintain their support and commitment to
Afghanistan and embrace it in its quest for peace and
prosperity.

14-6406421/26

A/69/PV.57

The situation in Afghanistan cannot be resolved
in isolation. Continued assistance and coordination on
the part of the international community and regional
collaboration are required to lift the country out of civil
war and strife and aid its transition to a new phase of
development.
Despite all of the hardships faced by the people of
Afghanistan, the fact remains that they have persevered
through difficult times with courage for over three
decades. Like many speakers before me, my delegation
today reiterates the call on the international community
to help the country through its transition for the sake of
the people of Afghanistan and the region.
Mr. Vencel (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his presence here and for his important statement.
Our thanks also go to the German delegation
for its continued successful leadership during this
year’s negotiations on the important draft resolution
A/69/L.20, which my country readily co-sponsored.
Recently, the Security Council and the international
community hailed the Afghan people and authorities
for their tenacity in successfully completing a peaceful
and democratic transfer of power this year and their
vision for the future of the country. The conclusion
of the Afghan presidential elections and subsequent
move to form a Government of national unity represent
an unprecedented political transition. That spirit of
collaboration should remain part and parcel of the
economic and human development, ensuring the rule of
law and peace and reconciliation efforts in the months
and years ahead.
The political transition coincides with the country’s
security transition as Afghan forces take over full
responsibility from the international partners that
are expected to end their missions in December. The
challenging period of ongoing parallel transitions in
the security, military and economic spheres, as well as
the political arena, will be critically important to the
country’s future. The Security Council and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
in cooperation with the Afghan Government, must
continue playing an important role in facilitating
a peaceful political transition in Afghanistan and
ensuring coherent approaches to equitable sustainable
development.

22/26

20/11/2014

Slovakia, based on its own history of transition, is
fully aware of the fact that the transformation process
is often found to be the opposite of easy. We would like
to take this opportunity to assure Afghanistan and its
people of our long-term commitment to participate in the
transformation and consolidation efforts of the country
alongside our partners in the international community.
In that regard, we anticipate close cooperation with the
new Afghan Government, with whom we are willing to
share our own transitional experience.
Reforms in Afghanistan are necessary. We therefore
welcome the adoption of the Afghanistan national
development strategy and the ideas outlined by the
Government of Afghanistan in its strategy document
entitled “Towards self-reliance: strategic vision for the
transformation decade”. Since public administration
is key in that regard, we urge the Government of
Afghanistan to continue to effectively reform the public
administration sector in order to implement the rule of
law and ensure good governance and accountability.
Slovakia welcomed the signing of the United
States-Afghanistan bilateral security agreement
and the status-of-forces agreement between NATO
and Afghanistan. The signing of those agreements
represents an important step in the process of the
ongoing efforts towards stabilizing the security
situation in Afghanistan, which is a prerequisite for the
development of the country.
In cooperation with its international partners,
Slovakia is committed to further reinforcing security
in the country and in the follow-up to the finalizing of
the International Security Assistance Force mission in
Afghanistan in 2014. Slovakia is also ready to take part
in the NATO Resolute Support mission to train, advise
and assist as of 2015.
Let me conclude by expressing our sincere
gratitude also to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for their
dedication and leadership. I would like to commend
the United Nations for its work in supervising the
unprecedented election audit. I also wish to thank
the team of the Mission for their professional work
in difficult conditions and to reiterate my country’s
full support for the irreplaceable role that UNAMA
is playing. We wish the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, every
success in his new appointment. We continue to offer
him our full support.

14-64064

20/11/2014

A/69/PV.57

Mr. Kassim (Malaysia): I wish to extend our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the situation in Afghanistan (A/69/540). My
delegation would like to highlight some perspectives on
the situation in Afghanistan that Malaysia considers to
be important.

in the country. While the ANSF fulfils its primary
responsibility for security, it is imperative that the
international community continue to provide the ANSF
with the support needed to ensure that its forces are
equipped and trained to counter threats to security in
the country.

My delegation is of the view that this meeting
has been convened in a timely manner. We welcome
the formation of the Government of national unity in
Afghanistan, which is a positive step forward for its
people. We would also like to commend the United
Nations for the supervisory role it assumed in the second
round of voting in the presidential elections in June.
Through that cooperation between the Government and
the United Nations, Afghanistan has embraced a new
Government that is inclusive and representative of its
people.

The work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), in cooperation
with the Government of Afghanistan, deserves to be
commended as well. UNAMA has been active in
reinforcing sovereignty, leadership and ownership
in the country. Its comprehensive approach has been
effective in laying down the foundations for sustainable
development in Afghanistan, while supporting
confidence-building measures within the framework of
the Afghan Constitution.

Malaysia is heartened by the courage and
determination of the millions of Afghans who
participated in the first and second rounds of voting.
The large turnout reflected the people’s aspirations
to achieve a peaceful and democratic transition in
leadership. In that regard, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate the people of
Afghanistan as they embark on the journey whose first
milestone is the formation on 29 September of a national
unity Government. Malaysia is confident that the new
Government will bring about continued stability,
progress and development despite the many challenges
it faces. We would encourage the new Government
to continue to promote its ambitious transformation
decade programme for the period 2015 to 2024, with an
eye towards developing a new vision for the country’s
future.
Malaysia continues to monitor the security
developments in Afghanistan with strong interest.
The expected withdrawal of the International
Security Assistance Force by the end of 2014 means
that the Afghan Unity Government will assume full
responsibility for the security and safety of its people
and for its territorial integrity. Malaysia is concerned
that the country continues to face security challenges
and to experience incidents of violence in the country.
Malaysia condemns acts of violence in all its forms and
manifestations, including those acts.
Despite the incidents of violence, Malaysia remains
confident that the Afghan National Security Forces
(ANSF) will be able to shoulder the responsibility
of protecting the people and maintaining security

On another note, Malaysia has always been
supportive of stability and progress in Afghanistan. Our
track record on that can be seen with the deployment
of the medical contingent from the Malaysian Armed
Forces. Stationed in the Bamyan province, our forces
were active in providing much-needed medical services
from July 2010 to April 2013.
Malaysia’s assistance to Afghanistan does not stop
there. As a moderate and progressive Muslim nation,
we will continue to provide opportunities for capacitybuilding and human resource development in the
country. Through the Malaysian technical cooperation
programme, we will continuously share our experiences
in the fields of development and public administration
as pillars of a developing nation. We strongly believe
that Afghanistan could benefit from the sharing of
experience and expertise that Malaysia has to offer.
We have seen a significant development in
Afghanistan with the formation of a united Government.
The situation in Afghanistan is an opportunity for
Member States to continue our support to that nation. Its
people have demonstrated the political will to embrace
a new era of democratic and inclusive governance. In
that regard, we must not turn our backs on them, but
instead lend them our helping hand.
Malaysia is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/69/L.20, on the situation in Afghanistan. We will
continue to be a partner to Afghanistan in this moment
of progress and development.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Turkey is pleased to co-sponsor
the draft resolution before us today (A/69/L.20), and we
look forward to its adoption by consensus.

14-6406423/26

A/69/PV.57

Afghanistan is going through a crucial phase
in terms of its political, security and economic
transformation. The gains in the country in the past
13 years, including in the fields of security, democracy,
governance, capacity- and institution-building,
economic development and human rights, should be
commended. Nevertheless, those achievements have not
yet reached a point of no return, and major challenges
remain to be tackled. Therefore, the international
community’s continuing support is vital for a peaceful,
secure and stable Afghanistan to be able to effectively
serve the needs of its people. With that understanding,
the comprehensive role assumed by the United
Nations and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in supporting the Afghan people will
continue to be critical.
We welcome the successful continuation of the
political transition process in Afghanistan. Indeed, the
results of the presidential elections were a success for
all of the Afghan people, as it demonstrated their strong
will and courage to determine their own future. The
developments have also proved the professionalism of
the Afghan institutions that took part in the process.
The common will of the candidates running in the
second round of the elections to establish a national
unity Government independent of the election results is
of particular importance, since it has clearly displayed
the Afghan people’s determination as a whole to
carry their country forward, as well as their belief
in a common ideal. We believe that Afghanistan has
emerged stronger from those experiences.
We welcome the fact that by the end of 2014 the
Afghan National Security Forces will assume full
security responsibility for the Afghan people and
their country. However, support for the continued
development of the Afghan National Security Forces
and institutions and wider cooperation with Afghanistan
will still be of paramount importance. The stability
of Afghanistan, and subsequently that of the region,
will depend on improved security. The consequences
of failure would be too immense for any of us to bear.
Turkey remains committed to standing by the people of
Afghanistan in this transition process, including in the
fields of security and development.
In addition to Turkey’s financial commitments for
the funding of the Afghan National Security Forces,
Turkey will also assume the framework nation role for
Kabul in the new mission that will be launched after the
International Security Assistance Force is concluded by

24/26

20/11/2014

the end of 2014. Turkey will also undertake responsibility
for Kabul International Airport. As may be recalled,
Mr. Ismail Aramaz, Ambassador of the Republic
of Turkey to Afghanistan, was recently appointed
as the next NATO senior civilian representative in
Afghanistan.
At a critical juncture of political, security
and economic transformation in Afghanistan, the
importance of regional cooperation and commitment is
becoming increasingly relevant to efforts to steer the
region towards becoming a zone of peace, stability and
prosperity. The region has demonstrated on various
occasions its readiness to resolve its own problems and
to transform common problems into areas of mutual
benefit. We welcome all bilateral and multilateral
dialogue and cooperation efforts to that end. With
that understanding, we also welcome the increased
momentum that has been achieved through the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a
Secure and Stable Afghanistan thus far. The fourth
Ministerial Conference of the Process, held in Beijing
on 31 October, once again demonstrated the importance
of promoting regional cooperation.
Turkey welcomes and encourages all efforts
to enhance connectivity at the regional level. We
believe that tangible projects emerging from increased
cooperation will facilitate economic development,
stability and self-sustainability in the region.
A continued display of will by the international
community will strengthen the hopes of the Afghan
people for a bright future. Turkey will always remain
in solidarity with the Afghan people and will continue
to contribute to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, as we have done for so many years.
Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union (EU) and would like to make a few
remarks in our national capacity.
I would like to welcome the draft resolution to be
adopted today (A/69/L.20), which Latvia sponsored,
and to commend the efforts by Germany, Afghanistan
and all partners that led to a successful outcome. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
First of all, Latvia welcomes the conclusion of
Afghanistan’s presidential elections, the inauguration of
the new President of Afghanistan and the formation of a
Government of national unity. The Afghan people have
demonstrated their clear desire for democracy. Now it
14-64064

20/11/2014

is up to all parties in Afghanistan to work together and
to achieve a united, peaceful, secure and prosperous
future for all its people. Afghanistan has achieved
remarkable progress in the past decade. It is imperative
that that progress be sustained and that further reforms
be implemented. Sustained economic growth and a
State-building process that is founded on the principles
of good governance, the rule of law and human rights,
especially the rights of women and children, should
be the basis for a democratic, prosperous and stable
Afghanistan. We welcome the upcoming London
Conference as an important opportunity for both the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to restate their commitments within the
mutual accountability framework.
Continued international commitment to support
Afghanistan is essential to achieving long-term
stability and sustaining Afghanistan’s transformation.
Latvia remains committed to a lasting partnership with
Afghanistan. We welcome the signing of the bilateral
security agreement between the Government of
Afghanistan and the United States and the NATO statusof-forces agreement as important steps for securing
future international support in providing security in
Afghanistan. Latvia will take part in the International
Security Assistance Force operation until the end of
this year and is fully committed to participating in
the new Resolute Support Mission. Latvia has already
committed to providing financial support to the Afghan
National Security Forces on an annual basis from 2015
to 2017. Latvia will also continue its participation in the
civilian European Union Police Mission.
Moreover, with the shifting of responsibilities in
Afghanistan, the role of the United Nations and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will
only increase and will require continued support by the
United Nations membership.
International commitment and support to Afghanistan
should go hand in hand with regional cooperation,
stability and economic development. Afghanistan lies
at the crossroads of the Middle East, Central Asian
and South Asian regions, each of them with its own
dynamics. However, we believe that middle ground can
be found and a space could be created where differences
are left behind and constructive engagement emerges.
Latvia supports the process emerging from the Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference as an important
opportunity to establish such a space of constructive
and consistent engagement by neighbouring countries.

A/69/PV.57

In the first half of next year, Latvia will hold the
presidency of the Council of the European Union, and
the strengthening of relations between the EU and
Central Asia will be one of our presidency’s priorities.
We believe that close cooperation with the Central Asian
States is of the utmost importance for the promotion
of regional security and economic development. The
Latvian Government is currently looking for new ways
to step up its development assistance in Afghanistan and
Central Asia. For instance, Latvia has already provided
training for Afghan rail and civil aviation experts.
Our long-term plans include providing scholarships
to Afghan students in the fields of customs, guarding
borders and railways. We just launched a new training
programme for the Eastern Partnership region and
Central Asia, which could also be provided to Afghan
students interested in building up their knowledge of
European law, economics and international affairs.
We believe that infrastructure projects that strengthen
regional connectivity contribute greatly to regional
cooperation and economic development. To contribute
to those efforts, this summer Latvia hosted the third
High-Level Conference on Transport, Logistics and
Trade Routes on the theme “Connecting Asia with
Europe”. It brought together more than 400 participants
from countries of the Far East, South and Central Asia
and from partner countries of the China and Central
and Eastern European cooperation programme. Latvia
will continue its engagement in that regard.
During Latvia’s presidency of the European
Union, we would like to organize, in the context of the
Asia-Europe Meeting, the third transport ministers’
meeting, side event and business forum on multimodal
transportation networks, to be held in Riga from 29 to
30 April 2015.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Latvia will
remain a reliable partner for both Afghanistan and
the international community in joining our efforts for
a peaceful, secure and prosperous Afghanistan and
region. An Afghan proverb says that a river is made
drop by drop, and we truly believe that.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.20, entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.

14-6406425/26

A/69/PV.57

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/69/L.20, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belize, Benin, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Cyprus,
the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Finland, France,
Georgia, Guatemala, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, the Philippines,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Spain, Tajikistan, the

26/26

20/11/2014

former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey,
Turkmenistan and the United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.20?
Draft resolution A/69/L.20 was adopted (resolution
69/18).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 37?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

14-64064
