A/RES/76/258

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 April 2022

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 23 (a)
Groups of countries in special situations: follow-up to
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 1 April 2022
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/76/L.47 and A/76/L.47/Add.1)]

76/258.

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 76/251 of 28 February 2022, by which it decided, on an
exceptional basis, to hold the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries in two parts as follows: the first part at United Nations
Headquarters in New York, on 17 March 2022, and the second part in Doha, from 5 to
9 March 2023,
Recalling also its resolutions 73/242 of 20 December 2018, 74/232 A of
19 December 2019, 74/232 B of 11 August 2020, 75/227 of 21 December 2020 and
76/216 of 17 December 2021, and its decision 76/551 of 20 January 2022,
1.
Endorses the Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries, adopted by the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries held in New York on 17 March 2022, which is contained in the annex to
the present resolution, and calls upon all the relevant stakeholders to commit to
implementing the Programme of Action;
2.
Reiterates its appreciation for the generous offer of the Government of
Qatar to host the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countri es
in Doha, to be held at the highest possible level, including Heads of State and
Government, in line with the mandate specified in its resolutions 73/242, 74/232 A
and B, 75/227 and 76/216, and for providing all the necessary support, urges all
relevant stakeholders to actively engage in the Conference, and looks forward to its
successful and ambitious outcome.
66th plenary meeting
1 April 2022

22-04927 (E)

080422

*2204927*

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

Annex
Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
Introduction: from Istanbul priorities to Doha commitments
1.
Forty years ago, in September 1981, the international community met in Paris
for the First United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and
launched the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least
Developed Countries with an ambitious objective of transforming the economies of
the least developed countries towards self-sustained development and enabling them
to provide at least internationally accepted minimum standards of nutrition, health,
transport, communication, social infrastructure, including drinking water and
sanitation, housing and education, as well as job opportunities for their citizens, in
particular the rural and urban poor.
2.
Now, we are meeting for the fifth time, in the most unprecedented of
circumstances, in which a health and socioeconomic crisis has shaken everyone,
individually and collectively. The world is plagued by growing poverty, hunger and
malnutrition, inequality, human rights violations, digital divides, vaccine divides,
complex humanitarian emergencies and armed conflict, insecurity, pandemics,
environmental degradation, climate change and disasters. Of greatest concern is that
one in three people in least developed countries still live in extreme poverty, and the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has caused this figure to rise further. We
are determined to foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies that are free from fear
and violence. There can be no sustainable development without peace and no peace
without sustainable development.
3.
We call for greater action and extraordinary measures by all countries and
strengthened international and multilateral cooperation to address challenges
affecting least developed countries on the basis of the concept of human security 1 and
to ensure that no one is left behind.
4.
We have entered the decade of action to deliver the Sustainable Development
Goals, the most critical time of our generation, to realize our collective ambitions of
sustainable and inclusive recovery and increased resilience from COVID -19 in a
sustainable and equitable manner and leaving no one behind. We reaffirm our
commitment to enhancing our efforts from COVID-19 to achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development and the Paris Agreement. We commit to taking more tangible steps to
support the least developed countries in this endeavour and to reach the furthest
behind first, recognizing the disproportionate impact of the pandemic on those in
vulnerable situations.
5.
The least developed countries saw their economies significantly shrink in 2020,
amid a severe global recession caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The external debt
burden and debt service obligations are rising significantly, gains made over the past
decade in poverty reduction were wiped out, there were increases in food insecurity
and malnutrition, and already fragile health systems saw resources shifted away from
urgent health and life-saving treatments. Disrupted education is likely to have a
lasting negative impact on countries’ recovery and development. Global inequalities
are being exposed and growing as a result of the pandemic, increasing the risk of
conflict and fragility, with women and girls, young people, persons with disabilities,
__________________
1

2/63

The General Assembly, noting the decision, in its resolution 66/290, to continue its discussion on
human security in accordance with the provisions of that resolution, stresses that actions arising from
the present document should be in line with the provisions of paragraph 3 of resolution 66/290.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

older persons, indigenous peoples, local communities, refugees, displaced persons
and migrants disproportionately affected. While many advanced economies deployed
massive fiscal stimuli to cushion the pandemic’s impact and have applied adjusted
health measures, the policy response in least developed countries was much more
limited owing to weak fiscal conditions, major supply chain and logistic challenges,
weak resilience capacity and static global support. For them, adequate access to
vaccines remains many months, if not years, away, casting a shadow over their urgent
and much-needed growth and development prospects.
6.
The COVID-19 pandemic threatens not only to reverse some progress made during
the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countri es
for the Decade 2011–2020, (Istanbul Programme of Action) but also to exacerbate
persistent challenges in least developed countries. Global inequality has risen as a
result of the pandemic, and the risk of conflict and fragility has increased, in particular
in relation to democratic governance and the rule of law. Owing to pre -existing
conditions, namely, chronic underinvestment in health systems, poorly functioning
food systems, weak social protection systems, lack of institutional capacity, high
levels of vulnerability to external shocks and employment that is predominantly in
the informal sector, the pandemic has caused serious negative effects on all priority
areas of the Istanbul Programme of Action that will be felt for years to come. This
might have a negative impact on the graduation process of some countries.
7.
We recognize that the least developed countries, currently consisting of 46
nations and comprising some 14 per cent of the global population, are some of the
poorest and most vulnerable in the world, accounting for only 1.3 per cent of global
gross domestic product (GDP), 1.4 per cent of global foreign direct investment (FDI)
and just under 1 per cent of global merchandising exports.
8.
We recognize that, notwithstanding many challenges and constraints, the least
developed countries represent an enormous human, cultural and natural resource
potential for sustainable economic growth, welfare, peace, prosperity, and food and
energy security. Millions of young people and a growing working -age population
could become development leaders and the drivers of transformative change. It is
imperative that action for the least developed countries by all stakeholders be aimed
at addressing the challenges in a sustainable manner and leveraging the opportunities
offered by new and emerging issues to catalyse the greatest multiplier effects on
growth and development. Therefore, a strengthened and inclusive global partnership
that effectively addresses the special needs of the least developed countries will
contribute to the causes of people, planet, peace, prosperity, partnership and
sustainable development for all.
9.
We also recognize that many least developed countries continue to f ace multiple
structural challenges and constraints, including narrow production and export bases,
stagnant trade and investment flows, diminishing productivity growth, small size,
isolation and remoteness from major markets, widespread poverty, hunger and
malnutrition, lack of access to quality and inclusive education and lifelong learning
opportunities, and underdeveloped human capital. Almost half of the least developed
countries are landlocked or small island countries, with a weak land and natural
resource base. These long-standing challenges are compounded by new and emerging
challenges, brought about by climate change, increased incidences of disasters and
public health emergencies, conflicts, fluctuating commodity prices and rising capital
outflows. Without a structural transformation that prioritizes economic diversification
and addresses institutional and capacity constraints, the least developed countries will
remain vulnerable to various socioeconomic, health and environmental shocks.
10. We recognize that progress has been made with regard to the Istanbul
Programme of Action in areas such as access to electricity, access to mobile telephony
22-04927

3/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

and mobile Internet, increased enrolment of girls and boys in primary education,
increased access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family
planning, and reforms that have made it easier to start and register businesses.
11. We also recognize that progress has been made towards graduation from the
least developed country category. However, there remain significant challenges in
meeting the graduation criteria and in ensuring sustainable and irreversible
graduation. The Istanbul Programme of Action set the goal of half of the least
developed countries, of which there were 24 at the tim e, meeting graduation criteria
by 2020. To date, 4 have graduated and 16 are at different stages of graduation.
12. We note with concern that progress fell short of the goals and targets set out in
the Istanbul Programme of Action, including achieving sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth at a 7 per cent rate; poverty eradication, achieving
structural transformation; doubling the share of trade, building productive capacity;
securing full employment and decent work for all, reducing the number of children,
in particular girls, out of school in primary and secondary education, which remains
at least double the world average; manufacturing and trade gains, which were minimal
and concentrated in only a handful of countries; tax-to-GDP ratios that increased very
slowly; and disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation.
13. We note with concern that progress towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals in the least developed countries has been uneven and is not on
pace to achieve the goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda. The number of people living
in extreme poverty remained at approximately 32 per cent, and those suffering from
hunger is on the rise, in particular among those in vulnerable situations. There is
evidence of losses in jobs and incomes in least developed countries. Unemployment,
in particular of young people, is rampant. The inequalities between least developed
countries and the rest of the world, as well as among least developed countries, are
rising. Infant and maternal mortality is exorbitantly high. Access to energy and
broadband connectivity is moving at a slower pace. Structural transformation is not
taking hold. Infrastructure investment and equitable access to infrastructure services
are falling far behind actual needs. Productive capacity and export competitiveness
are weak. Climate change is occurring much faster than anticipated, as evidenced by,
inter alia, disproportionately high levels of economic losses, damage to critical
infrastructure, disruption of basic services in the least developed countries,
devastating impacts on oceans and seas, loss of vulnerable ecosystems, land
degradation, the retreat of mountain glaciers and the continued rise in global
temperatures, thereby threatening the lives of many peopl e, in particular the poorest
and people in vulnerable situations. Biodiversity loss, deforestation, water stress and
global pollution from chemicals and waste remain major global challenges, while
desertification, land degradation and coastal erosion conti nue to increase.
14. The Doha Programme of Action for the decade 2022–2031 is a new generation
of renewed and strengthened commitments by the least developed countries and their
development partners grounded in the overarching goals of achieving rapid,
sustainable and inclusive recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, building resilience
against future shocks, eradicating extreme poverty, strengthening labour markets by
promoting the transition from informal to formal employment, enabling graduation
from the least developed country category, facilitating access to sustainable and
innovative financing, addressing inequalities, within and among countries, leveraging
the power of science, technology and innovation, mainstreaming tech driven entrepreneurship, bringing about structural transformation and achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, through a reinvigorated global partnership for
sustainable development based on scaled-up and ambitious means of implementation

4/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

and diverse support for the least developed countries in forging the widest possible
coalition of multi-stakeholder partnerships.
15. We reaffirm that the least developed countries, as the most vulnerable group of
countries, need enhanced global support to overcome the structural challenges and
recent devastating impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic that they face in implementing
the 2030 Agenda, and call upon development partners, international organizations and
other stakeholders to support least developed countries in its implementation. We also
call upon in this regard the international community to prioritize and strengthen
support from all sources to facilitate the coordinated implementation and coherent
follow-up and monitoring of the Doha Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda in
the least developed countries.
16. We underscore that the ownership, leadership and primary responsibility for
development in least developed countries rests with the least developed countries
themselves. Least developed countries should identify their own national pri orities
and formulate and execute coherent economic and development policies and
strategies. Development partners commit to providing concrete and substantial
support to these efforts, in a spirit of shared responsibility and mutual accountability,
through a renewed and strengthened global partnership.
17. The Doha Programme of Action will be guided by the principles of shared
responsibility, ownership and leadership of the least developed countries; an
integrated and comprehensive approach; resilience-building and risk reduction;
genuine and reinvigorated partnerships; result orientation; peace, security,
development and human rights; respect for cultural diversity, inclusion and equity;
and voice and representation and a balanced role of State and market considerations
as reflected in the Istanbul Programme of Action. The Doha Programme of Action
represents the enhanced commitments of the least developed countries, which have
the ownership of and primary responsibility for their own development, and their
development partners to a renewed and strengthened global partnership.
18. This partnership also includes the United Nations system, including the Bretton
Woods institutions, other multilateral institutions and regional development banks,
within their relevant mandates and international obligations.
19. Guided by the spirit of solidarity with least developed countries, developing
countries, consistent with their capabilities, will provide support for the effective
implementation of the Doha Programme of Action in mutually agreed areas of
cooperation within the framework of South-South and triangular cooperation, which
is a complement to, but not a substitute for, North-South cooperation.
20. The private sector, civil society and foundations will be encour aged to
contribute to the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action in their relevant
areas of competence in line with the national priorities of least developed countries
and in collaboration with relevant national government institutions.
21. We also underscore that good governance and the rule of law, inclusiveness and
transparency, as well as domestic resource mobilization, are crucial to the
development process of the least developed countries. These efforts need to be given
concrete and substantial international support in a spirit of shared responsibility and
mutual accountability through a renewed and strengthened global partnership.
22. We reaffirm that achieving gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls and the full realization of their human rights are essential to achieving
sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development for
all.

22-04927

5/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

23. We recognize that investment in the care economy is needed to spur sustainable
economies, restore and create jobs, recognize, reduce and redistribute women’s
disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work, and close the gender gap in
labour force participation.
24. The COVID-19 pandemic, the Ebola outbreaks, the financial crisis and climate
change have demonstrated that we live in a highly globalized and interconnected
world, where a crisis or a virus in a small part of a country can spread to the entire
world in a short span of time and have devastating impacts globally. COVID -19 has
highlighted the importance of holistic, all-hazard and One Health approaches that
consider interdependencies among the health of humans, animals and plants and their
shared environment. Looking beyond crises and bearing in mind the core principles
of the 2030 Agenda, it is our shared responsibility to ensure that no one is left behind
and to reach the furthest behind first.
25. We will undertake action to leverage the opportunities offered by the 226 million
young people in least developed countries who are real agents of chang e for structural
transformation, through productive capacity development in agricultural,
manufacturing, cultural and creative industries and services sectors, including tourism;
building and maintaining quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrast ructure to
improve the movement of goods and services, promoting life-cycle approaches;
expanding energy access and broadband connectivity; tapping into emerging
technologies; mainstreaming technology-driven entrepreneurship and developing
innovative digital ecosystems; delivering digital services and applications; harnessing
the demographic dividend that will yield economic and health gains that come with
ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education; and lifelong learning for all,
including persons with disabilities, while combating all forms of discrimination.
26. We are committed to building stronger, multifaceted and resilient systems in the
least developed countries. With the support of the international community, least
developed countries need to design systems, including infrastructure in transportation
and communications, energy and information and communications technology (ICT),
supply chains, economic, financial, public health and food systems, and universal
social protection, that are resilient, sustainable, comprehensive, shock-responsive,
gender-sensitive and risk-informed. Such action has the potential to make the national
economic system stronger and more resilient against any future shocks and ensure
sustainable and irreversible graduation from the least developed country category and
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
27. We affirm that the integrated and indivisible nature of the 2030 Agenda and the
Sustainable Development Goals, the Paris Agreement and the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 requires the involvement of all relevant
stakeholders at all levels – local, national and international – in solutions that are
context-appropriate, respond to the needs and rights of populations, in particul ar those
furthest behind, and tap into the full range of existing knowledge and experience. It
is, in fact, encouraging that national and local governments, civil society, academia,
the private sector and other relevant stakeholders have engaged with the S ustainable
Development Goals and the objectives of the Paris Agreement and are developing
innovative approaches and practices. International financial institutions and several
central and national development banks have started to better reflect the Goals as a
whole in their strategies and policies.
28. We note with concern that the international support measures that have been put
in place are not sufficient to contribute to addressing the full range of needs that exist
in the least developed countries, including the new and emerging ones. We urge the
international community to fulfil its existing commitments and push beyond
“business as usual” to agree on innovative and effective support measures for the least
6/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

developed countries that contribute to closing their funding gaps in meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals.
29. We reaffirm our commitment to a comprehensive, results-oriented, enhanced,
quantifiable, forward-looking, coherent, renewed and strengthened global partnership
for least developed countries based on the principles of leaving no one behind that is
fully aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda. We also reaffirm our commitments to supporting the least developed
countries through, inter alia, fulfilling all internationally agreed goals and targets
related to respective official development assistance (ODA) commitments, market
access, debt relief, when appropriate, technology transfer on mutually agreed terms,
technical assistance and capacity-building. These commitments must be met and
action must be taken beyond existing commitments to bring about transformational
change in least developed countries. The United Nations system, including its
specialized agencies, including the World Bank Group and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), as well as the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development and other relevant institutions, to
provide finance, technical support, assistance and policy advice to all pri ority areas
for the least developed countries, and this support will be improved, including through
additional concessional finance and the coordination between agencies and
departments, using approaches such as the integrated national financing frameworks .
30. We affirm that Governments play a very important role in articulating and
implementing the policies and programmes that will support a sustainable future that
leaves no one behind. National parliaments will have a great role to play in enacting
legislation and allocating funds that serve all in order to leave no one behind, as well
as holding Governments to account for the commitments that they have made.
31. The Doha Programme of Action will have six key focus areas for action, as
follows:
(a) Investing in people in least developed countries: eradicating poverty and
building capacity to leave no one behind;
(b) Leveraging the power of science, technology, and innovation to fight
against multidimensional vulnerabilities and to achieve the Sustainable De velopment
Goals;
(c)

Supporting structural transformation as a driver of prosperity;

(d) Enhancing international trade of least developed countries and regional
integration;
(e) Addressing climate change, environmental degradation, recovery from the
COVID-19 pandemic and building resilience against future shocks for risk -informed
sustainable development;
(f) Mobilizing international solidarity, reinvigorated global partnerships
and innovative tools and instruments: a march towards sustainable graduation .
I.

Investing in people in least developed countries: eradicating poverty and
building capacity to leave no one behind
32. We recognize that people, especially the large youth and working -age
population in least developed countries, are critical asset s for their development. It is
estimated that, between 2020 and 2030, the population in the least developed
countries will increase by 256 million, to 1.3 billion people.
33. We are concerned that poverty remains a key challenge for least developed
countries. Even before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, it was estimated that

22-04927

7/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

nearly 30 per cent of the population in least developed countries would remain in
extreme poverty by 2030. Upward trends in extreme poverty and gender inequality in
least developed countries since the COVID-19 outbreak suggest compounding
impacts of the crisis caused by the pandemic.
34. In addition to having a low income, people living in poverty in least developed
countries experience higher mortality rates and food insecurity and all forms of
malnutrition, limited or no access to quality inclusive education and health -care
services, and a lack of access to opportunities to gain income through decent
employment. Poor people in the least developed countries live in underserved ar eas
with poor infrastructure and limited access to water and sanitation and have limited
access to social protection. We respect and value the diversity of situations and
conditions of women and girls and recognize that some women face specific barriers
to their empowerment. We also stress that, while all women and girls have the same
human rights, women and girls in different contexts have specific needs and priorities,
requiring appropriate responses.
35. We reaffirm our commitment to diversity in cities and human settlements, to
strengthening social cohesion, intercultural dialogue and understanding, tolerance,
mutual respect, gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls,
inclusion, and the identity, safety and dignity of all people, and to taking steps to
ensure that local institutions promote pluralism and peaceful coexistence within
increasingly heterogenous and multicultural societies.
36. We are guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including full respect for international law. We are further guided by the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights treaties. We
emphasize the importance of fundamental freedoms for all. We are also informed by
other instruments such as the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and core
international human rights instruments. We recognize that good governance at all
levels, strong institutions, democracy, the rule of law, transparency and
accountability, and affording individuals access to the health-care services and
education, knowledge and skills needed for productive capacity and full participation
in decision-making processes are crucial to achieving sustainable development. Least
developed countries still face challenges in ensuring universal access to inclusive,
equitable and quality education, social protection and essential health -care services,
and their vulnerabilities and limited capacities exacerbate the impact of external
shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic, natural hazards and the adverse impacts of
climate change and biodiversity loss.
37. We aim to eradicate poverty, including extreme poverty, hunger and
malnutrition, in all its forms and dimensions, to advance human development in an
inclusive and sustainable way for all in the least developed countries by the end of
the decade and to provide equal opportunities for all, with special attention given to
the poorest and most vulnerable, including women and girls in vulnerable situation,
young people and children, older persons and persons with disabilities, as well as
those affected by violence and conflict, in order to leave no one behind.
Universal social protection systems
38. Limited social protection exacerbates vulnerabilities across all dimensions of
human development in least developed countries and constitutes a major obstacle to
economic, environmental and social development. Notwithstanding the commitment
made by many least developed countries and their development partners, a lack of
capacities and limited resources in least developed countries are major constraints to
providing comprehensive and sustainable social protection.

8/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

Targets
• Achieve a sustainable increase in coverage of nationally appropriate
comprehensive and universal social protection systems and measures, including
floors, for all in the least developed countries.
• End hunger and malnutrition and ensure access by all people in least developed
countries, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including
infants, to safe and healthy diets through sustainable year-round food systems.
• Provide food and emergency assistance everywhere to those in need.
We commit to taking the following actions:
39. We will reinforce social protection policies and prog rammes that are riskinformed, take into account the specific needs of women and girls, age and persons
with disabilities, and contribute to strengthening the ability of communities and
people, in particular the poorest and most vulnerable, to withstand po verty and risks
to their livelihoods and well-being, throughout their life course. We call upon
Governments to extend social protection for all, including workers in the informal
economy. We will also build social protection systems that are resilient and can
respond to shocks, including by integrating disaster risk reduction into social
protection strategies.
40. We recognize that significant additional domestic public resources, supplemented
by international assistance, as appropriate, will be critical to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. In this regard, we commit to providing fiscally sustainable and
nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all. We commit to
supporting predictable finance, including ODA, domestic resou rce mobilization, trade
and private sector financing and tax and public transfer reforms, where appropriate.
41. We commit to increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the public sector at
the national, subnational and local levels in delivering inclu sive social protection
programmes, including by expanding the digital infrastructure and ICT capabilities
of the public administration, by establishing national social registry systems, by
enhancing and digitalizing cash transfers and payment of entitlemen ts, and by
increasing transparency and access to information.
42. We recognize the need for dealing with severe food insecurities. In this regard,
we request the Secretary-General to explore the feasibility, effectiveness and
administrative modalities of a system of stockholding for the least developed
countries on a regional and subregional basis, or alternative means, such as cash
transfers, taking into account possible economic implications and risks, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly for its consideration at its seventy-seventh session.
Achieving universal access to quality education, skills and lifelong learning
43. Notwithstanding progress in increasing enrolment rates for primary education,
16.2 per cent of children of primary school age were out of school in least developed
countries in 2019 and almost half of children out of school in the world are in least
developed countries, with girls, children with disabilities and other children in
vulnerable situations disproportionately represented.
44. Enrolment and completion rates for tertiary education remain low, which has
far-reaching implications for the structural transformation agenda of the least
developed countries. Most of them depend on aid for their education budgets. At the
secondary and tertiary levels, gender disparities and disparities for the poorest and
most vulnerable exist. Lack of economic opportunities and poor basic facilities and
infrastructure, such as the lack of access to digital technologies, the Internet and
22-04927

9/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

electricity, safe drinking water and sanitation facilities, especially for girls, and public
transport, as well as insufficient trained teachers and the limited or lack of adequate
learning and teaching materials, seriously affect the quality of education in least
developed countries.
45. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on schooling is a generational
catastrophe. School closures resulting from the pandemic have had devastating
consequences for children’s learning and well-being. Millions of children and young
people are falling behind in their learning, making it even more difficult to
successfully make the transition from education and training to employment, which
will have long-term impacts on human capital, including reduced earnings and career
advancement. More than a year and a half into the COVID-19 crisis, almost all
learners in least developed countries have faced full school clo sures, which has also
deprived them of childcare, school meals and other vital school health services. In
particular, the crisis poses a series of mental health challenges to young people and
may aggravate the state of those with pre-existing mental health conditions. These
children, especially girls, who are unable to gain access to quality remote learning
and who face economic hardship are at an increased risk of never returning to school
and even of being subject to harmful practices, including child lab our and child, early
and forced marriage. The situation of young girls is particularly alarming because
they are more vulnerable and exposed to the risks of exploitation, including the risk
of early pregnancies. In addition, the pandemic threatens to undo many of the global
gains of the last two decades in girls’ education and employment.
Targets
• Ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable, inclusive and quality
primary and secondary education, leading to relevant and effective learning
outcomes and inclusive, sustainable economic growth.
• By 2030, ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable, inclusive
and quality technical, vocational and tertiary education, including university.
• Achieve universal access to inclusive and quality education at all levels,
eliminate the gender gap in enrolment and completion, and increase the quality
of education for all in least developed countries.
• Substantially expand globally the number of places and scholarships for
students and trainees from least developed countries, in particular in the fields
of science, education technology, business management and economics, and
encourage the full uptake of scholarships available to students of least
developed countries.
• Substantially increase access to the Internet, electricity, school meals that
support healthy diets, water and other vital school health services, and adequate
hygiene and sanitation facilities in all primary, secondary and tertiary schools
in least developed countries by 2030.
• Undertake feasibility studies to explore the possibility of establishing an online
university or other equivalent platforms for least developed countries.
• Expand professional training and quality apprenticeships and promote other
active labour market policies to facilitate a smooth school-to-work transition for
young people, especially young women.
• Urge the international community to join forces to have children return to school
in the wake of COVID-19 and ensure 12 years of safe and quality education for
all children, specifically girls.

10/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

We commit to taking the following actions:
46. We commit to supporting least developed countries and providing financing to
strengthen national inclusive and efficient education systems in order to harness the
demographic dividend, for both remote and on-site classes, including through better
curricula that respond to the dynamic nature of education, training and the job market;
local contexts, including country-specific challenges and local cultural contents;
teacher development, retention and deployment, especially in rural areas; and
improvements in basic infrastructure and providing adequate supplies that suit the
learning requirements of all children.
47. We also commit to supporting least developed countries in increasing enrolment
and decreasing dropout rates through measures such as abolishing school fees,
providing school feeding programmes that support healthy diets, water and sanitation
facilities, vaccinations, various school health service s and improving the quality of
education and especially foundational learning. We commit to supporting gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls in and through education and
ensuring equal access to all levels of education, including vocationa l and technical
education for people in vulnerable situations.
48. We will strive to provide universal and affordable access to the Internet,
substantially increase access to electricity, achieve access to adequate and equitable
sanitation and hygiene for all in all academic institutions in least developed countries,
and provide digital literacy skills, technology-enabled lifelong and dynamic learning
systems and human capital development by 2030.
49. We further commit to supporting the least developed co untries in gaining access
to and effectively utilizing digital tools and technologies to improve education
outcomes for all learners, including through educational radio and television
programmes, to meet learning and educational requirements according to the local
context. We also commit to distributing equipment and teaching materials, such as
radios and textbooks, both in physical and digital formats, including to the poorest
and vulnerable households, especially for girls. We further commit to supportin g
large-scale national efforts to utilize all forms of distance learning technology,
including low-cost technology, in support of remote learning and online education,
including through digital technologies, for better resilience in national equitable and
efficient education systems, as well as training to develop the digital skills of students
and educators.
50. We recognize the importance of education for sustainable development and
global citizenship education in helping countries to achieve a sustainabl e and
inclusive recovery after COVID-19, and will strengthen education for sustainable
development and global citizenship education in the period 2021 –2030.
51. We will encourage interaction, collaboration and exchange programmes of
students and the sharing of scientific studies and research papers among academic
institutions of least developed countries and the rest of the world. We commit to
substantially expanding globally the number of scholarships for enrolment in higher
education, including vocational training, and we will encourage higher education
institutes to allocate places and scholarships for students and trainees from least
developed countries, especially for young women, in particular in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, medicine and business administration, in developed
countries and other developing countries and encourage the full uptake of
scholarships offered by higher education institutes to least developed countries.
52. We commit to undertaking feasibility studies to explore the possibility of
establishing an online university or other equivalent platforms to support online
graduate and post-graduate university-level science, technology, engineering and
22-04927

11/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

mathematics education in least developed countries and recently gradua ted countries
with a view to, inter alia, providing policy support to promote distance education and
open learning for graduate and post-graduate studies in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics, ensuring a 50/50 gender balance at all levels whi le
guaranteeing special access for the poorest and people in vulnerable situations;
creating a virtual network of educational institutions within and beyond least
developed countries; assisting in course design and curriculum development; and
leading to scale and sustainability of the education system, taking into account all
pre-existing initiatives developed by the relevant partners in a comprehensive manner.
In this regard, we request the Secretary-General to submit a report, outlining, inter
alia, the mapping of existing initiatives, possible new modalities, resource
requirements, accreditation and sustainable funding sources, to the General Assembly
at its seventy-eighth session for its consideration.
Achieving gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and
young people to address inequality and drive economic growth
53. Women and girls continue to face barriers, such as a lack of access to inclusive
and quality education and digital skills, in particular at the secondary and tertiar y
levels, to health-care services, including sexual and reproductive health-care services,
and to social protection, decent work and opportunities in the labour market, and are
subject to harmful practices such as child, early and forced marriage, gender-based
violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment and other harmful
practices. Women were disproportionately affected by the COVID -19 pandemic,
including in terms of loss of jobs, income and livelihoods, while continuing to bear
the disproportionate brunt of unpaid care and domestic work. Investment and a focus
on the rights of women and girls are required to provide and enable access to inclusive
and quality education, social protection, online health services, including sexual and
reproductive health-care services, property and capital and productive assets
throughout the life course; to ensure financial inclusion through expanding access to
financial services such as credit; and to eliminate harmful practices and all forms of
violence. Together, these actions will help to address barriers to women’s full, equal,
effective and meaningful participation in all spheres of society, including in decision making and leadership, in order to achieve gender equality and empower women and
girls and further enhance the contribution of women to economic and social
development. The disproportionate impact of the pandemic on the social and
economic situations of women and girls, along with gender-based violence, also pose
challenges to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women
and girls in the least developed countries.
Targets
• Achieve women’s full, equal and meaningful participation and equal
opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political,
economic and public life.
• Support women’s equal opportunities in education, training, business,
entrepreneurship and decent jobs.
• Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and
private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.
• Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive
rights, as agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development and the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their review conferences.

12/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

• Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning
opportunities for all.
• Support the transition from informal to formal work in all sectors.
• Achieve the full, equal and meaningful participation of women and girls online.
• Achieve equitable access to social protection for women and girls.
We commit to taking the following actions:
54. We commit to establishing policies and programmes to improve an enabling
environment for the enjoyment of human rights by women and girls, expand women’s
access to inclusive and quality education and training, online services, health services,
entrepreneurship, job opportunities and economic opportunities, e xpand access to
gender-sensitive social protection and ensure women’s full, equal, meaningful and
effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision making in political, cultural, economic and public life, including th rough institutional
reforms and policies that address multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination.
We commit to supporting mechanisms that provide access to finance for women for
both personal and business use.
55. We commit to eliminating all forms of violence against all women and girls in
the public and private spheres, including sexual and gender-based violence,
trafficking, sexual and other types of exploitation, as well as all harmful practices,
such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation, through the
development, implementation and enforcement of appropriate policies and laws.
56. We commit to establishing inclusive and gender-responsive support
programmes to prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict and pos t-conflict
least developed countries, and to assist victims and survivors of sexual violence,
including through long-term health-care services, psychosocial support, access to
justice and safe accommodation and shelter and inclusion in peacebuilding initia tives.
57. We commit to providing access to family planning to all women in least
developed countries and ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive health
and reproductive rights, as agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development, the Beijing Platform for
Action and the outcome documents of their review conferences.
Population and health
58. We note that the least developed countries have the fastest growing populations
in the world, rising at an annual rate of 2.3 per cent, and that many are projected to
see their population double between 2019 and 2050. Appropriate policies and measures
need to be put in place to leverage the potential offered by the demographic dividend.
59. We will work together to support the acceleration of the demographic transition,
where relevant, and champion the importance of increased investment in human
development, including universal access to sexual and reproductive health -care
services, and public services, infrastructure and job creation that keep pace with
population growth and create healthier, better educated citizens and drive economic
growth.
60. Least developed countries face major challenges in improving the health of their
population owing to a lack of adequate health-care facilities and services, investment
and a trained health workforce, as well as adequate commodities and supplies and
weaknesses across other systems, in particular food systems. Newborn, child and
maternal mortality remains unacceptably high in least developed countries. Prevailing

22-04927

13/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

high rates of undernutrition continue to be a major cause of disease, child mortality
and lifelong losses in productivity and income, with many people unable to afford or
gain access to nutritious food and healthy diets. They also experience an increase in
obesity and non-communicable diseases, as well as other preventable or treatable
conditions.
Targets
• Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to
quality essential health-care services and nutrition, and access to safe, effective,
quality and affordable essential medicines, diagnostics, vaccines and other
health technologies for all.
• Reduce maternal deaths and eliminate preventable maternal, infant and child
deaths and improve access to affordable quality health-care services.
• Ensure birth registration to all newborns in least developed countries an d
provide a national legal identity to them.
We commit to taking the following actions:
61. We commit to providing financial and technical support and investment to
promote and upscaling education and training, in tandem with job creation, for the
burgeoning population of young people in least developed countries to leverage the
opportunities presented by the demographic dividend and to enable children and
young people, especially girls and young women, to develop their personalities,
talents and abilities and to participate fully in society. Least developed countries, with
the support of their development partners, will upgrade science and technology -based
education systems that lead to dynamic and emerging critical thinking skills of the
young generation and ensure their successful integration into national and
international labour markets, ensuring full and productive employment and decent
work for all.
62. We commit to providing the financial and technical support necessary for least
developed countries to strengthen integrated and inclusive national health systems
and the design, implementation of and access to modern health infrastructure and
systems, which is accessible to all members of the population, develop adequately
skilled professionals and medical facilities and supplies, strengthen health-care
information systems and the use of disaggregated data for decision -making, improve
essential integrated health-care services, including sexual and reproductive health,
and provide incentives to retain national health workers in order to achieve universal
health coverage in least developed countries, with a special emphasis on primary
health care as a cornerstone of a sustainable health system for all in least developed
countries.
63. We also commit to supporting the strengthening of food systems in least
developed countries, including by using holistic, all-hazard and One Health
approaches, so that they deliver better outcomes for people’s health and nutrition,
alongside ensuring the health of animals, plants and ecosystems, while also ensuring
that least developed countries are more resilient and sustainable in the face of climate
change and biodiversity loss. This includes making safe, sufficient and nutritious food
more available, affordable and accessible and creating more enabling food
environments. We welcome the Committee on World Food Security voluntary
guidelines on food systems and nutrition.
64. We reaffirm the decision of the Council for Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights on the extension of the transition period under
article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement for least developed country members for certain
14/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

obligations with respect to pharmaceutical products until 1 January 2033 and the
decision of the Council on the transition period under article 66.1 of the TRIPS
Agreement until 1 July 2034, and the commitment of World Trade Organization
(WTO) developed country members to providing incentives to enterprises and
institutions in their territories for the purposes of promoting and encouraging
technology transfer to least developed countries, as obligated under article 66.2 of the
TRIPS Agreement. We also encourage the voluntary transfer of technology on
mutually agreed terms with a view to enabling least developed countries to produ ce
life-saving medicines, including COVID-19 vaccines.
65. We commit to providing the support necessary to least developed countries to
assist in the birth registration for all newborns in least developed countries and the
provision of a national legal identity to them.
Investing in young people
66. In 2020, 66.9 per cent of the population was under 30 years of age. By 2030,
one in five of the projected number of young people in the world will have been born
in the least developed countries. In 2019, more than one in five young people around
the world were not in employment, education or training, which is almost unchanged
since 2005. Given that young women were already twice as likely to be unemployed
and not in education or training as young men, and because women have been
disproportionately affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the COVID-19 crisis is
likely to worsen not in employment, education or training gender gaps among young
people.
Targets
• Ensure, by 2030, that all young people achieve literacy and numeracy.
• Ensure access to lifelong digital learning opportunities for skills development.
• Increase youth participation and inclusion in decision-making processes.
• Increase access to safe and healthy working conditions, decent work opportunities,
knowledge and skills for all young people in the least developed countries.
• Promote entrepreneurial training to young people, including through financial
and technical assistance.
We commit to taking the following actions:
67. We commit to strengthening youth participation mechanisms to facilitate young
people’s meaningful engagement, especially young women and young people in
vulnerable situations, in policies and activities that enhance sustainable development
efforts. We will increase youth involvement in national sustainable development
coordination councils, working with national youth councils, expanding the United
Nations Youth Delegate Programme and other opportunities for youth representation,
as appropriate, and ensuring that young people contribute to the implementation and
review of the Doha Programme of Action.
68. We commit to adopting an inclusive, results-based and employment-generating
approach to development planning and implementation in accordance with national
priorities. We commit to ensuring fluency, including digital fluency, lifelong learning
opportunities, appropriate training, including vocational training, creativity,
entrepreneurship skills and the best opportunities for full employment and decent
work for all people, especially young women and men in the least developed
countries. We commit to supporting the least developed countries in reforming and
strengthening equitable and efficient education systems to allow for the development
22-04927

15/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

of skills and talents that are consistent with the demands of the national and global
job markets, which include preparing young people for frontier technologies and the
new digital age. We also commit to strengthening nationa l legislative frameworks, in
accordance with international labour standards.
Water, sanitation and hygiene
69. The proportion of the population with access to safe drinking water services was
64.6 per cent in 2018, with 84.1 per cent who had access in urban areas, compared
with 55 per cent in rural areas. Access to basic sanitation services remains very low
in the least developed countries, at an average 34 per cent of the population, in
particular in rural areas.
Target
• Achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water
and access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all in least
developed countries by 2030.
We commit to taking the following actions:
70. We reaffirm the importance of regional and international cooperation for safe
drinking water and sanitation and commit to expanding international cooperation and
capacity-building support, for accelerating access to inclusive, affordable and
climate-resilient water and sanitation services and improving institutional capacity
and increasing access to technology to develop water and sanitation infrastructure in
the least developed countries and water- and sanitation-related activities and
programmes, including the development and implementation of integrated water
resources management interventions and wastewater treatment solutions. We also
commit to providing access to safe and affordable drinking water, adequate sanitation
and hygiene facilities for all, with particular attention given to women and girls in
terms of the provision of safe and affordable drinking water, adequate and equitable
sanitation and hygiene services, which include menstrual hygiene, and services for
schools, health facilities and other public spaces.
Urbanization and shelter
71. On average, almost 60 per cent of the urban population in least developed
countries live in slums, where conditions carry especially high risks, owing to
overcrowding, limited access to water and sanitation, insufficient waste management,
inadequate rainwater drainage systems, poor health-care systems and a lack of other
basic services. Financing sustainable urbanization remains a challenge in least
developed countries. Sustainable funding at the municipal level through additio nal
resources is key to supporting the investment needs of growing cities in least
developed countries.
Targets
• By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic
services.
• By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport
system for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport.
We commit to taking the following actions:
72. We reaffirm our commitment to providing financial and technical support to
least developed countries in strengthening government housing agencies, including at
16/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

the local level, and ensuring improved access to land, in accordance with national
legislation; affordable housing and basic services; upgraded slums; and sustainable
transport and communication systems for all. In this regard, we further reaffirm the
need to take account of the special needs of least developed countries devastated by
natural and human-made hazards and conflict.
73. We commit to supporting least developed countries, including through financial
and technical assistance, in building sustainable, culturally sensitive and resilient
housing utilizing local materials and in increasing affo rdable housing, including by
leveraging public-private partnerships and sharing good practices among least
developed countries.
Migration and mobility
74. We recognize that migrants make positive contributions to inclusive growth and
sustainable development in their countries of origin, transit and destination, and to
the response and recovery to the crisis caused by COVID -19. We duly acknowledge
that migrants face significant barriers to safe and secure movement and livelihoods,
which in turn expose them to additional risks and vulnerabilities.
Targets
• Facilitate the orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of
people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed
migration policies.
• Enhance the positive contribution of migrants to inclusive growth and
sustainable development.
• Invest in the skills development of migrants and facilitate mutual recognition of
skills, qualification and competences.
• Ensure inclusive access to basic social (education, nutrition, health care) and
protection services, in particular for migrants in vulnerable situations, in line
with national policies and legislation and international obligations.
We commit to taking the following actions:
75. We recommit to cooperating internationally to ensure safe, orderly and regular
migration involving the full respect for human rights and the humane treatment of
migrants, regardless of their migration status, and to supporting countries of origin,
transit and destination in the spirit of international cooperation, taking into account
national circumstances. In this regard, we recognize the positive contributions of
migrants to inclusive growth and sustainable development in their countries of origin,
transit and destination, and in the response to and recovery from the COVID -19
pandemic. We note national policy measures and good practices to facilitate safe,
orderly and regular migration, and also note the decision to convene the first official
meeting of the International Migration Review Forum, under the auspices of the
General Assembly, in 2022.
76. We commit to promoting inclusive access to basic social and protection services,
in particular for migrants and refugee children and young people, in line wit h national
policies and legislation and international obligations. We intend to coordinate and
cooperate at all levels, as appropriate, to provide vital services, especially equal
access to education, which is a human right and is critical to equipping the m with the
necessary life-saving and -enhancing knowledge and skills.
77. We encourage investment in innovative solutions that facilitate the mutual
recognition of skills, qualifications and competences of migrant workers at all skill
22-04927

17/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

levels and promote demand-driven skills development in order to optimize the
employability of migrants in formal labour markets in countries of destination and in
countries of origin upon return, and to ensure decent work in labour migration.
78. We encourage the taking of appropriate steps to ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of migrants in the development of local solutions and
opportunities, as well as efforts to improve public perceptions of migrants and
migration and to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and
girls, in particular migrant women employed in the informal economy and in less
skilled work, to abuse and exploitation, underlining in this regard the obligation of
States to protect, respect and fulfil the human rights of all migrants.
79. We invite the international community and all relevant stakeholders, without
prejudice to ongoing support, to cooperate and mobilize resources and expertise,
including through financial and in-kind assistance, as well as direct aid to host
countries, refugee populations and countries of origin of refugees, including least
developed countries, with a view to enhancing the capacity of and reducing the heavy
burden borne by countries and communities hosting refugees and displaced persons,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
while fully respecting the humanitarian principles of humanity, independence,
neutrality and impartiality for humanitarian action.
80. We commit to designing and implementing policies and measures supporting
the outward and inward mobility of artists and cultural professionals from and to least
developed countries, where no suitable pathway exists, including South -South
mobility, as a key enabler for vibrant and dynamic cultural and creative industries.
Good and effective governance at all levels
81. Many least developed countries have made progress in governance in the past
decade. However, more needs to be done. Sustainable development cannot be realized
without peace and security, and peace and security will be at risk without sustainable
development. Three in four least developed countries are in situations affected by
conflict and post-conflict situations. Conflict-affected least developed countries
require context-specific approaches to address poverty, security and governance in an
integrated manner. In 2018, 33 million forcibly displaced people originated from least
developed countries, which is a growing problem, negatively affecting the governance
situation in their countries of origin. The average e-government development index
developed by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs for the delivery of
public services in least developed countries increased from 0.23 in 2010 to 0.34 in
2020 but remains below the world average of 0.6.
82. We recognize the importance of enhancing good governance at all levels by
strengthening democratic processes, institutions and the rule of law, increasing
efficiency, coherence, transparency and participation, protecting an d promoting
human rights, and reducing corruption and strengthening the capacity of Governments
of least developed countries to play an effective role in their economic and social
development.
83. We reaffirm the importance of the principle of sovereign eq uality enshrined in
Article 2.1 of the Charter of the United Nations. Broadening and strengthening the
voice and participation of least developed countries in international economic
decision-making, norm-setting and global economic governance is related to
target 10.6 of the Sustainable Development Goals.
84. We reaffirm our continued support for the strengthened and effective
participation of least developed countries in the global decision -making processes in
the economic, social, and environmental fields.
18/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

Targets
• Strengthen good governance and the rule of law at all levels.
• Provide continued support for the strengthened and effective voice and
participation of least developed countries in relevant international forums.
• Step up the fight against corruption and illicit financial flows.
• Build up efficient public administration institutions.
• Strengthen justice institutions and the rule of law.
We commit to taking the following actions:
85. We commit to strengthening good governance, democratic processes and the
rule of law by ensuring transparent and accountable governance, equal access to
justice and independent judicial institutions, based on the respect for human rights,
gender equality and the empowerment of those experiencing poverty, marginalization
or vulnerability, especially women and girls. We also commit to increased democratic
participation, enhancing institutional capacity at all levels and strengthening civil
society. We will also strengthen efforts to fight corruption, bribery and money laundering, the illegal transfer of funds and other illicit activities by strengthening
anti-corruption and other laws and regulations and their effective enforcement.
86. We commit to supporting least developed countries in the establishment of
e-government services, and digital government solutions, services and applications to
facilitate access to public sector offices and services, while providing for an
encompassing protection of personal data, and disseminate key information about
laws, regulations and government activities to citizens.
87. We commit to ensuring that the least developed countries are well represented
in the decision-making and governance structures of international organizations, as
appropriate. We also commit to providing continued support for the strengthened and
effective voice and participation of least developed countries in international dialogue
and action on development, as well as in decision- and rule-making and standard- and
norm-setting processes in all areas affecting their development, and in relevant
international forums.
88. We commit to promoting policy coherence and coordination of international
financial, trade and development institutions, processes and m echanisms, taking into
account the diverse and special development needs and challenges of least developed
countries.
Building and sustaining peace for sustainable development
89. A total of 24 of 46 least developed countries had active conflicts in 2 019. The
link between peace, security, stability and sustainable development are emphasized
in the 2030 Agenda. Peace, security, development, human rights and humanitarian
efforts are complementary and need to reinforce one another. Greater cooperation,
coherence, coordination and complementarity among development, disaster risk
reduction, humanitarian action and sustaining peace are fundamental to most
efficiently and effectively addressing needs and attaining the Sustainable
Development Goals. We recognize the positive role that sustainable development can
play in mitigating drivers of conflict, disaster risks, humanitarian crises and complex
emergencies, and recognize that a comprehensive whole-of-system response,
including promoting respect for cultural diversity, contributes to preventing violent
extremism, as and when conducive to terrorism, while the significance of culture in
the lives of communities makes its continuity essential for recovery and resilience in

22-04927

19/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

the wake of disasters. In addition, supporting and building partnerships with and
between conflict-affected least developed countries, through sustained and
predictable resources, remains critical for achieving peaceful and inclusive societies.
Targets
• Build durable peace and ensure stability, security and sustainable, inclusive and
resilient development in least developed countries.
• Foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies that are free from fear and violence.
• Strengthen multilateral dialogue and cooperation to prevent conflicts and ensure
peaceful solutions to existing conflicts.
• Promote increased representation of women at all decision-making levels in
national, regional and international institutions and in mechanisms for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflict.
90. We commit to ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
at all levels and stages of decision-making, and in all areas related to peace and
security, including peace processes and mediation efforts, conflict prevention and
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and relief and recovery, and to recognizing
women’s leadership therein, noting that women’s participation in peace negotiations
is likely to increase the durability and quality of pea ce and that mainstreaming
women’s meaningful participation and leadership into conflict prevention, resolution
and peacebuilding is essential.
We commit to taking the following actions:
91. We must redouble our efforts to resolve and or prevent confli ct and commit to
strengthening support for least developed countries affected by fragility and conflict
in order to address root causes of conflict, country-specific needs and situations,
including broad-based, inclusive and rapid socioeconomic development, with a
special focus on rebuilding better national institutions and capacity, rebuilding critical
infrastructure and generating productive employment and decent work for all.
92. We commit to building peaceful, just and inclusive societies that provide equal
access to justice and that are based on respect for human rights (including the right to
development), cultural diversity and pluralism, and public access to information on
the effective rule of law and good governance at all levels, and on transpare nt,
effective and accountable institutions. We will ensure that women effectively and
meaningfully participate, on equal terms with men, in the design, implementation,
follow-up and evaluation of policies and activities related to conflict prevention,
peace mediation, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction.
93. We commit to increasing the predictability of aid and making more effective use
of global and country-level funds for peacebuilding and State-building to achieve
sustainable development. We also encourage bilateral donors and multilateral
institutions to scale up access to instruments supporting investment in fragile
contexts. We shall work on providing humanitarian aid in coordination with a long term sustainable framework, contributing to sustainable development and productive
investment and therefore contributing to building and consolidating peace.
II.

Leveraging the power of science, technology and innovation to fight
against multidimensional vulnerabilities and to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals
94. We acknowledge the critical importance that science, technology and
innovation, including inclusive and enabling innovation ecosystems, environmentally

20/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

sound technologies and ICT can have in the pursuit of achieving the Sustainabl e
Development Goals. They can also play a key role in accelerating the pace of
economic diversification and transformation, and in improving productivity and
competitiveness, in a way that maximizes benefits for people, planet and prosperity
and enables the full participation of least developed countries in the global economy.
We underscore the urgent need to accelerate investment in the development and
scaling of innovation and technology solutions for the most pressing problems that
least developed countries face across economic, social and environmental fields that
support their digital transition and strengthen efforts to bridge digital divides,
including between rural and urban and between women and men, and build an open,
free and secure digital world. We call for strengthened international cooperation to
support least developed countries in strengthening science, technology and
innovation, including by providing financial contributions for investment in ICT
infrastructure. We also urge the strengthening of digital literacy and skills, as part of
efforts to bridge digital and knowledge divides, as a prerequisite for inclusive
participation in the digital economy. We also acknowledge the potential of the fourth
industrial revolution to raise global income levels and improve the quality of life for
populations around the world, while at the same time presenting the risk of
accelerating inequality within and between societies should gains be inequitably
distributed.
95. We express concern that, advances in science, technology and innovation
notwithstanding, significant gaps remain in science, technology and innovation
deployment between least developed countries and the rest of the world. We are also
concerned that there are serious gaps, especially in access to and capacities to adopt
technologies by least developed countries. They continue to face substantial structural
challenges in building human and institutional capacities in the field of digital
innovation.
96. During the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action over the period
2011–2020, least developed countries faced significant and persistent lags in major
indicators related to science, technology and innovation. According to the Global
Innovation Index rankings of 2020, 9 of the 21 least developed country economies
improved their rankings, while 11 of the least developed countries covered in the
Index went down the rankings. The ratio of research and development expenditure in
least developed countries as a share of GDP was 0.6 per cent or less between 2011
and 2017, compared with some 2 per cent of developed countries’ much larger GDP.
According to the data compiled by the World Intellectual Property Organization, from
2010 to 2018, the number of patent applications filed by residents of least developed
countries doubled, from 835 to 1,634. However, as a share of patents globally, the
figure is almost zero. The least developed countries published only 11 journal articles
for every 1 million people in 2018.
Key action areas
Access to modern technologies for sustainable development and building
human capital, infrastructure and institutions to reap the benefits of the fourth
industrial revolution
97. We express concern that least developed countries with limited infrastructure,
human and institutional capacities and Internet access are unable to participate in and
benefit from modern technologies, including financial technologies, and the ICT
revolution. During the period of the implementation o f the Istanbul Programme of
Action, Internet access in least developed countries increased to 19 per cent in 2019
from approximately 5 per cent in 2011. This progress notwithstanding, there are
growing digital divides both within and among countries, inclu ding gender digital

22-04927

21/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

divides and rural-urban divides. These divides result from low Internet and broadband
coverage, especially in rural and remote areas, the costs of using the Internet and the
lack of locally relevant content and of relevant digital skill s in least developed
countries. Approximately 800 million people in least developed countries do not have
access to the Internet and have no possibility of participating in economic, political,
social or cultural activities online. Without an expansion of national digital
infrastructure, the risk of least developed countries being locked into the low equilibrium trap is likely to be accentuated.
98. Least developed countries often lack sufficient technical resources,
organizational infrastructure and expertise to reap the benefits of digital growth or to
address related challenges. They lack effective cybersecurity strategies or best
practices, incident response functions, cybersecurity education or training for
cybersecurity professionals, and related research and development activities.
Targets
• Substantially increase investment from all sources in research and development,
as well as human and institutional capacity-building, for least developed
countries within an international enabling environment.
• Increase investment for adequate digital infrastructure to support sustainable
and inclusive digital development, including for e-learning, e-governance and
e-commerce.
• Promote the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms, including digital
and environmentally sound technologies, to least developed countries.
• Promote the development of effective, balanced, inclusive and enabling
ecosystems for innovation and creativity in least developed countries.
• Each least developed country will establish and strengthen a national science
institute to promote local innovations, research, design and development,
including in emerging technologies.
• Move away from low value-added natural resources and low-technology
products to higher value-added manufactures and higher-technology products.
• Build human capital through skills development, including digital skills and
literacy, and expand professional competencies.
• Mitigate negative impacts of emerging, new and disruptive technologies.
We commit to taking the following actions:
99. We commit to supporting least developed countries in formulating
comprehensive national regulatory frameworks, quality, reliable sustainable and
resilient physical infrastructure and inclusive digital ecosystems, and formulating
effective policies on science, technology and innovation, trade, investment, industry,
employment and education that accelerate the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goals, reduce all types of inequalities and build resilience against
shocks.
100. We commit to providing universal and affordable access to the Internet in least
developed countries, addressing the challenges associated with affordability in
Internet access to ensure that the benefits of new technolog ies are available to all, and
promoting an enabling environment for digital development, access and productive
usage for least developed countries through international support, as well as
transparent, predictable, independent and non-discriminatory regulations and the
promotion of competitive markets so that operators compete for low -use customers
22/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

through a variety of Internet plans that cater to different income levels and improve
rural coverage through universal service funds.
101. We commit to identifying underserved communities and supporting least
developed countries in integrating a strategic approach to inclusive and sustainable
models of last-mile connectivity and national broadband plans in order to promote
digital access for the poor, excluded and those in vulnerable situations, including
women and girls. We commit to helping least developed countries to build their digital
innovation capacity in order to navigate future technological changes and to ensure
sustainable capacity and leverage the workforce, promote access to technological
knowledge, and nurture the power of competitive industries.
102. We commit to supporting least developed countries in building capacity and a
framework to scale up the development, deployment and sustainable utilizati on of
emerging technologies for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and incorporate them into agriculture, manufacturing and services sectors.
103. We commit to strengthening the science-policy interface and expanding least
developed countries’ knowledge and understanding of and access to new technology
by building stronger partnerships with academies of science, universities, labs,
innovation incubators and private sector entities at the forefront of this technological
change, including those located in developed countries. We underline the need to
consider the current and potential impacts of new and emerging technologies on the
environment, the labour market, livelihoods and society.
104. We commit to enhancing least developed countries’ cybersecurity capabilities to
mitigate cyberthreats and ensure enhanced protection of their national critical
infrastructure, including critical ICT infrastructure, thereby increasing cyberresilience
and making the cyber ecosystem more secure, including for women and children, so
that it can serve national priorities and maximize socioeconomic benefits. We
underline that the human rights that people have offline must also be protected online.
105. We commit to enhancing least developed countries’ cyberse curity awareness to
better protect all people, including those in vulnerable situations, such as children,
young people, older persons, women and persons with disabilities. We also commit
to supporting least developed countries in developing their cybersec urity capacity
development programmes, including primary, secondary and tertiary education and
professional training on technical and managerial skills in industry, with the inclusion
of women and young people in the cybersecurity field.
106. We commit to providing the financial and technical support necessary to least
developed countries to establish and strengthen national and regional science
institutes in order to increase their capacity for research and development in science,
technology and innovations and promote the adaptation and application of modern
technologies for domestic uses. We also commit to promoting local innovation
capabilities of least developed countries for inclusive and sustainable economic
development by providing enhanced technical support and assistance to enable
stakeholders in the least developed countries to leverage intellectual property
successfully for growth, competitiveness and development, and bringing together
local scientific, vocational and engineering knowledge. We co mmit to addressing
gender inequality by enhancing the participation and leadership of women and girls
in the design, development and deployment of science, technology and innovation
activities.
107. We commit to supporting least developed countries in moving away from low
value-added natural resources and low-technology products to higher value-added
and higher technology products and more effective integration into global value

22-04927

23/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

chains, to build productive capacities, diversify their export matrix and gain a greater
share in the emerging digital economy.
108. We call upon Member States and the United Nations development system and
encourage other stakeholders to facilitate improved levels of participation of
scientists and engineers from least developed countries in international collaborative
research, science, technology and innovation projects, to strengthen their support for
the various science, technology and innovation partnerships with least developed
countries in primary, secondary and higher education, vocational education and
continuing education, and to promote business opportunities for the private sector in
science, technology and innovation infrastructure.
Science, technology, and innovation for development and recovery from the
COVID-19 pandemic and building resilience against emerging challenges
109. The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the importance of strong data and
science systems in addressing major threats. We acknowledge that science,
technology and innovation offer an opportunity for least developed countries to
recover sustainably and inclusively from the pandemic, reduce risks and strengthen
resilience to future systemic shocks and crises and emerging challenges. The
pandemic has underscored the pressing need for least developed countries to elevate
the application of science, technology, innovation and digital solutions at both policy
and operational levels.
Targets
• Support the efforts of least developed countries to significantly improve their
science, technology and innovation infrastructure and innovation capacities by
2031.
• Ensure universal and affordable access to and meaningful use of the Internet by
all in the least developed countries by 2030.
• Facilitate the expansion of broadband connectivity in least developed countries
to bridge the digital divide.
• Encourage investment in micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises that
facilitate access to the Internet and digital services.
• Promote productive capacity and competitiveness in the least developed
countries through technology-driven entrepreneurship.
• Develop competitive digital innovation ecosystems in least developed countries
that are resilient to future pandemics and fit for purpose.
We commit to taking the following actions:
110. We commit to bridging the science, technology and innovation divide and
providing financial and technical support and technology transfer on mutually agreed
terms to least developed countries, including through South-South and triangular
cooperation, to help to ensure that all least developed countries can engage effectively
in sustainable and resilient development that will also protect the economies, systems
and populations, in particular the poor and those in vulnerable situations.
111. We will strive to increase investment in education, including digital literacy,
skills and e-learning, and to improve education and training, including lifelong
learning endeavours in least developed countries, especially in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics, to close digital divides, including rural -urban, young
people-older persons and gender digital divides. We will enhance collaboration in

24/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

research, data and knowledge-sharing to cope with the immediate impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic and strengthen resilience. We will provide enhanced support to
the relevant stakeholders in least developed countries in increasing their knowledge
and understanding of intellectual property, know-how and technology transfer.
112. We will provide enhanced funding for developing innovative solutions relevant
to the local context and in response to specific problems in least developed countries,
aimed at benefiting those in vulnerable situations, leaving no one behind, including
in the areas of agriculture and food production, renewable energy and development,
infrastructure development, disaster risk reduction, environmental protection and
climate resilience.
113. We support the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries as a focal
point for least developed countries to strengthen their science, technology and
innovation capacity towards building sustainable productive capacities and promoting
structural economic transformation. We support the Technology Bank in
strengthening the science, technology and innovation capacity of least developed
countries for structural transformation and productive capacity development. We
invite Member States, as well as international organizations, foundations and the
private sector, to provide voluntary financial and in-kind resources to the Technology
Bank in order to enhance its capacity and effectiveness. We also decide to strengthen
collaboration among Governments, the private sector and ac ademia to advance
science, technology and innovation research and development, build inclusive digital
economies and bridge the digital divide, including by facilitating technology transfer
on mutually agreed terms.
114. We express our appreciation to the host country, Turkey, for the full support
given to the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries since its
establishment in June 2018.
Promoting private sector engagement, digitalization and broadband connectivity
115. We aim to achieve sufficient levels of digital skills and literacy to ensure digital
inclusion and enable digital development that supports both basic infrastructure
development and human capital accumulation. We take note of the Secretary General’s Road Map for Digital Cooperation and acknowledge its vision of a more
inclusive, equitable and safe digital future for all.
Targets
• By 2030, all people in least developed countries should have safe, affordable
and meaningful digital connectivity.
• By 2025, broadband Internet user penetration should reach 35 per cent in least
developed countries for both men and women.
• By 2031, double broadband Internet user penetration in least developed
countries to reach 70 per cent mark for both men and women.
• Increase financing from all sources to least developed countries to support the
development of domestic digital, data, and artificial intelligence infrastructure.
We commit to taking the following actions:
116. We commit to enhancing multi-stakeholder support to strengthen digital
capacity-building for least developed countries to fully harness open, accessible and
secure digital technologies, while encouraging Govern ments in particular to develop
robust and effective regulatory frameworks and policies, including to promote

22-04927

25/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

cybersecurity, accessible digital infrastructure, products and services, and digital
capacity-building.
117. We commit to promoting partnerships with the private sector to leverage in full
their capacity for innovation and encourage greater investment in science, technology
and innovation for development, including sustainable network infrastructure and
practical digital capacity-building initiatives in least developed countries. We
encourage and support the private sector, in particular major technology companies,
to work closely with public, educational, research-focused and development agencies
to facilitate technology transfer on mutually agreed terms, leverage research and
innovation that meets least developed countries’ needs and build the necessary
capacities and technical competencies of least developed countries.
118. We call upon development partners to enhance their support for least developed
countries in building their broadband infrastructure, connectivity, access and use of
digital technologies, incentivizing investors to invest in broadband infrastructure in
least developed countries to meet their investment gaps, including throug h leveraging
existing investment guarantee arrangements, such as the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency, and supporting capacity-building programmes for least developed
countries to gain access to existing facilities.
119. We recognize the untapped potential of least developed countries’ creative
industries to create full and productive employment and decent work, support
entrepreneurship and innovation, encourage the formalization and growth of micro -,
small and medium-sized enterprises, promote social inclusion and eradicate poverty.
We commit to protecting and promoting the status of the artists and cultural
professionals through policies and measures, and encourage artists’ inclusion in the
digital ecosystem, including through appropriate intellectual property frameworks.
III.

Structural transformation as a driver of prosperity
120. The initiation of a sustained process of structural transformation remains a
critical challenge for least developed countries. Their economies are largely
undiversified, highly dependent on commodities and external assistance and at the
bottom of regional and global value chains. High-productivity manufacturing and
services make a miniscule contribution to GDP in least developed countries. Country specific industrial policy is therefore necessary. While the agriculture sector employs
more than half the population, it is characterized by subsistence practices, with low
levels of value addition per worker, and inadequate access to both national, regional
and global markets.
121. The services sector contributes directly to structural transformation. However,
it contributes less than half of GDP in many least developed countries, the bulk of
tertiary employment is concentrated in less knowledge-intensive services and
participation in the global export of commercial services is negligible. We underline
the importance of country-specific policies supported by an international enabling
environment to promote, establish and enhance a domestic services sector.
122. For least developed countries to fully utilize their potential, we commit to
promoting the achievement of inclusive and sustainable structural transformation
capable of increasing productivity and growth, reducing their disaster risk, including
exposure and vulnerabilities to existing and future external shocks. We will create
decent full employment and decent jobs, eradicate poverty and ensure inclusive and
sustainable development.

26/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

Key action areas
Productive capacity-building
123. Many least developed countries’ economies feature limited productive
capacities, which constrain their ability to produce efficiently and effectively, to
diversify their economies and to create sustainable and productive employment. This
challenge translates into binding supply constraints and, ultimately, into weak export
and economic potential and limited productive employment generation and social
development prospects. To build and enhance productive capacities at the country
level, each least developed country, with the support of development partners, is
encouraged to undertake national productive capacities gap assessments to analyse
the key constraints in building productive capacities and achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Targets
• Generate quality employment opportunities for all and increase labour
productivity by 50 per cent by 2031, with particular attention given to the
integration of women, young people and those in vulnerable situations.
• Substantially increase economic and export diversific ation with a view to
reaching the level of other developing countries in export concentration by
2030.
• Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, double
industry’s share of employment and GDP in least developed countries.
We commit to taking the following actions:
124. We commit to promoting and supporting the formulation of national strategies
aimed at increasing decent employment, diversification, economic transformation,
value addition, efficiency and competitiveness in the manufacturing, agriculture and
services sectors, as well as life-cycle approaches, with a cross-cutting focus on
sustainability, and call for enhancing financial and technical support and policy space
from all sources to facilitate the implementation of t hese strategies.
125. Least developed countries commit to creating a conducive policy environment
for industrial diversification and value addition, including strengthening efforts to
accelerate capital accumulation, building institutional and human capac ities and
knowledge development. We support improved data collection to better understand
productivity levels and trends and better inform policies to drive productivity shifts.
126. We encourage innovative solutions, entrepreneurship and the use of moder n,
sustainable, cost-effective and locally adapted technologies and practices, with an
emphasis on the manufacturing, agriculture and services sectors, including tourism,
information and communications and finance, and call for the sharing of scientific
knowledge and innovative technologies on mutually agreed terms.
127. We note the call for enhancing support towards establishing or upgrading quality
assurances and standards of products and services in least developed countries to meet
international standards.
128. We call upon Member States to increase financial and technical support to least
developed countries in promoting family farming and the development of small,
medium and large agribusinesses and industries with sustainable value addition along
the agricultural value chain. We commit to implementing science- and evidence-based
and data-driven agricultural practices that increase resilience and sustainable
productivity, help to maintain ecosystems, strengthen capacity for adaptation to

22-04927

27/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters, improve food
security and reduce malnutrition in all its forms. We decide to improve access to
agricultural research and sustainable innovation and practices, including
agroecological and other innovative approaches and sustainable technologies, to
support adaptation and, where possible, mitigation.
129. We commit to promoting micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, including
those run and owned by women entrepreneurs, by supporting full and equ al access to
financial services and products, strengthening the legal framework, especially for
micro-enterprises, supporting them to enter into national, regional and global value
chains, supporting them for digitalization and tapping the potential of e -commerce
for enhanced competitiveness in the global digital economy. We intend to devise a
rural agro-commodity-based value chain upgrade through affordable finance, with the
participation of private enterprises, and thereby unleash entrepreneurship at the farm
level.
130. We will promote increased market opportunities and full and equal access to
financial services and products for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises and
entrepreneurs from least developed countries in order to create sustainable gro wth
and decent jobs, in particular for women and young people through their beneficial
integration into national, regional and global value chains. Structural transformation
of least developed countries requires a conducive business ecosystem with strong a nd
well-equipped business support organizations and business-friendly policies,
regulatory frameworks and export strategies to facilitate the access of micro -, small
and medium-sized enterprises to markets. We will support and empower micro-, small
and medium-sized enterprises and entrepreneurs in least developed countries with a
view to bringing about inclusive growth and prosperity.
131. We reaffirm the importance of human capacity as a critical factor in the
utilization of other productive capacities and call for increasing responsible public
and private investment, including through international cooperation, in human
capacity development and skills development in order to increase productive
capacities and the number of young people and adults who have relevant skills,
including technical and vocational skills, for full and productive employment and
decent jobs and entrepreneurship.
Infrastructure development
132. Least developed countries continue to face huge quality infrastructure gaps, in
particular regarding access to energy, transport and ICT, and lack the capacity to
maintain existing infrastructure and address the gaps in full. The Group of 20
Principles for Quality Infrastructure Investment promote enhanced efforts and
support towards quality infrastructure development consistent with international
standards, including through improved coordination between public and private
investment, which is fundamental to close the infrastructure gap.
(a)

Transport
133. Notwithstanding the efforts made, least developed countries continue to face
inefficient and unreliable physical transport infrastructure owing to high costs, a lack
of investment, poor maintenance, and a lack of institutional capacity and stable policy
and regulatory environments. The establishment of safe, affordable, accessible and
sustainable transport systems, including rail transport, road transport, seaports, and
air transport, and transport facilitation are critical for least developed countries to
reduce transport costs, facilitate trade, link to regional and international markets and
enhance competitiveness.

28/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

Target
• Significantly expand, upgrade and maintain and gain access to safe, affor dable,
accessible and sustainable transport infrastructure and national and cross boundary connectivity and ensure that all forms of transport infrastructure are
maintained through closing the missing links and strengthening institutional
capacities to manage transport services.
We commit to taking the following actions:
134. We commit to developing and implementing comprehensive national and local
policies for safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport infrastructure
development and maintenance, encompassing all modes of transportation. We intend
to ensure sustainable, climate-resilient transport infrastructure that can withstand the
impacts of disasters, climate change and rising sea levels and intend to increase
electrification and access to public transport. In this regard, we will be mobilizing
domestic and international resources and share experiences on transport infrastructure
development and financing, thereby building institutional capacities and strengthening
transport services.
135. We call upon development partners, international organizations, regional
development banks and the private sector, through public-private partnerships and
direct investment, to provide financial and technical support to the efforts of least
developed countries in transport infrastructure development and maintenance. In this
regard, we stress the importance of developing the policies and regulatory
frameworks necessary and strengthening enabling environments to promote private
sector involvement in infrastructure development, including enhancing technical
assistance and capacity-building. We also intend to leverage new and innovative
financing sources and new funding mechanisms, including blended finance and green
bonds.
(b)

Energy
136. Notwithstanding the importance of access to affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy to achieve structural transformation, least developed countries
face challenges at three levels, namely, the generation, transmission and utilization of
energy. In addition, they lack the capacity to mobilize the large amounts of financing
required to invest in major power generation projects. Only some 53 per cent of the
population in least developed countries has access to energy, with rates of access in
rural areas of approximately only 10 per cent in some countries. We recognize that
the COVID-19 pandemic has underlined the importance of affordable, reliable
sustainable and modern energy access, from health services to the use of ICT.
Resources deployed for COVID-19 responses and immediate health priorities have
further constrained already limited fiscal capacity and increased the risk of energy
insecurity in these countries.
137. The least developed countries committed to net zero greenhouse gas emissions
by 2050 in the context of resources being available to do so. The pathway to net zero
emissions requires a substantial increase in the share of renewable energy and in clean
energy technologies in all three main end-use categories: electricity, transport and
heating/cooling. The immense potential of the renewable energy sector in least
developed countries notwithstanding, these countries rarely benefit from larger
financing schemes to the same extent as more prosperous developing countries. We
are concerned that 15 least developed countries are among the top 20 access-deficit
countries in the world and that, in 2019, the least developed countries attracted only
20 per cent of international commitments in support of clean energy to developing
countries.

22-04927

29/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

138. We welcome the call of parties 2 to accelerate the development, deployment and
dissemination of technologies, as well as the adoption of policies, to make the
transition towards low-emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up the
deployment of clean power generation and energy-efficiency measures, including
accelerating efforts towards the phasing down of unabated coal power and phasing
out of inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, while providing targeted support to the poorest
and most vulnerable in line with national circumstances and recognizing the need for
support towards a just transition.
139. Access to clean cooking also remains a major concern in least developed
countries, although the number of households have access to clean cooking methods
increased to 17 per cent in 2019, up from 11 per cent in 2010. The majority of the
people in least developed countries live in rural areas, with access to clean fuel for
cooking as low as 7 per cent, and several least developed countries have overall acce ss
to clean cooking equal to or less than 5 per cent.
Targets
• By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy services.
• Double the generation of electricity per capita in least developed countries by
2030.
• Increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the energy mix (target
7.2 of the Sustainable Development Goals).
• Double financing from all sources in support of clean and renewable energy and
enhance capacities in energy production, trade and distribution in least
developed countries, in line with Sustainable Development Goal 7.
• By 2030, expand infrastructure and upgrade technology for supplying modern
and sustainable energy services for all.
• Enhance technology transfer on mutually agreed terms to least developed
countries to accelerate the transition to clean and renewable energy.
• By 2030, enhance international cooperation to facilitate access to and promote
investment in clean energy research and technology, as well as infrastruc ture, in
accordance with Sustainable Development Goal 7.
• Fifty per cent of the annual financing flows to clean cooking and electricity
access should be directed to the least developed countries.
We commit to taking the following actions:
140. We encourage the doubling of international public finance and the mobilization
of resources from all sources to meet the urgent need for investment in power
generation and transmission, including grid reinforcement and the upgrading of
technology, in order to provide affordable, modern, reliable and sustainable energy to
all through improved generation, transmission and distribution facilities and
enhanced energy efficiency in least developed countries. We also commit to
promoting scaled-up and targeted support to least developed countries in the
implementation of the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All,
including the global plan of action for the Decade.
141. We aim to provide financial and technical support to least developed countries
on a priority basis to double the per capita generation of electricity in least developed
__________________
2

30/63

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and/or Paris Agreement.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

countries by 2030 and increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the
energy mix.
142. We commit to strengthening cooperation at the regional level to promote
innovation and facilitate financing, support regional cross -border power grid
connectivity to advance economic integration and sustainable development, and share
best practices, and in this regard we invite Governments to reinforce their energy
interconnections, connecting regional energy markets and increasing energy security
at the regional and global levels.
143. We commit to promoting women’s full, equal and effective participation and
leadership in the design and implementation of energy policies and p rogrammes,
mainstream a gender perspective into such policies and programmes, and ensure
women’s full and equal access to and use of sustainable energy to enhance their
economic and social empowerment, including employment and other income generating opportunities.
144. We commit to promoting public and private investment to ensure that
households make the transition to cleaner, more efficient and sustainable cooking
technologies and fuels, including through publicly supported technology innovation
accelerators, with a focus on remote, poor and vulnerable households.
145. We commit to increasing the deployment of least-cost decentralized solutions,
policy support, and new business models and the sharing of best practices, including
mini- and micro-grids, stand-alone renewable energy systems, rooftop solar
photovoltaic panels and storage, digitally enabled and fintech solutions and other
technologies that can be directly linked to livelihood improvement and economic
activities, especially in remote low-demand areas, and that can help to close the access
gap and bridge the last mile.
146. We call upon least developed countries to create enabling environments,
including appropriate regulatory frameworks and policy reforms, to facilitate private
sector investment and promote attractive project pipelines. We also invite
development partners, multilateral development banks and other international and
regional organizations, including the International Renewable Energy Agency, the
International Solar Alliance and other relevant stakeholders, to substantially increase
their investment in least developed countries, through a simplified access process, in
developing sustainable, reliable, modern, inclusive and equitable energy systems,
including by strengthening energy systems through cross-border grid connections, as
appropriate, and giving consideration to incorporating decentralized renewable
energy solutions in energy planning, as appropriate, and recognizing that energy
transition will take different paths in different parts of the world.
147. We commit to the development, dissemination, diffusion, transfer on mutually
agreed terms, and application of environmentally sound technologies to address the
energy access challenges of least developed countries by identifying the specific
needs of each country through mobilizing technical and financial assistance and tools
to deploy affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy solutions. We
emphasize in this context the urgent need to enhance international cooperation t o
facilitate access to clean energy research and technology, including renewable energy,
energy efficiency and advanced and cleaner fossil fuel technologies, as well as
improved infrastructure, for supplying affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all.
148. We commit to supporting the implementation of the Least Developed Countries
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Initiative for Sustainable Development
aimed at harnessing the potential of renewable energy across least developed
countries and promoting energy efficiency. We call upon development partners to
22-04927

31/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

provide resource allocations for aligned efforts and activities regarding the Initiative
across all least developed countries.
Connecting least developed countries to global and regional value chains and
strengthening their services economy and trade
149. Least developed countries are faced with numerous challenges in their efforts to
integrate into regional and global value chains, including limited industrial
development, low levels of productivity and diversification, lack of technology and
structural transformation, limited access to trade finance, rules of origin and non -tariff
barriers such as quality standards.
Target
• Significantly increase the value added and manufactured component of the
exports of least developed countries, with the objective of integrating least
developed countries into the regional and global value chains.
We commit to taking the following actions:
150. We call for greater integration of least developed countries into the regional and
global value chains to increase diversification and accelerate their structural
economic transformation and sustainable development.
151. We commit to supporting least developed countries in significantly increasing
their integration into the regional and global value chains, with a view to enhancing
their competitiveness, leapfrogging their development process and driving their
productivity growth. In this regard, we will support least developed countries in
strengthening their productive capacity, export competitiveness, access to trade
finance, skills transfer and connectivity, market access, trade facilitation and
technology transfer on mutually agreed terms.
Support for private sector development
152. A dynamic, broad-based, well-functioning and socially responsible private
sector is a valuable instrument for achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth, access to goods and services, a sour ce of tax revenue and
sustainable structural transformation. Structural constraints, such as infrastructure
bottlenecks, limited access to finance, high operating and trading costs, limited
human capital, limited ICT capacities and institutional constraint s, have limited the
growth of the private sector in least developed countries.
Targets
• Create an enabling environment for private sector development, supporting its
further alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals.
• Ensure full and equal access to financial services and products for micro -, small
medium-sized enterprises, including insurance, especially for women, and
improve financial and digital literacy.
We commit to taking the following actions:
153. We commit to promoting an enabling business environment conducive to growth
and development, the absence of corruption, and a transparent and rules-based
regulatory framework, simplifying business regulations and processes, reducing and
streamlining administrative formalities, creating efficient national support
mechanisms for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, improving supply

32/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

chains, facilitating access to markets, reinforcing cooperation, building capacities to
implement effective competition policies, and adopting open, transparent and clear
regulatory frameworks for business and investment, with protection for prope rty
rights and land rights, as appropriate, and in accordance with national circumstances
and consistent with international legal frameworks. Where appropriate, we aim to
strengthen regulatory frameworks to better align private sector incentives with publi c
goals, foster long-term quality investment and ensure that the private sector adopts
sustainable practices.
154. We commit to fostering economic activity and the ease of doing business for
private companies by promoting domestic market and capital forma tion, economic
clusters or hubs/industry parks/export processing zones that remove obstacles to
investment and infrastructure usage, enable the simplified facilitation of business
operations and trade and support least developed countries in the implementa tion of
such measures. We will also support micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in
entering into national, regional and global value chains by taking steps to close digital
divides through financial support and access to appropriate digital tools an d platforms
connecting markets.
155. We commit to strengthening cooperation for the exchange of experiences and
the dissemination of best practices that foster entrepreneurship, promote dialogue and
contacts, and stimulate the transfer of skills and technology, on mutually agreed
terms.
156. We support the provision of finance, including grants, technical assistance, seed
funding and concessional financing, from donor countries, United Nations entities,
the World Bank Group and IMF and the private sector, in order to leverage additional
sources of finance for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises to facilitate their
growth and development. In this regard, we commit to promoting regular public private sector dialogue.
IV.

Enhancing international trade of least developed countries and
regional integration
157. We recognize that least developed countries can derive significant benefit from
a universal, rules-based, open, transparent, predictable, inclusive, non-discriminatory
and equitable multilateral trading system under WTO. Notwithstanding the massive
expansion of trade and investment in the past decades, least developed countries face
considerable challenges in effective integration into global trading systems and in
benefiting from the opportunities afforded by international trade and global value
chains.
158. We are concerned that the least developed countries’ share of global
merchandise exports stagnated over the past decade, remaining at 1 per cent. The
Sustainable Development Goal target of doubling the least developed countries’ share
of global exports by 2020 from 2011 (2 per cent target) has not been met.
159. We are concerned that, owing to COVID-19, merchandise exports of least
developed countries fell by a further 9.1 per cent compared with the global average
decline of 7.7 per cent in 2020. 3 In 2020, the value of the global services trade was
down 35 per cent year on year. Micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises have been
adversely affected by the pandemic. Limited export diversification has heightened the
vulnerability of least developed countries to the impact of the pandemic on global

__________________
3

22-04927

World Trade Organization, “Market access for products and services of export interest to l east
developed countries” (WT/COMTD/LDC/W/69, para. 3.9).
33/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

trade. The crisis has also highlighted the fundamental importance of trade in making
essential goods and services available to countries and people in need.
160. We acknowledge that the share of total global exports of cultural goods from
least developed countries accounted for only a 0.5 per cent share of total global
exports, both in 2005 and 2014. The potential of the cultural and creative sector to
enhance least developed countries’ participation in and benefit from new
opportunities for dynamic growth in world trade remains largely untapped.
161. We are concerned that rising protectionist tendencies are threatening to further
weaken efforts regarding the expansion of international trade and emphasize that
bilateral and regional trade agreements should complement but not substitute the role
of WTO as the central governing body for global trade. Otherwise, the international
trade landscape could become increasingly polarized and fragmented in the coming
decades, which would be harmful for the least developed countries.
162. We call upon WTO members to fully and expeditiously implement all the
decisions of its Ministerial Conferences taken in favour of least developed countries.
Key action areas
Duty-free and quota-free market access
163. We note that there have been progressive improvements since the adoption of
the Istanbul Programme of Action on providing duty -free and quota-free market
access to least developed countries. WTO members adopted a duty -free and quotafree market access decision at the Ninth Ministerial Conference, held in Bali,
Indonesia, in 2013. Most of the developed country members grant either full or nearly
full duty-free and quota-free market access, with gaps remaining in a limited num ber
of markets and a few sectors. A number of developing country members have granted
a significant degree of duty-free and quota-free market access to products from least
developed countries and a number of them have reached nearly full duty -free and
quota-free coverage. Least developed countries need to be provided with increasingly
greater market access in preference-granting countries.
Targets
• Facilitate market access for products of least developed countries, including by
developing simple and transparent rules of origin applicable to imports from
least developed countries, in accordance with the guidelines adopted by WTO
members at the Ministerial Conference held in Bali in 2013.
• Significantly increase the exports of least developed countries, in particular with
a view to doubling 4 their share of global exports by 2031.
We commit to taking the following actions:
164. We call upon all developed country WTO members and developing country
WTO members declaring themselves in a position to do so to timely implement duty free and quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all products originating from
all least developed countries, consistent with WTO decisions, which would facilitate

__________________
4

34/63

In accordance with the review undertaken by the Committee for Development Policy in 2021
(E/2021/33), 16 least developed countries are in different stages of graduation. Therefore, a
considerable number of them are likely to graduate by 2031, which may lower the overall export
figure of least developed countries. This should be taken into account in assessments against the
target.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

the integration of least developed country producers into regional and global value
chains.
165. We reiterate our conviction that no country graduating from the least developed
country category should have its development progress disrupted or reversed. We
welcome that the United Nations graduation process helps to ensure that no
graduating country has its special and differential treatment measures and exemptions
abruptly reduced. We invite development and trading partners to consider extending
to the graduated country trade preferences previously made available as a result of
least developed country status or reducing them in a phased manner in order to avoid
their abrupt reduction. We note that the Group of Least Developed Countries put
forward various proposals at WTO, pertaining to, among other things, trade -related
challenges and those related to the smooth transition of the countries graduating from
the least developed country category, and seek to further examine these issues.
166. We commit to fully meeting our transparency obligations on trade measures and
meaningfully improving equitable access for all countries, especially least developed
countries, to safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines, including through facilitating
technology transfer within the framework of multilateral rules and applicable
international obligations, so as to encourage research and innovation while at the
same time supporting licensing agreements and any other arrangements on mutually
agreed terms in the short and medium term, as well as any other long -term
arrangements that help to scale up the manufacturing of vaccines and in a sustainable
manner.
Preferential rules of origin
167. We note that considerable progress has been made towards ensuring that
preferential rules of origin are simple and transparent and contribute to facilitating
market access of imports from least developed countries. WTO members adopted two
decisions on preferential rules of origin for least developed countries, at the
Ministerial Conferences held in Bali in 2013 and in Nairobi in 2015. Almost all
preference-granting members have submitted notifications of their preferential rules
of origin requirements.
Target
• Ensure that preferential rules of origin applicable to imports from least
developed countries are transparent and simple and contribute to facilitating
market access.
We commit to taking the following actions:
168. We call upon all developed country WTO members and developing country
WTO members declaring themselves in a position to do so to facilitate market access
for products of least developed countries, including by applying simple and
transparent preferential rules of origin applicable to imports from least developed
countries, in accordance with the guidelines adopted by WTO members at the
Ministerial Conference held in Bali in 2013 and the decisions taken at the Ministerial
Conference held in Nairobi in 2015. We call upon preference-granting members that
have not yet done so, to notify their least developed country-specific preferential rules
of origin to enhance transparency.
169. We invite development partners to provide technical and financial assistance to
least developed countries to further scale up their legal and technical capacity to
comply with sanitary and phytosanitary measures and technical barriers to trade
provisions.

22-04927

35/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

Least developed countries services waiver
170. We recognize that the agreements on trade in services enable the liberalization
of services across all modes of supply and help to boost trade in services and attract
investment, as well as enable safe, regular and orderly mobility, including by
removing barriers to the temporary movement of natural persons to supply services
abroad, or “mode 4” of trade in services. We note that efforts are being made to
improve the participation of least developed countries in services trade. We note that
51 members (including individual European Union member States) have notified their
preferences under the least developed countries services waiver. We note that
multilateral commitments in this regard have been limited and conditioned by
measures such as economic needs tests, quotas or pre-employment requirements.
Target
• Increase least developed countries’ exports of services by fully implementing
the WTO ministerial decision on the operationalization of the waiver concerning
preferential treatment to services and service suppliers of least developed
countries and encourage members that have not yet notified their preferences
under the least developed countries services waiver, to also do the same.
We commit to taking the following actions:
171. We call upon the WTO members to take concrete measures, including
meaningful preferences for least developed countries services and service suppliers,
in accordance with the WTO ministerial decisions in 2011, 2013 and 2015 on the
operationalization of the least developed countries services waiver and in response to
the collective request of those countries. We also call for strengthening domestic
service capacity in least developed countries through enhanced technical assistance
and capacity-building.
Technical assistance and capacity-building, including through Aid for Trade
172. We note that, between 2011 and 2019, more than $100 billion was disbursed in
Aid for Trade to support least developed countries in strengthening infrastructure,
building productive capacity and enhancing trade policy and regulations. After
reaching a peak of $20 billion in 2018, Aid for Trade commitments to least developed
countries fell by 19 per cent, to $16.6 billion in 2019. Although Aid for Trade funding
to least developed countries has grown 13 per cent annually since 2006, reaching
$13.5 billion in 2018, the COVID-19 pandemic threatens to slow or reverse this trend.
Target
• Significantly increase Aid for Trade support for least developed countries,
which is expected to double by 2031 from 2018 levels. 5
We commit to taking the following actions:
173. We aim to increase the proportion of total Aid for Trade going to least developed
countries, provided according to development cooperation effectiveness principles,
which is expected to double by 2031 from 2018 levels. We also call for increase d
support from multilateral development banks and the private sector to meet trade
financing needs. We urge private and public sector actors to work together to address
__________________
5

36/63

Aid for Trade funding to least developed countries has grown 13 per cent annually since 2006,
reaching $13.5 billion in 2018. See Helen Castell, “6 takeaways from WTO’s Aid -for-Trade
stocktaking even for least developed countries”, Trade for Development News (20 April 2021).
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

trade finance gaps, by enabling a rapid transition to paperless trading and addressing
regulatory constraints that hinder trade finance.
174. We, in acknowledging and building on achievements made to date, including by
the Enhanced Integrated Framework and others providing support to least developed
countries, commit to providing trade-related assistance and financial and technical
support to enhance the institutional and productive capacity of the least developed
countries, in line with the objective of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind.
175. We note that 35 of 46 least developed countries, or more than three quarter, are
WTO members. Since 2011, six least developed countries have successfully
completed the accession process and joined WTO. Currently, eight least developed
countries are at different stages of the accession process.
Target
• Ensure accession to WTO of all least developed countries committed to do so
by the end of the current decade.
We commit to taking the following actions:
176. We call upon WTO members to fully implement the 2002 accession guidelines
for least developed countries and the 2012 General Council decision 6 as the accession
instruments for least developed countries and refrain from seeking concessions and
commitments beyond the benchmarks aimed at ensuring the accession of all least
developed countries in WTO by the next decade. We commit to supporting acceding
least developed countries in meeting existing requirements and those least developed
countries committed to acceding and pushing through the domestic reforms necessary
in that respect to strengthen their human, institutional and regulatory capacities in
trade policy and trade negotiations, to ensure their accession.
177. We commit to providing appropriate support, such as financial and technical
support, to least developed countries in order to support the negotiations for the
accession of least developed countries to WTO.
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
178. We welcome the entry into force on 23 January 2017 of the TRIPS amendment
aimed at facilitating access to medicines for countries with insufficient or no
manufacturing capacities. We welcome that, pursuant to the decision on the
implementation of article 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement, developed country members
have provided annual reports on incentives and planned action under article 66.2. We
also welcome that, in 2021, the duration of the general transition period under
article 66.1 has been further extended until 1 July 2034. Similarly, in 2015, the
specific transition to implement or apply sections 5 (paten ts) and 7 (protection of
undisclosed information) of part II of the TRIPS Agreement with respect to
pharmaceutical products was extended until 1 January 2033 for least developed
countries.
Target
• Support least developed countries by providing incentives to enterprises and
institutions in developed country member territories for the purpose of
promoting and encouraging technology transfer to least developed countries, in
order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base.
__________________
6

22-04927

General Council, World Trade Organization, “Accession of least developed countries”,
addendum, 25 July 2012 (WT/L/508/Add.1).
37/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

We commit to taking the following actions:
179. We reiterate the importance of article 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement to provide
incentives by developed country members to the enterprises and institutions in their
territories for promoting technology transfer to enable least developed countries to
create a sound and viable technological base and note the recent discussions on this
article, in particular on the meaning of “incentives to enterprises and institutions”.
180. We acknowledge the importance of the TRIPS flexibilities available to least
developed countries, including the extensions of the general transition period under
article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement and of the transition period under article 66.1,
which provides that least developed country members will not be obliged, with
respect to pharmaceutical products, to implement or apply sections 5 (patents) and 7
(protection of undisclosed information) of part II of the TRIPS Agreement or to
enforce rights provided for under these sections until 1 January 2033, or until such a
date on which they cease to be a least developed country member, whichever date is
earlier.
Agriculture and cotton
181. We note the progress made in reforming agricultural trade. We attach great
importance to the ongoing discussions with a view to reducing trade-distorting
support in agriculture, including cotton, in line with Sustainable Development Goal 2
commitments. We recognize the importance of food security and nutrition. We will
engage constructively to continue negotiations, including on a permanent solution to
the issue of public stockholding for food security purposes. We will work to advance
the discussions on export restrictions, including on foodstuff purchased by the World
Food Programme.
Target
• Correct and prevent trade restrictions and distortions in world agricultural and
cotton markets, including through the elimination of all forms of agricultural
export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures with equivalent effect,
consistent with the decision taken at the WTO Ministerial Conference held in
Nairobi in 2015, with a view to achieving the long-term objective of substantial
progressive reductions in support and protection of agricultural products.
We commit to taking the following actions:
182. We call for correcting and preventing trade restrictions and distortions in world
agricultural and cotton markets, including through the elimination of all forms of
agricultural export subsidies and disciplines on all export measu res with equivalent
effect. We also call for better markets for small cotton farmers in developing and least
developed countries and reaffirm the various commitments made on cotton, the last
of which was at the Tenth Ministerial Conference of WTO, held in Nairobi in 2015.
World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade Facilitation
183. We note that, while the current implementation rate of the Agreement on Trade
Facilitation stands at 70.2 per cent for all WTO members, the implementation rate of
least developed countries was only 36.8 per cent as at 10 June 2021. We also note that
80 per cent of least developed countries have already identified their technical
assistance needs. We further note that there are several challenges for least developed
countries in implementing the Agreement, owing primarily to financial, technical and
regulatory capacity constraints.

38/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

Target
• Fully implement the Agreement on Trade Facilitation and provide assistance in
and support for capacity-building of least developed countries in this regard, in
accordance with development cooperation effectiveness principles.
We commit to taking the following actions:
184. We will implement the Agreement on Trade Facilitation to speed up customs
procedures, make trade easier, faster and cheaper, provide clarity, efficiency and
transparency, reduce bureaucratic hurdles, and use technological advances.
185. We commit to supporting least developed countries in the implementation of the
Agreement on Trade Facilitation, including assistance in and support for capacitybuilding to least developed countries to enable implementation of the Agreement,
consistent with the Agreement, especially implementation of category C provisions
based on the technical assistance requirement as notified by least developed country
members. We also commit to working together within WTO, including through the
ongoing quadrennial reviews of the Agreement, to support implementation through
coordination, the sharing of experiences and transparency.
E-commerce
186. We note that the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of digital
technologies as tools for continuing economic activity during the crisis. E -commerce
can take the form of business-to-business or business-to-consumer transactions,
combined with secure online mobile platforms and fintech solutions fundamentally,
and can profoundly reduce the matching costs by which buyers and suppliers can
meet, connect and create profits within the country and across borders and facilitate
access to last-mile producers and markets. This can speed up economic adjustments
to shocks such as COVID-19 and many other profound economic, environmental and
geopolitical shocks that a country may face in the coming years. The huge potential
notwithstanding, least developed countries have been unable to sufficiently benefit
from the opportunities offered by e-commerce owing to a lack of necessary digital
infrastructure, logistical facilities, digital literacy and skills, and fintech solutions, as
well as regulatory and policy frameworks.
Target
• Increase the participation of least developed countries in e-commerce by
strengthening ICT infrastructure and building their human and institutional
capacities to better support the development of and integration into digital value
chains.
We commit to taking the following actions:
187. We will contribute to strengthening e-commerce in least developed countries by
building digital ecosystems and providing capacity-building support. We urge
development partners to provide additional and substantial support to least developed
countries in building and gaining access to required infrastructure in energy,
electricity and digital infrastructure; promoting personal data protection; upgrading
workforce skills; ensuring affordable and reliable access to broadband and mobile
networks and Wi-Fi connectivity, including in the last mile; facilitating mobile
banking with low- or no-fee digital payments; and strengthening productive capacity
and structural transformation, along with transparent and fair regulations, for
promoting e-commerce and the integration of least developed countries into the global
economy. We note the efforts of participants in the ongoing WTO Joint Statement

22-04927

39/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

Initiative on Electronic Commerce towards ensuring a high standard and
commercially meaningful outcome that works for all to promote data flow with trust.
188. We note the discussions held under the 1998 work programme on e-commerce
and encourage all WTO members to reinvigorate the work programme in line with
the spirit of its mandate and with a view to bridging the digital gaps among and within
countries. We urge all development partners to enrich their support to address capacity
constraints in e-commerce in the least developed countries, to enable them to
participate in and benefit from the global trading system through e -commerce and the
digital economy, which is much needed in the light of the current COVID -19
pandemic situation.
Special and differential treatment
189. We call for the full implementation of the provisions of special and differential
treatment for developing countries, in particular least developed countries, in
accordance with WTO agreements. We welcome the establishment of the monitoring
mechanism to analyse and review all aspects of the implementation of special and
differential treatment provisions, as agreed at the Ministerial Conference held in Bali
in 2013, with a view to strengthening them and making them more precise, effective
and operational, as well as facilitating integration of developing and least developed
WTO members into the multilateral trading system.
Regional integration
190. We underline that regional cooperation, including trade integration and transit
cooperation, can facilitate the integration of least developed countries into the global
trading system. We note that, as at 1 February 2021, 339 regional trade agreements
were in force, of which 42 are in Africa. Among others, the African Continental Free
Trade Area and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership present a major
opportunity for participating least developed countries to boost trade, output in
services, and the manufacturing and natural resources sectors. Positive experiences
notwithstanding, regional and international cooperation still needs to rise to the
challenges ahead.
We commit to taking the following actions:
191. We commit to promoting regional economic integration and enhancing regional
connectivity to increase regional trade, including integration of least developed
countries into regional value chains and services trade. We urge the internatio nal
community, including international financial institutions and multilateral and regional
development banks, to increase their support for capacity-building projects and
programmes that foster regional and subregional integration, with special attention
given to least developed countries, and that enhance the participation and integration
of small-scale industrial and other enterprises into regional and global value chains
and markets.
192. We commit to supporting least developed countries in the implementation of
multi-country customs transit guarantee regimes through the implementation of either
international transit agreements or functional regional agreements.
193. We commit to supporting least developed countries’ efforts in promoting
subregional and regional cooperation, including export promotion, and improving
regional connectivity through trade-facilitating measures, such as joint projects on
customs and border procedures and, insofar as possible, telecommunications facilities
and energy.

40/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

194. We will provide assistance to landlocked and small island least developed
countries aimed at addressing the challenges in their remoteness from international
markets and lack of infrastructure.
V.

Addressing climate change, environmental degradation, recovering from the
COVID-19 pandemic and building resilience against future shocks for
risk-informed sustainable development
195. The least developed countries are especially vulnerable to and disproportionately
affected by the adverse effects of climate change, environmental degradation and
other disasters. Some countries have adopted good practices in addressing these
effects, which include the installation and use of early warning systems; adaptation
solutions in key sectors and systems such as agriculture and food security, water,
health, infrastructure and ecosystems; forecast-based financing; integrating climate
change, environmental and disaster risk considerations in development planning;
development of risk indices to support various stakeholders; comprehensive risk
management approaches; and sustainable management of natural resources.
196. We recognize that the outcomes from the twenty-sixth session of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Clima te Change, 7 held
in Glasgow, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, from 31 October
to 13 November 2021, related to loss and damage, including resolving to strengthen
partnerships between developing and developed countries, funds, technical agencies,
civil society and communities to enhance understanding of how approaches to
averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage can be improved, and urge
developed country parties to the Framework Conventions, the operating entities of
the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, United Nations entities and
intergovernmental organizations and other bilateral and multilateral institutions,
including non-governmental organizations and private sector entities, to provide
enhanced and additional support for activities that address loss and damage associated
with the adverse effects of climate change.
197. The COVID-19 pandemic and its health, economic and social consequences,
including increasing gender and other inequalities, have further underlined t he need
for multilateral cooperation, unity and solidarity to protect public health and to
prepare for and respond to health emergencies, across all sectors, using holistic, all hazard and One Health approaches, recognizing the interconnectedness among the
health of humans, animals, plants and their shared environment, including through
collaboration among the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Organization for Animal Health and
the United Nations Environment Programme.
198. Among more than 120 countries reporting across all Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction targets for disaster losses in 2019, least developed countries
accounted for 48 per cent of livelihood disruptions, 40 per cent of deaths, 17 per cent
of economic losses and 14 per cent of infrastructure damage, although their combined
GDP amounted to only 1 per cent of the total and their combined populations were
only 18 per cent of the global population.
199. The COVID-19 pandemic has not only exposed, but also amplified least
developed countries’ high degree of vulnerability and the risks of cascading crises.
We are concerned that a prolonged economic downturn following the pandemic risks
adversely affecting the implementation of the Paris Agreement, the 2030 Agenda and

__________________
7

22-04927

Including also the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of
the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the third session of the Conference of the Parties serving as
the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement.
41/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, as well as the ability of countries,
especially least developed countries, to adequately respond to the adverse impacts of
climate change and environmental degradation.
200. We are deeply concerned that the limited fiscal space and resilience capacity in
least developed countries pose serious constraints on their ability to address the
COVID-19 pandemic and foster sustainable recovery. The investment in climate
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction in least developed countries has fallen
considerably short of meeting needs. We are also concerned that climate change
impacts are becoming more acute. Food insecurity and malnutrition, water stress,
quality and scarcity, land degradation, biodiversity loss, melting of glaciers, ocean
acidification, coastal erosion, sea level rise, damage to infrastructure and assets,
pressures on pastures, displacement of populations, threats to cultural heritage,
disruption of indigenous and traditional lifestyles, and threats to livelihoods are
severely disrupting economic and social development. Changes in the access to and
availability of water resources are disrupting hydroelectric generation and putting
industrial production and basic services at increased risk, while sanitation and
wastewater management remain a source of concern. We urge least developed
countries, and will support them through strengthening partnerships, global
coordination and cooperation, to adopt an all-hazard, multisectoral and coordinated
approach in preparedness for health emergencies, recognizing the links between
human, plant and animal health and their shared environment and the need for a One
Health approach.
201. We are committed to reducing the vulnerability of the least developed countries
to economic, environmental shocks and natural hazards, especially those related to
climate change, and to enhancing their ability to meet these and other challenges
through enhanced adaptive capacity and resilience. Building adaptive capacity and
resilience, including at the individual and community level, lies at the core of the
Doha Programme of Action, in line with the provisions contained in international
agreements on climate change, disaster risk reduction and the environment.
Key action areas
Building sustainable and inclusive recovery from COVID-19 and resilience
against future shocks
202. On average, it is projected that that the least developed countries are expected
to take three to five years or more to recover to their pre-COVID-19 crisis level of
per capita GDP. The persistent challenges posed by climate change and environmental
degradation threaten to further impede recovery efforts.
Targets
• Support timely access to safe, effective and affordable COVID -19 vaccines.
• Provide necessary support to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility and other relevant initiatives to vaccinate all eligible individuals against
COVID-19 as early as possible and 70 per cent of the population in least
developed countries by mid-2022, as recommended by the World Health
Organization. 8
• Ensure equitable and affordable access for all to safe, quality, efficacious,
effective, accessible and affordable COVID-19 vaccines, therapeutics and
diagnostics.
__________________
8

42/63

See World Health Organization, “Strategy to achieve global COVID -19 vaccination by
mid-2022”, 6 October 2021.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

• Promote and encourage technology transfer on mutually agreed terms to
increase production capacities of the entire supply chain of vaccines and any
other health products in the regions of least developed countries.
• Support the supply and conservation environment, and the distribution and
administration and surveillance of vaccines.
• Ensure adequate domestic and international support to strengthen inclusive
social protection systems in the least developed countries, to address current
poverty and vulnerability and future shocks.
• Support awareness-raising campaigns about the benefits of COVID-19
vaccination.
• Ensure widespread testing and tracing, maintenance and access to adequate
stocks of therapeutics and personal protective equipment and ventilation
equipment.
• Promote the building of strong health systems and regulatory authorities that
ensure universal access to health care in the least developed countries to address
current and future shocks.
We commit to taking the following actions:
203. We take note of the “Statement dated 28 April 2020 of the Group of Least
Developed Countries on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) burgeoning challenges
and a global stimulus package for the least developed countries” 9 and commit to
supporting its implementation, as appropriate.
204. We recognize the role of extensive immunization against COVID -19 as a global
public good for health in preventing, containing and stopping transmission in order
to bring the pandemic to an end, through safe, quality, efficacious, effective,
accessible and affordable vaccines that are available, leaving no one behind. We
support adequate and timely access to quality, safe and effective vaccines in order to
vaccinate all eligible populations in least developed countries at an affordable price,
on an equitable basis and as quickly as possible, including through the COVAX
Facility.
205. We stress that vaccinations need to be supported with essential complementary
measures to minimize the loss of lives and morbidity from the COVID -19 pandemic
and urge development partners to provide to least developed countries, in a timely
manner, access to quality, safe, efficacious and affordable diagnoses, therapeutics,
medicines, medical science-based treatment protocols, vaccines, and essential health
technologies and their components, as well as equipment, for the COVID-19
response, including through the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator. We
reaffirm the TRIPS Agreement, as amended, and the 2001 Doha Declaration on the
TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which recognizes that intellectual property
rights should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of the right of
member States to protect public health and, in particular, to promote access to
medicines for all, and note the need for appropriate incent ives in the development of
new health products.
206. We support adequate and timely access to quality, safe and effective vaccines in
order to vaccinate all eligible populations in least developed countries at an affordable
price, on an equitable basis, and as quickly as possible, including through the COVAX
Facility, adequate support to address liquidity and fiscal space constraints and debt
relief, when appropriate, and international trade measures being put in place to
__________________
9

22-04927

See A/74/843.
43/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

support their recovery in a sustainable manner and that builds resilience against future
shocks.
207. We commit to providing adequate domestic and international support to ensure
equitable and affordable access for all to COVID-19 vaccines, therapeutics and
diagnostics, and strengthening inclusive social protection systems in the least
developed countries, to address current poverty and vulnerability and future shocks.
In a spirit of global solidarity and international cooperation among Governments, as
well as partnerships with international organizations, international financial
institutions, civil society and the private sector, we call upon development partners to
provide financial and in-kind support to least developed countries such as direct
budgetary support or project-type interventions and to increase the resources of
relevant regional and multilateral emergency financing facilities and ease the
conditions of access to these facilities.
208. We commit to establishing and strengthening inclusive social protection
mechanisms to protect the poorest and most vulnerable, including the provision of
direct support in the form of cash or food or other essentials, as appropriate, to at least
350 million people living in extreme poverty in least developed countries. In this
regard, we encourage Governments and development partners to provide funds for
social protection, including to those living in extreme poverty in least developed
countries.
209. We commit to ensuring that stimulus measures are aligned with the 2030
Agenda, the Paris Agreement and Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and
contribute to fast recovery and “building back better” 10 from the COVID-19
pandemic, and building resilience in least developed countries, including by
conserving, sustainably using and restoring natural ecosystems and biodiversity,
including through nature-based solutions, sustainable agriculture; sustainable,
accessible, reliable and resilient infrastructure, and the built environment; catalytic
concessional financing for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises; sustainable
finance instruments such as green bonds and Sustainable Development Goal bonds;
and incentives for private investment in sustainable opportunities such as affordable
renewable energies, sustainable waste management, shock-responsive supply chains,
life-cycle approaches, and safe, smart and sustainable mobility.
210. We commit to enhancing cooperation at the national, regional and global levels
to address antimicrobial resistance, using an integrated and systems-based One Health
approach, including through health system strengthening, capacity -building,
including for research and regulatory capacity, and technical support, and to ensure
equitable access to affordable, safe, effective and quality existing and new
antimicrobial medicines, vaccines and diagnostics, as well as effective stewardship.
Climate adaptation and building resilience, including sustainable management
of natural resources
211. While least developed countries have made some progress in the process to
formulate and implement national adaptation plans and in implementing the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, they often lack the resources and capacity
to address critical needs. Adaptation and resilience in food systems, including in the
sectors of agriculture, manufacturing, social protection services and livestock, are of
prime importance for least developed countries and have major implications for food
security, nutrition, livelihoods, especially of the most vulnerable in society, and
__________________
10

44/63

In the context of Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 –2030, which is aimed at
enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to “build back better” in recovery,
rehabilitation and reconstruction.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

employment. Water resources already face multiple pressures and are highly sensitive
to climate change impacts such as the drying-up of sources, disruption in rainfall
patterns and increased frequency of both extreme and slow-onset events, which
reinforce already existing trends in land degradation and desertification. The rapid
projected growth of urban populations presents challenges in the provision of services
such as water and sanitation, which must develop and grow at a faster rate in order to
keep pace. Localization of climate action, including support for local governments
and building resilient communities, is extremely important because they understand
local needs and are on the front line of climate change adaptation action, and disaster
risk reduction, response and recovery. Critical infrastructure services, such as
transport, water and electricity, remain highly unreliable and vulnerable to extreme
climatic events. Measures to restore and improve the sustainable management of key
natural resources such as water and land, as well as biodiversity, are urgently needed.
212. We note the high importance of building resilience in least developed countries
through stepped-up capacity-building and finance for adaptation to climate change,
including through comprehensive multi-stakeholder resilience-building measures for
least developed countries, leveraging the Green Climate Fund and existing measures
and initiatives such as the National Adaptation Plan Global Network and the United
Nations Capital Development Fund’s Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility.
Targets
• Support the full formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans,
including integrated and strategic adaptation action at the national and local
levels by all least developed countries, making use of the Green Climate Fund
and existing initiatives such as the National Adaptation Plan Global Network
and the Local Climate Adaptive Living Facility.
• Develop and strengthen national and regional platforms and strategies for
disaster risk reduction to take action to achieve the targets of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
• Support and reinforce, as appropriate, the existing comprehensive multi -hazard
early warning system and comprehensive multi-hazard crisis mitigation and
resilience-building measures for least developed countries.
• Continue to support the development and implementation of adaptation
communications, strategies and plans, including those that may be included as
components of nationally determined contributions and long -term strategies
under the Paris Agreement.
We commit to taking the following actions:
213. We commit to continuing and striving for increased support, such as for
capacity-building for adaptation planning and implementation in least developed
countries, including through the least developed country work programme under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and additional and
complementary means, in order to address medium- and long-term adaptation needs
through the formulation of national adaptation plans and subsequent implementat ion
of the policies, programmes and projects identified by them.
214. We commit to strengthening Action for Climate Empowerment in least
developed countries through the development and implementation of training
programmes focused on climate change education at all levels.
215. We commit to providing the technical assistance to least developed countries
necessary to develop operational national risk information systems that support

22-04927

45/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

policymaking and decision-making by all stakeholders, including national and local
governments, private sector business operations, cultural heritage managers and
bearers, the real estate sector and land planning agencies, the insurance industry and
local communities.
216. We decide to enhance support to least developed countries in strengthening their
national statistical and planning offices and other relevant authorities for the
systematic collection, analysis and validation of data on disaster loss and other
relevant disaster risk reduction targets, and in strengthening interi nstitutional and
inclusive coordination on disaster risk data, risk assessments and integrated analysis.
217. We underline the need for reinforcing the existing comprehensive multi -hazard
early warning system and comprehensive multi-hazard crises mitigation and
resilience-building measures for least developed countries aligned with the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction as a key instrument to build resilience against
and mitigate the impacts of various shocks, and are committed to making the best use
of existing initiatives. We invite the Secretary-General to undertake, with least
developed countries, a comprehensive study involving all relevant United Nations
Development Systems and other relevant stakeholders on the existing arrangements,
lessons learned and identified gaps and submit it to the General Assembly for further
consideration.
218. We call for public and private, domestic and international investment, as well
as bilateral and multilateral support, to be climate-resilient, risk-informed and aligned
with national and local adaptation, climate resilience and disaster risk reduction
strategies and efforts related to averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage
associated with the adverse impacts of climate change.
219. We commit to enhancing international cooperation and technical assistance and
support to least developed countries so that they can take urgent and significant action
to reduce the degradation of natural habitats and land degradation and loss of territory,
halt biodiversity loss and prevent the extinction of threatened species.
Access to finance and technology to address climate change
220. We note with concern that the current provision of climate finance for adaptation
remains insufficient to respond to worsening climate change impacts in developing
country parties and recognize the importance of the adequacy and predictability of
adaptation finance. We welcome that the parties 11 urged developed country parties to
urgently and significantly scale up their provision of climate finance, technology
transfer and capacity-building for adaptation so as to respond to the needs of
developing country parties as part of a global effort, including for the formulation and
implementation of national adaptation plans and adaptation communications. Many
least developed countries face challenges in gaining direct access to international
public finance owing to a lack of technical capacity. We support the provision of
assistance to least developed countries in preparing bankable projects and creating
enabling environments, and we encourage further efforts to enhance access to finance.
Targets
• Recognizing the outcomes of the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
regarding delivering on the goal of jointly mobilizing $100 billion in climate
finance per year, scale up support for developing countries, including least
developed countries.
__________________
11

46/63

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and/or Paris Agreement.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

• The provision of scaled-up financial resources should be intended to achieve a
balance between adaptation and mitigation, taking into account country -driven
strategies.
• Increase climate finance provided for adaptation and resilience, in particular for
vulnerable countries, including least developed countr ies.
• Continue to support the implementation of national adaptation plans and
national adaptation programmes of action of least developed countries under the
Green Climate Fund and other climate-relevant funds under the Global
Environment Facility, including the Least Developed Countries Fund, the
Special Climate Change Fund and the Adaptation Fund.
• Increase financing for nature-based solutions or ecosystem-based approaches
for climate mitigation and adaptation.
We commit to taking the following actions:
221. We recognize that limiting global warming to 1.5°Celsius requires rapid, deep
and sustained reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions, including a reduction in
global carbon dioxide emissions by 45 per cent by 2030 relative to the 2010 lev el and
to net zero around mid-century, as well as deep reductions in other greenhouse gases.
We urge the parties to the Paris Agreement that have not yet communicated new or
updated nationally determined contributions to do so as soon as possible in advanc e
of the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the
Parties to the Paris Agreement. Recalling article 3 and paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 11 of
article 4 of the Paris Agreement, we welcome the request of the Conference of the
Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties of the Paris Agreement for parties to
revisit and strengthen the 2030 targets in their nationally determined contributions,
as necessary, to align with the Agreement’s temperature goal by the end of 2022,
taking into account different national circumstances. We further welcome the
establishment of a work programme to urgently scale up mitigation ambition and
implementation in this critical decade, as well as the convening of an annual high level ministerial round table on pre-2030 ambitions, beginning at the fourth session
of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris
Agreement.
222. We welcome that the parties 12 urged developed country parties to deliver in full
on the $100 billion goal urgently and through to 2025 and emphasize the importance
of transparency in the implementation of their pledges. We also welcome that they
urged the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention,
multilateral development banks and other financial institutions to further scale up
investment in climate action, and call for a continued increase in the scale and
effectiveness of climate finance from all sources globally, including grants and other
highly concessional forms of finance.
223. We recall, as provided for in article 9.4 of the Paris Agreement, that the
provision of scaled-up financial resources should be intended to achieve a balance
between adaptation and mitigation, taking into account country -driven strategies, and
the priorities and needs of developing country parties, especially those that are
particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and have significant
capacity constraints, such as the least developed countries and small island
developing States, considering the need for public and grant-based resources for
adaptation.

__________________
12

22-04927

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and/or Paris Agreement.
47/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

224. We welcome that the parties 13 urged developed country parties to at least double
their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing country
parties from 2019 levels by 2025, in the context of achieving a balance between
mitigation and adaptation in the provision of scaled-up financial resources, recalling
article 9, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement.
225. We welcome the decisions of the Board of the Green Climate Fund to aim for a
50:50 balance between mitigation and adaptation over time on a grant-equivalent
basis and to continue to provide at least 50 per cent and (in line with the Green
Climate Fund’s initial resource mobilization allocation floor) to aim to allocate 69 per
cent 14 of the adaptation allocation for particularly vulnerable countries, including
least developed countries.
226. We commit to increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of funding to climate related multilateral funds such as the Green Climate Fund, the Global Environment
Facility, including the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Special Climate
Change Fund, and other climate-relevant funds and to continue to improve access to
all these funds by least developed countries. We also call upon relevant parties to
simplify, as appropriate, the access procedures for climate finance for least developed
countries and to support the least developed countries, including through the new task
force on access to climate finance. We also call for greater efforts to improve access
to climate finance for least developed countries and support least developed countries
in developing technical capacity to ensure efficient access to financial resources.
227. We will continue to support the development of approaches in least developed
countries for dealing with adaptation, including nature-based solutions, ecosystembased approaches and adaptation in cities, which will include the most
disproportionally affected people such as young people, children, persons with
disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, and women and girls; and the
approaches will focus on the development of essential climate resilience programmes
regarding food systems, water resources, health services, living spaces and
settlements and critical infrastructure.
228. We will continue to enhance regional cooperation and sup port for least
developed countries in addressing the impacts of regional transboundary climate risks
associated with supply and value chains.
229. We request relevant entities of the United Nations system, international
financial institutions and development banks, as well as the private sector and
foundations, to continue to support least developed countries in formulating and
implementing national adaptation plans and strategies, nationally determined
contributions and national disaster risk reduction strategies to advance mitigation and
adaptation. We also call upon these entities to apply the Principles for Responsible
Investment and to commit to comprehensive and robust physical climate -related risk
assessments and disclosures related to their activities in least developed countries.
230. We will continue to invest in gender-responsive prevention and risk reduction,
including risk-informed and resilient infrastructure and public services and in the
adoption of legislation, policies and standards that regulate and incentivize investors
and companies to adopt a risk-informed approach and that enable monetary and
regulatory authorities to incorporate the impact of disaster and climate risks into

__________________
13
14

48/63

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and/or Pari s Agreement.
Green Climate Fund, “Decisions of the Board – twenty-seventh meeting of the Board,
9–13 November 2020”, decision B.27/06, paras. 33 (b) and (h) (ii). Available at
www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gcf-b27-22.pdf.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

regulatory and policy frameworks, as recommended in the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction.
231. We commit to providing significant support to existing climate and disaster risk
finance and insurance and catastrophe-triggered financial instruments such as the
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, the African Risk Capacity Agency and
the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company, as well as developing and
enhancing the capacity of existing instruments and derivatives that provide risk
insurance and guarantees for where they are most needed, such as micro-, small and
medium-sized enterprises and low-income households with a gender-responsive
approach. We note the risk pools by development partners within the framework of
the InsuResilience Global Partnership.
232. We commit to providing financial and technical assistance and facilitating
technology transfer on mutually agreed terms to least developed countries to develop
and implement national strategies for the sustainable use, preservation, protection and
restoration of the natural resources and the sustainable management of marine and
terrestrial biodiversity and ecosystems based on the best scientific evidence available,
in line with the 2030 Agenda.
233. We call for action by the private sector, including banks and institutional
investors, to support environmental, social and corporate governance issues and to
take climate change and biodiversity into consideration in their investment decisions
in least developed countries.
VI.

Mobilizing international solidarity, reinvigorated global partnerships
and innovative tools: a march towards sustainable graduation
234. We acknowledge that least developed countries are dependent in large part on
public resources to finance sustainable development needs and ensure a smooth
transition from the least developed country category. Available resources – domestic,
external, public and private – have not been sufficient to meet growing investment
and spending needs. The high reliance of least developed countries on external
resources, including ODA, FDI, concessional lending and private flows, such as
remittances and portfolio investment, persisted over the past decade. During the
Istanbul Programme of Action implementation period, external debt has been rising
and is, in some cases, exacerbated by large costs caused by disasters and structural
vulnerabilities. The COVID-19 pandemic and its economic fallout have exacerbated
financial vulnerabilities and debt risks in least developed countries, which have been
building up over the past decade.
235. We welcome progress made over the past decade with respect to graduation and
stress that continued support and incentives will be important to accelerate the number
of least developed countries reaching the graduation thresholds and for ensuring
sustainable and irreversible graduation with momentum.
236. We aim to support least developed countries and graduating countries in
achieving at least 7 per cent GDP growth per annum and growth in the disposable
income of households in the bottom half of the income distribution.
Key action areas
Support for domestic resource mobilization and fight against illicit
financial flows
237. We acknowledge that the low tax-to-GDP ratios of least developed countries can
be explained in part by their economic structures, high poverty rates, weak tax
administration and the nature of their tax systems. The median tax -to-GDP ratio in

22-04927

49/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

least developed countries increased very slowly, from 13.3 in 2011 to 16.2 per cent in
2018, with rates lower than 10 per cent in several of them. Efforts to increase
government revenue have been under way in many least developed countries,
including through the broadening of the tax base and enhancing compliance and
transparency, including through the digitalization of tax systems. Other challenges fo r
least developed countries include illicit financial flows and resource -intensive tax
administration, as well as inappropriate transfer pricing.
238. We recognize that continued development of the institutional capacity of least
developed countries for efficient, effective and transparent public procurement
practices is an important opportunity for expanding the resources that least developed
countries can channel towards implementing the 2030 Agenda, including achieving
its Sustainable Development Goals, combating climate change and biodiversity loss
and recovering from COVID-19.
Target
• Increase tax revenue as a proportion of GDP to at least 15 per cent in all least
developed countries to enable them to become self-sustainable.
• Enhance international cooperation for the recovery of stolen assets and their
return to their countries of origin, in accordance with the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.
• Enhance intergovernmental coordination to prevent illicit financial flows.
We commit to taking the following actions:
239. We call upon least developed countries to make substantial efforts to effectively
mobilize domestic resources, build up financial infrastructure and capacities, and put
in place appropriate regulatory measures and institutions; to continue to take
measures to create conditions for attracting and sustaining investment and mobilizing
domestic savings, both public and private; and to continue to undertake the fiscal
reforms necessary, as appropriate, to build effective, transparent, fair and accountable
national tax and financial management systems, in line with the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda. We call upon development partners and relevant institutions to enhance
support for development and strengthen revenue digitizat ion and call for enhanced
financial and technical support to build the revenue collection capacity of least
developed countries.
240. Recognizing the efforts of least developed countries to enhance domestic
resource generation, we commit to supporting efforts by least developed countries
towards progressive taxation, building capacity and strengthening tax administration,
combating tax evasion, savings mobilization, digitalization of tax administration and
financial inclusion, all of which should enable th e delivery of sustainable, effective,
transparent and efficient public service, including for the poorest and most vulnerable,
with savings channelled to productive investment and to reducing inequalities. We
stress the importance of conducive international regulatory frameworks and
transparency and of support by national and regional financial institutions, including
development banks, in this respect.
241. We commit to enhanced international tax cooperation and efforts to close
international tax loopholes, all of which are aimed at avoiding base erosion and profit
shifting, and welcome support through initiatives such as Tax Inspectors Without
Borders and the Addis Tax Initiative. We commit to supporting least developed
countries in taking advantage of increases in tax transparency and the exchange of
information, such as by implementing the new international standard of automatic
exchange of information.
50/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

242. We recommit to strengthening the capacities of revenue administration and the
broadening of the taxpayer base, and supporting voluntary compliance, accountability
and transparency, efficient revenue management and efficient risk management,
including through digitalization and transformation of tax administration, in line with
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. We acknowledge that any consideration of tax
measures in response to the digital economy should include a careful analysis of the
implications for least developed countries, taking into account their input and their
unique needs and capacities.
243. We encourage the use of and improved access to innovative tools, such as
mobile banking, payment platforms and digitalized payments, as appropriate,
including by women and micro-businesses, and we recognize the role that these can
play in promoting financial inclusion, as well as reducing costs, increasing
transparency, improving the speed and security of payments and opening up new
markets.
244. We call for support by development partners and international and regional
financial institutions to support the strengthening of the capacity of domestic financial
institutions and the banking system to promote appropriate, affordable and stable
financing for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises through the creation of
credit lines that encourage venture capital funds, facilitate access to public capital
markets, targeting those enterprises, and to create, strengthen and widen lending
markets that cater to the diversified needs of private enterprises, micro -, small and
medium-sized enterprises and consumers, including women.
245. We commit to substantially reducing illicit financial flows in order to help least
developed countries to mobilize resources, including through increased international
cooperation, to stem corruption and money-laundering and identify, freeze and
recover stolen assets and their return to countries of origin, in accordance with the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, and to developing their capacities to
track financial transactions, administer taxation, facilitate custom s services and
investigate and prosecute offences to contribute to the success of efforts to reduce
illicit financial flows derived from crimes.
246. We call upon all countries and relevant institutions to implement measures to
enhance disclosure practices and promote transparency in financial information and
enhance disclosure practices and transparency in both source and destination
countries, and to cooperate in efforts to reduce illicit financial flows and corruption.
International public and external finance to contribute to sustainable
development in least developed countries
247. We note with appreciation that ODA to least developed countries by
Development Assistance Committee countries increased in real terms from 2011 to
2019 by some 4.6 per cent, but note with concern that the average share of gross
national income provided as ODA to least developed countries from Development
Assistance Committee countries declined from 0.10 to 0.08 per cent during that time
period. 15 At the same time, we note that ODA remains crucial for financing investment
for sustainable development in least developed countries, while innovative sources of
finance, such as blended finance, remained limited in these countries. There is a clear

__________________
15

22-04927

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD.Stat, with figures for official
development assistance to least developed countries derived from table DAC2a and the
underlying gross national income figures derived from table DAC1.
51/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

need for more determined efforts by developed countries to fulfil and, where possible,
enhance their relevant ODA commitments to least developed countries.
248. We underline that North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation is vital
to least developed countries, noting that South-South cooperation and commitments
are not a substitute but a complement to North-South cooperation, in particular with
regard to technical assistance, and the sharing of best practices in terms of their
development, especially in areas of productive capacity-building, infrastructure,
energy, science and technology, trade, investment and transit transport cooperation.
249. We recognize the rising significance of impact investing as a new public -private
financing mechanism for the 2030 Agenda and underlin e the urgent need to develop
mechanisms to channel public and private investment towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals in least developed countries. We also encourage
greater efforts in establishing impact investing funds, targeting agricommo dities and
associated smallholders and micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in the least
developed countries.
Target
• Ensure the fulfilment of respective ODA commitments to least developed
countries.
We commit to taking the following actions:
250. We commit to ensuring the fulfilment of all ODA commitments to least
developed countries, ensuring the alignment of aid with least developed countries’
national priorities and increasing the alignment of aid with least developed countries’
national systems and procedures. We welcome the decision by the European Union
by which it reaffirms its collective commitment to achieving the target of 0.7 per cent
of gross national income for ODA within the time frame of the 2030 Agenda and
undertakes to reach 0.20 per cent of gross national income for ODA to the least
developed countries within the time frame of the 2030 Agenda. We encourage ODA
providers to consider setting a target to provide at least 0.20 per cent o f gross national
income for ODA to the least developed countries. We are encouraged by those that
are allocating at least 50 per cent of their ODA to the least developed countries.
251. We invite development partners to ensure that the allocation of globa l ODA
resources takes into account the structural handicaps and constraints that are unique
to least developed countries. We call upon development partners to ensure the right
balance in the allocation of ODA fostering sustainable development in its three
dimensions, namely, economic, social and environmental, and in various sectors, as
well as for building resilience against various shocks and for the empowerment of
women.
252. We call upon the countries of the global South to further strengthen their supp ort
to least developed countries in all these areas in a predictable manner along the lines
of the Buenos Aires outcome document of the second High -Level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation.
253. We urge development partners to ensure that multilateral, regional and national
development banks facing capital constraints have a solid financial position to
provide necessary and timely support, including concessional finance of multilateral
development banks to least developed countries, throug h a simplified access process.
We welcome the advancement of the International Development Association’s
twentieth replenishment and call for further initiatives by the international
community.

52/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

254. We welcome continued efforts to improve the quality, impact and effectiveness
of development cooperation and other international efforts in public finance,
including adherence to agreed development cooperation effectiveness principles. We
will align activities with the national priorities of least developed coun tries, including
by reducing fragmentation and accelerating the untying of aid. All parties to the Doha
Programme of Action will promote country ownership and results orientation and
strengthen country systems, use programme-based approaches, where appropriate,
strengthen partnerships for development, reduce transaction costs and increase
transparency and mutual accountability. We will make development more effective
and predictable by providing least developed countries with regular and timely
indicative information on planned support in the medium term. Least developed
countries will provide whole-of-society national sustainable development strategies
and costed medium-term financing frameworks. Least developed countries will also
improve transparency and accountability on external finance to all domestic
constituencies.
255. We will hold open, inclusive and transparent discussions on the modernization
of the ODA measurement and on the proposed measure of “total official support for
sustainable development” and affirm that any such measure will not dilute
commitments already made.
256. We encourage innovative finance, including blended finance in order to leverage
additional, substantial and predictable finance disbursed in a manner that respects the
priorities and special needs of least developed countries and does not unduly burden
them. This could include expanding ODA allocations and other international public
finance uses to include flexible financing that can be used as first -loss, concessional
or de-risking capital to attract additional resources from the private sector to
Sustainable Development Goal-aligned investment across the investment continuum
that can scale to address the needs of least developed countries. We commit to
significantly scaling up support in the form of concessional financing and equity for
existing financing mechanisms that deliver catalytic investment capital, for example,
for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises and small investment projects in least
developed countries and graduated countries, to mobilize sustainable private
investment that advances the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and
acts as a crisis facility.
257. We welcome the IMF special drawing rights allocation of the equivalent of
$650 billion of 23 August 2021 to meet the long-term global need to supplement
reserve assets, and encourage countries with strong external positions to seek options
for the voluntary channelling of special drawing rights, in accordance with national
laws and regulations. and to this end appreciate the efforts of IMF to seek further
viable options for the voluntary channelling of special drawing rights to countries
most in need, including least developed countries, such as the Poverty Reduction and
Growth Trust and the new Resilience and Sustainability Trust, with a view to
providing affordable long-term financing to developing countries in a manner that
preserves their external debt sustainability, and encourage the consideration of viable
options to voluntarily channel through multilateral development banks.
258. We call upon official creditors to make long-term sustainable financing
available to least developed countries through grants and concessional funding and to
offer more fixed-interest lending at low interest rates, emphasizing that this is part of
a mix of financing approaches that also include grants.
Foreign direct investment
259. We note with concern that FDI flows to least developed countries had already
been on a decline since 2015, reaching $21 billion, or 1.4 per cent, of world FDI in
22-04927

53/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

2019. COVID-19 accelerated the decline of FDI to least developed countries, which
remains heavily concentrated in the extractive industries. Several least developed
countries have undertaken steps to facilitate investment, such as the acceleration of
approval procedures, the increased use of digital tools, a reduction in fees and
automatic renewal of permits.
260. We note the establishment of the Investment Support Programme for Least
Developed Countries, implemented by the International Development Law
Organization, which is aimed at providing legal and technical support to least
developed countries on investment-related matters. We commit to further
strengthening the Programme, invite donors to continue to support it and encourage
least developed countries to make wide use of the Programme’s facilities.
Target
• Adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for least developed
countries.
We commit to taking the following actions:
261. We commit to implementing the decision contained in the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda to adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for the least developed
countries. We reiterate the decision 16 to provide financial and technical support for
project preparation and contract negotiation, advisory support for investment -related
dispute resolution, access to information on investment facilities, improving enabling
environments, and risk insurance and guarantees such as through the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency. In this regard, we request the Secretary -General to
explore the feasibility of establishing an international investment support centre for
least developed countries in the form of a one-stop shop to mobilize support for
implementation of the investment promotion regime for least developed countries and
graduated countries, and to submit the study and recommenda tions to the General
Assembly for its consideration at its seventy-eighth session.
262. We will incentivize additional financing and investment, including grants,
guarantees and blended finance, in quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient
infrastructure, and facilitate efforts to channel long-term sustainable investment to
least developed countries. We commit to helping least developed countries to benefit
from sustainable financing sources and strengthen their regulatory and policy
environments, and to supporting existing initiatives to develop pipelines of investable
projects and use risk-sharing mechanisms to incentivize private investment and
mobilize international capital, where applicable.
Debt sustainability and debt cancellation initiative through improved and
transparent debt architecture
263. We note with concern that the stock of debt and debt service payment obligations
of least developed countries increased significantly over the past decade. Total debt
service increased from an average of 5 per cent of exports of goods and services in
2011 to 13 per cent in 2019. As of February 2021, 4 least developed countries were
classified as in debt distress, while the number of least developed countries at high
risk of debt distress increased to 16. Over the past decade, the composition of debt of
least developed countries changed considerably towards less concessional finance.
We welcome the measures adopted in 2020 by the Group of 20 and the Paris Club,
namely, the Debt Service Suspension Initiative, to facilitate higher COVID-19
pandemic-related spending and the Common Framework for Debt Treatments beyond
__________________
16

54/63

General Assembly resolution 69/313, annex, para. 46.
22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

the Debt Service Suspension Initiative to facilitate timely and orderly debt treatment
on a case-by-case basis with broad participation of all creditors, on comparable terms,
including the private sector, in line with the comparability of treatment principle.
Target
• Address the debt distress of least developed countries by 2025 and provide
coordinated and appropriate debt solutions in a timely manner to all least
developed countries that face debt vulnerabilities or are in debt distress, in order
to work towards sustainable debt levels in all least developed countries.
We commit to taking the following actions:
264. We commit to assisting least developed countries in attaining long-term debt
sustainability and coordinated policies aimed at fostering adequate debt financing,
debt relief, when appropriate, debt restructuring and sound debt management, as
appropriate, and ensuring that debt relief does not detract from ODA resources
intended to be available for least developed countries.
265. We encourage IMF to conduct in-depth reviews of least developed countries’
external debt, effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on least developed countries’ debt
servicing capacity and possible policy options at the national and international levels
to effectively address the external debt problem of least developed countries.
266. We commit to continuing to enhance efforts to increase sup port, including
financial and technical assistance, for institutional capacity -building in least
developed countries to enhance sustainable upstream and downstream debt
management as an integral part of national development strategies, including by
promoting transparent and accountable debt management systems and negotiation and
renegotiation capacities and by supporting legal advice in relation to addressing
external debt litigation and debt data reconciliation between creditors and debtors,
notably through the Common Framework for Debt Treatments beyond the Debt
Service Suspension Initiative, so that debt sustainability may be achieved and
maintained.
267. We invite official creditors, including international financial institutions, to
consider exploring the inclusion of State-contingent clauses in public debt contracts
to enable standstills in times of crisis and to provide an example for private markets,
including through granting a suspension of debt service.
268. We invite creditors and debtors to further explore, where appropriate and on a
mutually agreed, transparent and case-by-case basis, the use of debt instruments, such
as debt swap initiatives, for sustainable development and climate action.
Remittances
269. We note that remittances to least developed countries increased significantly
over the past decade but declined in 2020 owing to COVID-19. At the same time,
costs of remittances to least developed countries have remained disproportionally
high.
Targets
• By 2030, reduce to less than 3 per cent the transaction costs of migrants’
remittances.
• Eliminate remittance corridors with costs higher than 5 per cent.

22-04927

55/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

We commit to taking the following actions:
270. We commit to working to improve access to and the use and quality of financial
services to lower the cost of remittances to least developed countries and welcome
international action, such as the Global Forum on Remittances and Development led
by the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the Global Partnership
for Financial Inclusion, with the objective of improving the flow and reducing the
cost of remittances.
271. We commit to providing accessible information on remittance transfer costs,
including foreign exchange margins, by provider and channel, such as t hrough
comparison websites, in order to increase transparency and competition in the
remittance transfer market and promote the financial literacy and inclusion of
migrants and their families through education and training.
272. We decide to support incentive programmes to ensure that remittances are used
for long-term investment in productive capacity-building in least developed
countries, such as micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, and ensure that
women and men are engaged as equal partners and beneficiaries. We will also support
efforts to more easily link remittances to other financial services such as savings,
credit, insurance and pensions, all of which can expand financial health and
strengthen resilience to shocks and setbacks for migrants and their families.
Extension of international support measures to graduating and graduated least
developed countries to make graduation sustainable and irreversible
273. We note with appreciation that 4 countries have graduated since 2011, another
4 have been designated to graduate by 2024 and 12 others have met the graduation
criteria at least once. However, most graduating least developed countries face a
multitude of challenges, including poverty and inequalities, in particular gender
inequality, inadequate structural transformation and productive capacity, and
vulnerability to economic and climatic shocks. Furthermore, we are concerned by the
simultaneous loss of least developed country-specific support measures compounded
by the negative social and economic impacts of the COVID-19 crisis.
274. We further note that the Committee for Development Policy has found that a
five-year preparatory period is necessary for all countries recommended for
graduation at the 2021 triennial review to effectively prepare for a smooth tran sition,
given that these countries will need to prepare for graduation while planning for a
post-COVID-19 recovery and implementing policies and strategies to reverse the
economic and social damages incurred as a result of the COVID -19 shock.
275. We encourage the Committee for Development Policy to continue to engage
with graduating countries and countries recently graduated from the least developed
country category so that the full extent of the socioeconomic impacts of COVID -19
are understood, in line with the work of the Committee on sustainable development
and resilient recovery from the pandemic.
276. We aim to ensure an incentive-based international support structure to
graduating and graduated least developed countries, including support for their
smooth transition from development and trading partners, as well as the United
Nations system, to make graduation sustainable and ensure post -graduation
development momentum and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Targets
• Enable 15 additional least developed countries to meet the criteria for
graduation by 2031.

56/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

• Improve the scope, where necessary, and use of smooth transition measures and
incentives for all graduating least developed countries.
• Provide specific support measures to recently graduated countries for making
the graduation sustainable and irreversible.
We commit to taking the following actions:
277. We emphasize that a successful transition out of the least developed country
category needs to be based on a national smooth transition strategy, formulated by
each graduating country. We urge development and trading partners and the United
Nations system to continue their support for the implementation of smooth transition
strategies so as to avoid any abrupt reductions in either ODA, special and differential
treatments, Aid for Trade or other technical and financial assistance. This includes the
need for improved planning and coordination of transition finance by ODA providers
during both the preparatory period and the post-graduation phase.
278. We reiterate our conviction that no country graduating from the least developed
country category should have its development progress disrupted or reversed. We
welcome that the United Nations graduation process helps to en sure that no
graduating country has its special and differential treatment measures and exemptions
reduced abruptly. We invite development and trading partners to consider extending
to the graduated country trade preferences previously made available as a result of
least developed country status or reducing them in a phased manner in order to avoid
their abrupt reduction. We note that the Group of Least Developed Countries put
forward various proposals at WTO, pertaining to, among other things, trade -related
challenges and those related to the smooth transition of the countries graduating from
the least developed country category, and seek to further examine these issues. We
call upon the development partners to continue to provide, as appropriate, special
climate change-related finance and technological support to graduated countries to
support action towards the achievement of the goals of the Paris Agreement and for a
period consistent with their vulnerabilities, sustainable development needs and other
national circumstances and emerging challenges.
279. We encourage the least developed countries and development partners to
integrate graduation and smooth transition strategies into their national development
and aid strategies, as appropriate, including capacity-building and technical
assistance to diversify sources of financing, including blended finance and private
finance.
280. We recognize that graduating countries face major challenges in addressing the
social and economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and of disasters and
encourage the integration of disaster risk reduction into the smooth transition
strategies of graduating countries in order to promote the sustainability of
development progress, including the impact assessment of the likely consequences of
graduation and the vulnerability profiles.
281. We recognize the need for enhanced support to countries before a nd after
graduation, through appropriate, predictable, additional and demand -driven incentives
and support measures, including in the following areas:
(a) Technical assistance in preparing and implementing a smooth transition
strategy, including capacity development and technical assistance in the analysis and
identification of support needs;
(b) Legal assistance to negotiate market access after trade preferences that are
granted on the basis of least developed countries status end;

22-04927

57/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

(c) Availability of credit ratings and risk management measures, including
through the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency;
(d) Technical assistance to negotiate market access after trade preferences that
are granted based on least developed countries status end;
(e) Technical assistance to build and strengthen intellectual property rights
systems of least developed countries to enable them to comply with obligations
related to intellectual property after graduation;
(f) Consider extending access to dedicated funds for addressing adverse
impacts of climate change and vertical funds such as the Gavi Alliance, Aid for Trade
and Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries for graduated countries for
a fixed period and in a predictable manner.
282. We welcome the work of the inter-agency task force on least developed country
graduation, led by the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, to
provide strengthened and coordinated United Nations system-wide support to the
countries graduating from the least developed country category and invite the Office
to advocate for appropriate predictable and additional incentives and support
measures for graduating and recently graduated countries and to mobilize additional
international support for the implementation of the smooth transition strategies. We
invite all relevant United Nations entities to collaborate under the inter-agency task
force and develop operational guidelines for their support to least developed
countries, including assistance to graduating countries.
283. We welcome the establishment of a Sustainable Graduation Support Facility by
the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, as Chair of the
inter-agency task force on least developed country graduation, and the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, as the secretariat for the Committee for Development
Policy, as a concrete, country-led solution of dedicated capacity development support.
We call upon Member States to support this initiative in order to further strengthen
coordinated and coherent United Nations system support and bring together country specific integrated graduation-related advisory and capacity-building services
responding to the concerns of Member States regarding graduation and serving as a
repository and clearinghouse of initiatives and projects pursued in support of these
countries.
284. We call for a monitoring mechanism that is responsive to emerging crises and
that better links monitoring to specific support, including possible extensions of the
preparatory period. Enhanced monitoring by the Committee for Development Policy
should include the following:
(a) Establishing a crisis response process within the monitoring mechanism to
react to crises and emergencies occurring during the annual monitoring cycle;
(b) Mobilizing the existing crisis management expertise of the United Nations
system and other international entities, utilizing the convening power of the Office of
the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, both in case of crisis and regular
monitoring;
(c)
process.

Expanding coverage of annual monitoring reports and the preparation

285. We call upon the Committee for Development Policy to continue due
consultations with least developed countries and countries recently graduated from

58/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

the least developed country category while conducting the triennial reviews of the list
of least developed countries and monitoring the countries that are graduating and have
graduated from the list of least developed countries, and request the Committee to
include in these consultations those least developed countries whose graduation may
have been deferred.
Availability and use of data
286. We note with concern that many least developed countries lack quality data to
measure and track progress in the goals and targets of th e Istanbul Programme of
Action and the Sustainable Development Goals. The average statistical capacity
indicator score increased from 56.4 in 2011 to 58.0 in 2019 but remains below the
world average of 64. The COVID-19 pandemic has illustrated vividly how crucial
reliable data are for policymaking. Inclusive data are required to understand the
differential impacts of the pandemic and address its economic and social effects,
especially for people in vulnerable situations.
Target
• Significantly increase the availability of high -quality, timely, reliable and
disaggregated data.
We commit to taking the following actions:
287. We commit to further strengthening traditional data sources, such as surveys and
administrative records, complemented by new sources, and continuing to strengthen
our efforts to collect, analyse and disseminate high-quality, accessible, timely and
reliable data for improved monitoring and policymaking to implement the 2030
Agenda and the Doha Programme of Action.
288. We commit to providing financial support, equipment and infrastructure and
technical assistance to strengthen the capacities and capabilities of national statistical
offices, monitor policies of least developed countries and fill data gaps with
responsible, open and inclusive data that take into account diversity in programming.
In this regard, we recognize that modernizing population data systems, through
improving civil registration and vital statistics systems and geospatial information
sources, must be a priority to prepare for future disasters and make progress on
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Implementation, follow-up and monitoring
289. Efficient follow-up and monitoring mechanisms adapted at the national,
subregional, regional and global levels are crucial for the successful implementation
of the Doha Programme of Action and are fully aligned with existing frameworks
such as the Sustainable Development Goals. National, regional and global
mechanisms should be mutually complementary and reinforcing. Necessary steps will
be taken to ensure the mutual accountability of least developed countries and their
development partners for delivering on their commitments undertaken under the Doha
Programme of Action.
290. National-level arrangements are particularly important, given that the Doha
Programme of Action is owned and led by the least developed countries themselves.
At the national level, each least developed country Government should develop an
ambitious national implementation strategy regarding the Doha Programme of Action
and integrate the provisions of the Programme of Action into its national policies and
development and United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
and conduct regular country-led and country-driven reviews, with the full

22-04927

59/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

involvement of all key stakeholders. Existing country -level review mechanisms and
report dissemination, including those for the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the implementation of poverty reduction strategy papers,
nationally determined contributions, United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Frameworks and the existing consultative mechanisms, should be
broadened to cover the review of the Doha Programme of Action and extended to all
least developed countries. National parliaments and other institutions can also support
these processes.
291. We call upon the entities of the United Nations development system to actively
support the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action at the nation al,
subregional, regional and global levels, in close cooperation and partnership with the
World Bank Group and the international financial and development institutions, and
to integrate the Programme of Action into their strategic plans and annual work
programmes and reporting at all levels. We also call upon the entities of the United
Nations development system to support the resident coordinators in the least
developed countries and to assist them in the mainstreaming of the Doha Programme
of Action into development planning at the country level in a coordinated and
cohesive manner.
292. We invite resident coordinators and United Nations country teams, as well as
country-level representatives of the World Bank Group, IMF and other multilateral
institutions, to continue to collaborate with and provide support to national follow -up
and monitoring.
293. In line with the principles of development cooperation effectiveness,
development partners should support agreed objectives and policies designed by least
developed countries on the basis of the Doha Programme of Action that are integrated
into existing national development and cooperation frameworks. They should monitor
the delivery of their commitments and consider appropriate measures to overcome
shortfalls or shortcomings, if any.
294. At the regional level, the relevant United Nations regional commissions and
agencies should undertake biennial reviews of the implementation of the Doha
Programme of Action in close coordination and cooperation with subregi onal and
regional development banks and intergovernmental organizations. Inclusive regional
processes will draw on national reviews and contribute to follow up and review at the
global level. The relevant United Nations regional commissions and agencies sh ould
continue to ensure that the needs and challenges of least developed countries are
addressed as part of their ongoing work.
295. At the global level, the implementation and monitoring mechanisms established
after the Istanbul Programme of Action should be strengthened and improved with a
view to ensuring timely and effective follow-up of the implementation of the Doha
Programme of Action, including through better stocktaking of policies and measures
at the national, regional and sectoral levels; improved substantive support for the
implementation of the Programme of Action at the global level; systematic monitoring
of relevant developments in other intergovernmental processes and action by the
United Nations system organizations and inter-agency processes; and structured
support for follow-up from the least developed countries themselves. The General
Assembly should continue to monitor the implementation of the Doha Programme of
Action on an annual basis under the specific item on its agenda. Effective l inkages
will be made with the follow-up and review arrangements of all relevant United
Nations conferences, processes and frameworks, including the 2030 Agenda, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement and the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction.

60/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

296. We invite the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as well
as the high-level political forum on sustainable development, to devote adequate time
to discussion of the sustainable development challenges facing the least develo ped
countries in order to enhance engagement and implement commitments.
297. The Economic and Social Council is invited to continue to include periodically
an agenda item during its annual substantive session on the review and coordination
of the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action. Periodic reviews of progress
made and constraints confronted by least developed countries should be conducted
by the Council to allow for focused interaction. The Development Cooperation Forum
should continue to review trends in international development cooperation, as well as
policy coherence for development, including for least developed countries and
graduated countries. These will be supported by reviews by the Council’s functional
commissions and other intergovernmental bodies and forums.
298. The General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council should conduct
annual reviews of the progress made in the implementation of the Doha Programme
of Action.
299. We invite the governing bodies of the United Nations funds and programmes
and other multilateral organizations, including the World Bank Group, IMF and other
international financial institutions, as well as WTO, to contribute to the
implementation of the Doha Programme of Action and to integrate it into their work
programmes, as appropriate and in accordance with their relevant mandates. These
organizations are invited to participate fully in reviews of the Doha Programme of
Action at the national, subregional, regional and global levels.
300. The Secretary-General is requested to ensure the full mobilization and
coordination of all parts of the United Nations system to facilitate coordinated
implementation and coherence in the follow-up and monitoring of the Doha
Programme of Action at the national, subregional, regional and global levels. The
coordination mechanisms available, such as the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) and the United Nations Development
Group, should be broadly utilized and the Inter-agency Consultative Group for Least
Developed Countries should be kept active in this regard.
301. We welcome the work of the Inter-agency Consultative Group for Least
Developed Countries, led by the Office of the High Representative for the Least
Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States, invite CEB and the High-level Committee on Programmes to
support the coordination and follow-up of the implementation of the Doha Programme
of Action on a system-wide basis, and also invite the Secretary-General, in his
capacity as CEB Chair, to include the implementation of the Programme of Action in
the agenda of the Board. We invite all relevant United Nations entities to collaborate
under the Inter-agency Consultative Group to develop operational guidelines for their
support to countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
302. We invite the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States to
prepare a comprehensive road map for the accelerated implementation of the Doha
Programme of Action, identifying specific roles and responsibilities of various
stakeholders, with a view to ensuring that the commitments in favour of least
developed countries lead to concrete deliverables that would facilitate
implementation of the Programme of Action and help least developed countries to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.

22-04927

61/63

A/RES/76/258

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

303. The Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States should
strengthen its functions to undertake the following:
(a) Assist the Secretary-General in the systematic and effective follow-up and
monitoring of the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action and the full
mobilization and coordination of all parts of the United Nations system, including
through the use of data, with a view to facilitating the coordinated implementation of
and coherence in the follow-up and monitoring of the Programme of Action at the
country, regional and global levels aligned with the 2030 Agenda;
(b) Assist in mobilizing international support and resources for the
implementation of the Doha Programme of Action for least developed countries;
(c) Strengthen its awareness-raising and advocacy work in favour of least
developed countries, in partnership with the relevant entities of the United Nations
system, as well as with parliaments, civil society, the media, academia and
foundations;
(d) Undertake research and analytical works to provide substantive support to
least developed countries in group consultations and in their participation in other
intergovernmental meetings and conferences, in order to facilitate science - and
evidence-based decisions in favour of least developed countries, taking into account
new and emerging challenges and opportunities; to support the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the high-level political forum on
sustainable development and CEB as they relate to least developed countries; and to
foster debate and innovative thinking, promote consensus on ways forward and
coordinate efforts to achieve the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action.
304. The Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States will continue
to be responsible for coordinated substantive support to the global review of the Doha
Programme of Action, including through the following:
(a) Following up on action taken at the national level based on input from
Governments, United Nations system agencies, civil society organizations and other
relevant stakeholders;
(b) Monitoring sectoral policy developments at the intergovernmental
processes of relevant international and regional organizations;
(c) Maintaining substantive contact with United Nations system organizations
and other relevant international and regional organizations, as well as resident
coordinators in least developed countries;
(d) Assisting the Secretary-General in his efforts in support of least developed
countries;
(e) Supporting follow-up by least developed countries at the global and
sectoral levels.
305. The Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States will continue
to monitor international policy developments of relevance to least developed
countries, including the outcomes of major global conferences, and carry out relevant
advocacy efforts aimed at the effective and timely implementation of the Doha
Programme of Action.
306. We note the network of national focal points of least developed countries
established by the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed

62/63

22-04927

Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries

A/RES/76/258

Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States and
the convening of meetings of the national focal points on a regular basis. We also note
that the national focal points designated by the least developed countries are heavily
involved in the localization of the Istanbul Programme of Action and the Sustainable
Development Goals, as well as their national implementation, monitoring, review and
reporting of the Programme of Action. We invite the Office of the High
Representative to further strengthen the network of national focal points of least
developed countries and convene annual meetings of the focal points to share
experiences and best practices on mainstreaming the Doha Programme of Action and
Sustainable Development Goals into national development processes, as well as their
implementation and follow-up; network among peers; and better understand existing
means of implementation, including viable financing and business models.
307. With a view to ensuring the effective implementation of the functions of the
Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States and strengthening its
capabilities and effectiveness to support the least developed countries, as well as the
effectiveness of the United Nations system support provided to least developed
countries, we request the Secretary-General to prepare a report, in consultation with
Member States and the relevant specialized agencies, funds, programmes and r egional
commissions, taking into account the work done by the United Nations system, and
to submit it with recommendations to the General Assembly for its consideration at
its seventy-seventh session.
308. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop ment should continue to
address the challenges faced by least developed countries through the conduct of
intergovernmental consensus-building, especially through the Trade and Development
Board, and to contribute to the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action,
including through its technical assistance to least developed countries. The institutional
capacity of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the research
and analysis of least developed country issues should be maintained to this end.
309. The General Assembly is invited to consider conducting a comprehensive high level midterm review of the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action in
2026. The Assembly, towards the end of the decade, is also invited to consider
holding, in 2031, a sixth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries in order to make a comprehensive appraisal of the implementation of
Programme of Action and to decide on subsequent action.

22-04927

63/63
