S/2020/987*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 8 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a briefing provided by Ms.
Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; and Ambassador Abdou Abarry, Permanent Representative of the Niger,
in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as the statements delivered by the representatives of Estonia, France, Germany,
Indonesia, the Russian Federation, South Africa (on behalf of the Niger, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, South Africa and Tunisia), the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with
the video teleconference on “The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo” convened on Tuesday, 6 October 2020. A statement was also delivered
by the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

*

Reissued for technical reasons 8 February 2021.

20-13536 (E) 191020 171120

*2013536*

S/2020/987

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Leila Zerrougui
I am grateful for this opportunity to update the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the activities of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) in conjunction with the issuance of the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2020/919).
My briefing today will touch on the continuing political tensions in the
country the progress being made on the Mission’s transition, and efforts to pursue a
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians.
At the outset, I wish to emphasize that, notwithstanding the pandemic,
MONUSCO has successfully maintained continuity of operations and mandate
delivery by introducing a range of measures and procedures that have helped to
ensure that the Mission is not a vector of transmission for the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19).
Among other things, the Mission enhanced its internal screening and treatment
capacity in order not to place an additional burden on the local medical system.
A temporary halt was placed on troop rotations and staff returning from abroad
were required to self-quarantine. Movements were also temporarily halted between
Kinshasa, where the outbreak commenced, and the provinces where the Mission’s
operations are concentrated.
Although MONUSCO’s civilian and uniformed personnel had their
professionalism and patience of sorely tested during this difficult period, they
continued to carry out the Mission’s work, demonstrating their adherence to United
Nations values.
In this context, I wish to reiterate my appreciation to the troop- and policecontributing countries of MONUSCO for their flexibility, particularly concerning
the temporary halt on troop rotations, and to all Mission personnel, civilian and
uniformed, for their unwavering professionalism and dedication during this time
of great uncertainty. I am pleased to report that rotations have resumed and that all
civilian personnel are present at their duty stations and working under appropriately
flexible arrangements.
In my previous briefings to the Security Council, I have underlined the dual
nature of the current political situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo. On the
one hand, I believe that, despite its internal differences, the political class accepts
and even appreciates the opportunities offered by the ruling coalition between Cap
pour le Changement and Front commun pour le Congo. On the other hand, there are
persistent tensions between the members of the coalition that have threatened to
undermine what has come to represent a key pillar on which the country’s long-term
stabilization rests.
To this challenge we must now add another — the risk that politicking and
positioning ahead of the 2023 elections will become the overriding focus, to the
exclusion of the governance reforms and stabilization measures that the country
needs. The current political dispensation remains fragile and could yet unravel. At
the same time, it has the potential to sustain and advance the gains that have already
been made, should all actors work towards this goal. It is as much a learning process
for the members of the ruling coalition — who were political opponents and must
now overcome their differences and build trust among one another — as it is for the
2/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

opposition and civil society, who must learn to navigate a new political landscape
and work to ensure that the peaceful transfer of power becomes a routine occurrence.
In this context, I have spared no effort in the exercise of my good offices. I
continue to meet regularly with stakeholders from across the political spectrum,
both inside and outside of Government, to remind them of the delicate juncture at
which the country finds itself and urge them to focus on implementing the reforms
needed to address the pressing needs of the population and place the country on the
path to long-term stability and sustainable development. In doing so, I have sought to
impress upon all my interlocutors that there is a difference between normal political
competition and behaviour that undermines the stability of the country.
The Security Council will soon receive the joint strategy on the progressive
and phased drawdown of MONUSCO. I am pleased to report that fruitful discussions
are ongoing with the Government at the most senior levels to achieve a common
understanding of the way forward. President Tshisekedi has underlined his wish for
a gradual transition and a responsible exit of MONUSCO. He has stressed that this
should be undertaken through a progressive transfer of tasks from MONUSCO to the
Government, in coordination with the United Nations country team.
Given the complexity of the conflict environment in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the joint strategy is based on a series of region-specific strategies,
tailored to the particular needs of the six provinces, outside of Kinshasa, where the
Mission is still present. There is agreement with the Government that in the coming
years, MONUSCO will gradually consolidate its footprint in the three provinces
where active conflict persists — namely, North and South Kivu and Ituri — while
pursuing its work of good offices and institutional strengthening at the national
level. As part of this process, the Mission should be able to withdraw from the
Kasai region, which is in a phase of post-conflict consolidation, relatively soon. In
Tanganyika, recent improvements in the security situation should enable the Mission
to reduce its military footprint, despite continued domestic armed group activity in
the north and low-level inter-community conflict in some areas.
I have already touched on the security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which is described in detail in the report of the Secretary-General. I
have consistently condemned the serious abuses and violations that continue to be
committed against civilians. MONUSCO is working closely with the Government
and the Congolese security forces to provide comprehensive responses in all areas
affected by armed group violence.
At the core of its current activities, the Mission remains focused on improving
the implementation of its protection of civilians mandate, including by enhancing
the performance of its peacekeepers and harnessing the technological capabilities
at its disposal, such as unarmed aerial systems. The Mission will continue to work
closely with the Congolese military and police to strengthen their ability to protect
the civilians in the remaining areas of the country affected by insecurity.
At the same time, it is important to understand that the protection of civilians
goes well beyond the conduct of military operations. This is why the Mission is
working with the Congolese authorities and local communities, civil society,
women’s organizations and young people as part of an integrated approach that
combines support to community reconciliation, strengthening of the justice system,
professionalization of the security forces, and monitoring and reporting on human
rights abuses. MONUSCO is also working hand-in-hand with the United Nations
country team, the World Bank, the Peacebuilding Fund and other multilateral and
bilateral partners to develop and implement a range of programmes designed to meet

20-135363/26

S/2020/987

the immediate humanitarian needs of the population and set the country on the path
to sustainable development.
In this context, I wish to express deep concern over recent reports of
attacks — including killings and kidnappings — on humanitarian actors trying to
provide relief to populations affected by conflict. I urge all stakeholders to enable
humanitarian access to populations in need and recall that resolution 2417 (2018)
condemns unlawful denial of humanitarian access to civilian populations.
The stabilization of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo will depend
to a large extent on progress made towards the dismantling of armed groups and the
sustainable reintegration of ex-combatants into their communities. It is vital, in this
context, that we avoid repeating the experiences of the past, where large numbers
of ex-combatants were granted amnesty and integrated into the Congolese security
forces, undermining their professionalism, discipline and unity of command. The
prospect of obtaining a rank in the Congolese security forces was an incentive to
form an armed group, resulting in a deadly cycle of recyclage, the consequences of
which are still being felt today.
I have continuously emphasized the need to break this cycle and implement
a programme of community reintegration that seeks to build the resilience of
communities receiving ex-combatants and provide for their legitimate needs, while
removing the incentive to form and join armed groups. I believe that this is one of
the most urgent priorities facing the country today, and it is one on which I continue
to engage with the Congolese authorities at the national and provincial levels, as well
as interested donors. I call on the Council to throw its full weight behind efforts to
foster this new, community-based approach to reintegration, which represents a clear
break with the failed policies of the past.
MONUSCO remains committed to exploiting synergies with other United
Nations presences in the Great Lakes. In particular, the Mission continues to work
closely with the Office of the Special Envoy on a range of issues, including the
promotion of non-military measures to tackle the threat posed by armed groups, the
importance of which I have already emphasized, and the development of the United
Nations regional strategy. The Mission is also committed to working closely with
the African Union, the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region and the
Southern African Development Community, all of which play an essential role in
promoting peace and development in the subregion.
To conclude, as I have stated before, the elections of 2018 and resulting
peaceful transfer of power were a historic turning point that has made it possible
to start envisaging MONUSCO’s progressive drawdown and withdrawal from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Serious challenges remain and there is clearly
much work to be done to place the country on the path to long-term stability
and long-term development. I therefore call on the Security Council to continue
supporting MONUSCO in its efforts to help the Congolese Government and people
preserve the gains made during the Mission’s presence and create the conditions for
its responsible exit.

4/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger, Abdou
Abarry, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
I have the honour to deliver this statement in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is my intention this morning to provide an
overview of the work of the Committee since my predecessor, Ambassador Mansour
Alotaibi, Permanent Representative of Kuwait, briefed the Council on 24 July 2019
(see S/PV.8584).
Since Ambassador Alotaibi’s briefing, the Committee has held a total of four
meetings, three in 2019 and one in 2020. Due to the outbreak of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Committee has also met informally via videoteleconference (VTC) on five occasions in 2020.
In 2019, during the briefing to regional States held on 9 August, the
Coordinator of the Group of Experts provided an overview of the main findings
and recommendations of the Group’s final report (S/2019/469), following which a
number of regional States shared their views in connection with the report. During
the informal consultations held on 27 August, the Coordinator of the Group of
Experts briefed Committee members on the Group’s workplan in pursuance of its new
mandate, as set forth in resolution 2478 (2019). During the informal consultations
held on 2 December, the Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the
Group of Experts regarding the Group’s midterm report (S/2019/974), and discussed
the findings and recommendations contained therein. In 2019, the Chair of the
Committee also hosted an informal informal with the Senior Official of the Followon Mechanism for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Robert Petit, who,
on 6 October, provided an update to members of the Committee at the Permanent
Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations.
On 1 January 2020, I assumed the chairmanship of the Committee. During
the briefing to Member States held on 21 February, the Coordinator of the Group
of Experts provided an overview of the main findings and recommendations of
the Group’s midterm report, document S/2019/974, following which a number of
regional States shared their views in connection with the report.
Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York in March
2020, the Committee had to adjust its working methods, as in-person meetings could
not be convened. On 22 May, the Committee held its first informal informal remotely,
via VTC, during which the Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of
the Group of Experts regarding the Group’s final report (S/2020/482), and discussed
the findings and recommendations contained therein. During the same meeting, the
Committee heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, on the situation of children
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 12 June, the Committee held, via VTC,
a joint informal informal with the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic to hear a briefing by Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, on the situation in both countries.
During the informal informal held with regional States via VTC on 10 July,
the Coordinator of the Group of Experts provided an overview of the main findings
and recommendations of the Group’s final report, following which a number of
20-135365/26

S/2020/987

regional States shared their views in connection with the report. Finally, during the
informal informal held via VTC on 4 September, the Coordinator of the Group of
Experts briefed Committee members on the Group’s workplan in pursuance of its
new mandate set forth in resolution 2528 (2020).
The Committee also held, via VTC, an informal informal on 27 May with
the Senior Official of the Follow-on Mechanism for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Robert Petit. I would like to reiterate that the Committee continues to
support Mr. Petit and his team of technical experts as they provide assistance to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its investigations into the
March 2017 murders of two former members of the Group of Experts, Zaida Catalán
and Michael Sharp.
As members are aware, in paragraph 7 of its resolution 2478 (2019) the Council
requested the Group of Experts “to circulate to the Committee every twelve months
proposed updates to the existing information on the DRC Sanctions List” On 10
August 2020, a number of proposed updates to the sanctions list submitted by the
Group of Experts were circulated in the Committee. On 19 August, the Committee
agreed to updates regarding two individuals and three entities, and is awaiting
further responses from Member States in connection with requests sent by the Group
of Experts regarding the status of certain listed individuals, prior to updating the list
entries of these individuals.
On 6 February 2020, the Committee added Seka Baluku to the list of
individuals and entities subject to measures reaffirmed by paragraph 2 of resolution
2360 (2017).

6/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting and I also thank Special
Representative Zerrougui and Ambassador Abarry for their valuable insights.
I would like to begin by commending the actions of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) that have enabled the protection of civilians and the continuation of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, despite the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the increased violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Many armed groups have not responded to the call for a global ceasefire
and continue their attacks. This violence will continue to require a rapid, robust
and effective response from MONUSCO, in particular from its rapid reaction force
and force intervention brigades, together with the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
MONUSCO is reporting a significant increase in the number of human
rights abuses and violations, which reached 2,140 last quarter. This highlights the
challenges facing the Mission and possible plans towards its exit from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The gradual transfer of MONUSCO’s responsibilities has to
ensure that there are no setbacks in the progress made; it must not undermine the
safety and security of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
development of the joint transition strategy and its benchmarks must be conducted
together with the main humanitarian partners and other international and national
civil society organizations. This would help ensure that the strategies and activities
of various stakeholders are aligned, and that the activities supported by MONUSCO
will not be disrupted. Strong cooperation with the Congolese authorities must
tackle the large number of human rights violations, which remains a significant
problem. Accountability for such violations must be established in order to avoid the
prevalence of a culture of impunity and build trust in the country’s security forces.
Strengthening of rule-of-law and of justice institutions is a critical component of
efforts addressing the root causes of conflict.
The challenges facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain numerous
and diverse: armed group violence and its links to the illicit trade of natural resources,
floods and the Ebola virus disease, now in the west of the country, in addition to the
pandemic.
I would like to end my statement by commending MONUSCO, the Congolese
authorities and all partners for their continued commitment to establishing peace in
the country.

20-135367/26

S/2020/987

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and the Ambassador of the
Niger for their interventions. I would like to emphasize three points.
First is the adaptation of our response to the persistent security challenges.
Certain regions, such as the Kasais or Tanganyika, are entering a promising phase
of stabilization. The Congolese authorities must continue to consolidate the progress
that has been achieved in strengthening institutions and socioeconomic development
in order to take over from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which has begun to disengage
in these regions.
Other regions remain heavily affected by violence against civilians,
particularly women and children, as well as against the security forces. Sexual
violence persists. It is in these regions, in Ituri and the Kivus, that the Mission’s
efforts must be recentred to meet the conditions for its withdrawal when the time
comes. Moreover, a regional approach remains indispensable, as the violence in the
east is perpetrated by national as well as foreign armed groups.
The joint strategy being prepared with the Congolese authorities to allow
for a progressive transfer of MONUSCO’s tasks has to address the root causes
of the conflicts. It will have to include clear and realistic indicators in terms of
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and reinstallation of
foreign armed groups, in terms of security sector reform, rule of law, and control of
the exploitation of natural resources.
That brings me to my second point.
Violations of human rights and international humanitarian law are on the
rise, particularly in the east. The Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
whose work I commend, can do more to address this — for example, by making
additional designations. The development of a national strategy for the fight against
impunity and the implementation of transitional justice mechanisms is essential. The
Congolese authorities must also continue to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court.
The end of the tenth Ebola epidemic in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as of the measles outbreak, are major successes. Efforts must continue
to combat the coronavirus disease, cholera and the Ebola epidemic that has broken
out in the western part of the country. The threat of famine is a matter of particular
concern. The Government knows that it can count on the full support of France, as
evidenced by the European humanitarian airlift set up before the summer.
We must be fully vigilant with regard to the protection of hospitals and
humanitarian personnel. I welcome the mobilization of MONUSCO to contribute to
the safety of Dr. Mukwege and the Panzi clinic. Local protection capacities must be
further strengthened.
Finally — and this is my third point — improving MONUSCO’s action must
remain at the centre of our attention in view of the renewal of its mandate. All possible
measures must be taken to enable MONUSCO to attain its full operational capacity.
An ambitious reform of the Force Intervention Brigade also remains indispensable.
8/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

Last December, the Council unanimously underlined the importance of improving
the efficiency of the Brigade by assigning new staff officers and additional units.
As President Tshilombo Tshisekedi recalled before the General Assembly (see
A/75/PV.5), the Democratic Republic of the Congo supports the principle of an
enhancement of the Brigade’s operational capacity. We therefore encourage the
Secretariat and the contributing countries to continue their discussions in order to
swiftly achieve the implementation of the Council’s decisions.
The Force Intervention Brigade played a major role in the defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars in 2013 thanks to its offensive posture. It is that dynamism
and agility that must be swiftly restored in order to protect civilians and neutralize
armed groups. The full engagement of contributing countries is indispensable in that
regard. We owe this to the Congolese State and to the population.
It is time for resolution 1325 (2000), whose twentieth anniversary we are
celebrating this month, to become a reality for Congolese women and men. France,
in its national capacity and within the Council, will continue to support the rights of
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Resolution 2538 (2020) must also
be operationally implemented within MONUSCO.
A new stage in the relationship between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations is taking shape. The long-term peace and stability of
the country depend on it.

20-135369/26

S/2020/987

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
I would like to make a couple of points on the security situation and the human
rights and humanitarian situation. We are concerned about the persistent levels of
violence in North and South Kivu and Ituri. The activities of, and attacks by, armed
groups, especially the Allied Democratic Forces, must stop. As a consequence, the
protection of civilians remains a key challenge. We are glad to see some positive
signals, such as a peace pledge in Mahagi territory in Ituri in August. The reported
8 per cent increase in human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based
violence, is of particular concern to us. Almost half of all human rights violations are
attributable to State security activists. That number indicates a clear need for reform
and for greater accountability.
The humanitarian situation continues to be alarming, with more than 25 million
people depending on humanitarian aid. Once again women and children are being
hit disproportionately hard. We urgently call on the international community to
support the humanitarian response plan, which is dramatically underfunded at this
stage. Germany has so far contributed approximately €70 million for humanitarian
assistance measures in 2020, including response measures regarding Ebola and the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Let me make some remarks on the political situation and reform efforts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Even if the country has navigated strikingly
well through the Ebola epidemic and the COVID-19 pandemic so far, the massive
socioeconomic repercussions have to be dealt with. Therefore, we call on political
actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage constructively, and we
encourage the Government to continue its work on much-needed reforms in the
security sector, the justice sector and the economy. It is important to focus on what
needs to be done now. We should not only look towards the electoral year 2023. Strong
democratic institutions and respect for the rule of law, for equal and meaningful
participation of women in the fight against impunity and against corruption will
be crucial.
Let me also say a couple of words on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), on
the reconfiguration of Mission and on benchmarks. We reiterate Germany’s support
for MONUSCO. MONUSCO remains indispensable in supporting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular regarding the protection of civilians and in
the east of the country. We encourage the Mission to continue in its reform process
and to abide by resolution 2502 (2019), as well as the recommendations contained
in the report authored by former United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled “Improving Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers”.
We note with concern that allegations of five cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse by members of MONUSCO were recorded. We stress that these allegations
must be properly investigated by troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Office of Internal Oversight Services, respectively.
On the reconfiguration of MONUSCO, it is important to ensure national
ownership in developing a joint strategy. We need a conditions-based reconfiguration
and realistic benchmarks. Security-sector reform must be at the core of that process.
The progress made should be secured and close links with new peacebuilding efforts
should be allowed.
10/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
At the outset, allow me to thank the briefers, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Abdou Abarry.
Indonesia has been following the progress in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since we joined the Council in January 2019. We join the SecretaryGeneral’s call on all Congolese stakeholders to work together to continue laying the
foundations for peace, stability and sustainable development. Allow me to touch
on the following points.
First, the Great Lakes region has great potential for sustainable peace. As the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General explained, in order to sustain peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we need to work together on a range of
issues in the region, including through the promotion of non-military measures to
tackle the threat posed by armed groups, as well as community reintegration, which
we need to explore further.
We need to maintain the momentum of peace that was started by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in January 2019. We call on all partners to use
that momentum to enhance their support and assistance to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region.
A silo mindset will no longer work. All of the United Nations system and its
partners in the region should work together. We need to enhance efforts to ensure
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues on a peaceful path and that its
people experience peace, stability and prosperity even beyond the 2023 elections.
The role of neighbours and regional organizations is essential to help maintain that
peaceful climate. Neighbours know best.
We welcome the efforts of Special Representative Zerrougui to continue
engaging with all parties from across the spectrum. Building trust is important.
Secondly, we need to increase humanitarian assistance in the country. That
is an essential element for the advent of a sustainable peace. We join the SecretaryGeneral in commending the Congolese Government for having taken swift and
decisive action to limit the spread of the coronavirus disease.
Nevertheless, we also realize that other humanitarian challenges are facing the
country. These include the re-emergence of the Ebola virus disease and, as set out
in the most recent report on food security, the fact that nearly 22 million people in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are now acutely food-insecure — the highest
number in the world. We call for all partners to increase their humanitarian support
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also join the Secretary-General’s call
for a global ceasefire so as to provide ample access for humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, Indonesia continues to support the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and its leadership. To that end, we need to ensure the safety and
security of peacekeepers. Increasing attacks by armed groups such as the Allied
Democratic Forces have claimed numerous innocent lives. Last June, such attacks
claimed the life of an Indonesian peacekeeper, an engineer who was there to help
with the infrastructure and the livelihoods of the people in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He was the first casualty in MONUSCO in the past two years.
20-1353611/26

S/2020/987

To be able to carry out its mandate of protecting civilians, MONUSCO needs
first to be able to defend itself. The safety and security of peacekeepers remains a
high priority for Indonesia. It is time for us to seriously look at our peacekeeping
efforts to increase their professionalism, performance, funding and capacity.
We will continue our efforts to save lives and protect civilians through
community engagement, winning their hearts and minds to build trust. Just as
we promised at the beginning of our membership, in January 2019, Indonesia will
continue to be a true partner to our brothers and sisters in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

12/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
We join other speakers in thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Permanent Representative of
the Niger to the United Nations Abdou Abarry for the information that they shared.
We agree that the security situation in the eastern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is far from having been stabilized. The Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire remains unheeded. We find particularly concerning the
upsurge in violence observed recently in Ituri and North Kivu. Despite the ongoing
military operations conducted by the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC), the Allied Democratic Forces continue to carry out violent
attacks against civilians and to step up the pressure on the Congolese military and
peacekeepers. The past months also saw the intensification of raids by other armed
groups, which continue to grow in number, together with inter-ethnic violence, in
particular in Djugu territory.
The complex security and humanitarian situation is further aggravated by
the re-emergence of the Ebola virus in Equateur province and the spread of the
coronavirus pandemic.
The continuing tensions within the governing coalition in Kinshasa represent
yet another factor negatively affecting the situation. We fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s call on all Congolese stakeholders to abandon narrow partisan behaviour
and work together to continue laying the foundations for peace and stability in the
country. Interference in the domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is unacceptable.
We acknowledge the contribution being made by MONUSCO, including its
Force Intervention Brigade, in countering armed groups and protecting civilians in
the eastern provinces, fostering reconciliation processes and supporting, through
its good offices, the development of a national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration framework and provincial road maps. We welcome the improvements
in coordination achieved between the Mission and the FARDC, as well as the
expansion of the operational area of the force in Ituri province. Concerning sanctions,
we remain convinced that the restrictions imposed on the country should under no
circumstance negatively affect the efficiency of the military operations conducted
by the FARDC against armed groups.
We look forward to the publication this month of a MONUSCO joint strategy
for a gradual transition and responsible exit from the country, commissioned by the
Council last year. We strongly believe that all decisions in that regard should be made
taking into account the situation on the ground and upon careful consideration of the
views expressed by Kinshasa, States of the region and troop-contributing countries.
Russia, being part of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, will
continue assisting the process of peace and stabilization in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. At this juncture, we are focusing particular attention on assisting
Kinshasa in tackling the challenges posed by the coronavirus pandemic and other
infectious diseases, including the Ebola virus. In recent months we have shared
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo two mobile microbiological rapid-test
laboratories as well as personal protective equipment. We stand ready to further
20-1353613/26

S/2020/987

promote epidemiological cooperation with Congolese colleagues, including on
vaccine-related issues.

14/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
countries that are members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, South Africa
and Tunisia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this important
and timely meeting on the Democratic Republic of Congo. We would also like to
thank and commend the Secretary-General on his comprehensive report on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the activities of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) (S/2020/919), and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of MONUSCO, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, on her comprehensive briefing.
Today the A3+1 wishes to focus our intervention on the political processes
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the security and humanitarian situation;
regional processes; and support for MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The prevailing political situation in the country provides a rare opportunity to
build a stable long-term future and a unified country. In that regard, the unity of the
current establishment is paramount in order to address the myriad challenges that
the country is facing.
Against that backdrop, the A3+1 delegations commend the continued efforts
by the Congolese to resolve their political differences in a peaceful manner. We
are also pleased with the ongoing constructive dialogue aimed at resolving political
tensions, as reflected in the public commitment and reaffirmations to the coalition
made by President Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi and former President Joseph Kabila.
This is vital to lasting peace and national reconciliation.
On the security front, the A3+1 remains deeply concerned by the ongoing
instability and insecurity as a result of the belligerent actions by armed groups
in North Kivu, which continue to draw due attention, particularly as the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) are carrying on with attacks on civilians, the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO. The
situation is similar in South Kivu, where the redeployment of the FARDC to other
areas in the east has created a security vacuum, leading to active recruitment by
some armed groups.
That illustrates the need to put in place sustainable and enduring security
measures in the areas affected. Nevertheless, we are encouraged by the progress
registered in the peace agreements between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and armed groups in Ituri province. However, we are concerned
that the delay in the implementation of the demobilization and reintegration process,
partly due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, could impact the
situation negatively.
It is in that context that the A3+1 underscores the centrality of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region as a long-term solution to create stability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We note the consolidated force presence in Ituri province
to respond to militia violence and in Beni territory to address the threat posed by
the ADF.

20-1353615/26

S/2020/987

In that regard, the A3+1 emphasizes the importance of fully supporting
MONUSCO’s role in stabilizing the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
recognizes the efforts of the Force Intervention Brigade in addressing the threat
posed by the armed groups. The Force Intervention Brigade requires the continued
support of the Council in that regard, and needs to be fully trained to remain effective
in addressing the threat against the civilian population in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, despite enormous expectations and the complexity of
the task.
Although we have seen some progress in the stabilization and strengthening
of State institutions, the A3+1 remains concerned about the prospect of a hastened
and rushed drawdown of MONUSCO. It is our view that the Mission’s drawdown
should be based on a comprehensive plan to improve the capacity of the State to
deliver while MONUSCO reduces its presence in the country.
That plan should include completed security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; fully functional State institutions, such
as immigration and border control; improved police and army, and a strengthened
judiciary. Lastly, the drawdown of MONUSCO should be predicated on a positive
evolution of the situation on the ground in order to ensure a successful handover of
Mission tasks to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Turning to the regional cooperation efforts, the A3+1 reiterates the importance
of fostering strong and effective regional relations and cooperation, as reflected in
the Government’s campaign to build bridges and not walls. In that respect, we are
satisfied by the Government’s continuing efforts to engage regional partners to
address common threats to the region.
For the period under review, the A3+1 welcomes the meeting between
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and President Denis Sassou Nguesso, as well as
the cooperation agreement signed between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Angola on security and public order in border areas. Furthermore, we continue
to support the long-standing commitment of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo to achieve
sustainable peace, security and stability. In that respect, we are pleased with SADC’s
deployment of a technical mission in September, which resulted in the adoption of a
phased approach to the demarcation of the affected border.
The A3+1 also commends the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
region for its efforts alongside MONUSCO and welcomes their commitment to assist
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to achieve sustainable peace, security and
stability.
The A3+1 remains concerned about the current humanitarian situation.
The slowdown in new reported cases in the COVID-19 pandemic is a welcome
development, but the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic continues to be
a concern. In that regard, we commend the ongoing swift response and decisive
efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, other United Nations
agencies, the African Union and the World Health Organization.
Our delegations welcome the multisectoral response plan for the Ebola
outbreak, which aims to strengthen the effectiveness of a health system struggling
to provide basic social services and to reach those affected, mainly women and
children. It is our hope that major challenges such as insufficient funding and the
lack of decentralized access to testing and treatment will be addressed in a timely
manner, with the assistance of the international community.

16/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

The A3+1 remains deeply concerned about the extreme levels of hunger in
the country, with the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification analysis
revealing that more than 21 million people are experiencing a crisis level or worse
of acute food insecurity. We also reiterate our concerns about the high levels of
displacement in the eastern parts of the country as a result of clashes between armed
groups, intercommunal violence and excessive rainfall and flooding.
Our delegations call for sustained international support to enable the country’s
authorities to mitigate the negative impact of these humanitarian challenges for the
people and the economy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate the
need for flexible financial arrangements to bolster development efforts within the
country, in line with national priorities and in accordance with the aims of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The A3+1 also calls for further efforts by regional and international partners
to tackle the illicit extraction of, and trade in, mineral resources, which remain a
major source of revenue for armed groups in the east of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In conclusion, on behalf of the A3+1, I commend the efforts and commitment
of the United Nations, MONUSCO, troop-contributing countries, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and international partners to stabilize the
country and protect civilians from ongoing threats, despite the prevailing challenges.
Our delegations therefore reiterate calls to the international community and partners
to mobilize the necessary resources to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in its efforts to strengthen its institutions, as well as to advance the security sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes.
The A3+1 is of the firm view that it is imperative for the international
community — through the African Union, the United Nations and international
partners — to maintain solidarity with the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and provide the necessary political, financial and other support in order to
build on the gains made thus far.

20-1353617/26

S/2020/987

Annex IX
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Sonia Farrey
Let me begin by thanking Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing
and commending the continuation of the vital operations of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) throughout the unprecedented coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. We are also grateful to Ambassador Abarry for briefing us on the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We welcome President Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s call for electoral reforms based
on consensus. We call on all parties to reduce tensions, which jeopardize progress,
and to work together to seek reform in order to deliver timely and credible elections.
We remain committed to ensuring long-term stability and security in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The deterioration in North and South Kivu,
the resurgence of conflict in Ituri and increased Allied Democratic Forces activity
in areas previously controlled by the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are of concern. There is a critical need for security sector reform in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that is grounded in a comprehensive national
strategy to be developed by its Government.
We are encouraged by MONUSCO’s work with governors in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the development of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration road maps and welcome reports that a number of armed groups
and militia combatants are ready to surrender. We call on the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to support that momentum by nominating
a national focal point and developing a comprehensive national framework on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
The human rights situation remains deeply troubling, in particular the increased
abuses by armed groups, widespread conflict-related sexual violence and continued
violations by State agents, including in the context of measures implemented to
tackle COVID-19. We condemn the involvement of the armed forces and police of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in conflict-related sexual violence.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the adoption of a national transitional
justice strategy capable of addressing the culture of impunity and providing justice.
We urge all State agents to demonstrate full respect for human rights and call for
continued efforts by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
improving the human rights environment.
As the second-largest bilateral donor to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Kingdom remains a committed humanitarian and development
partner. We recognize the broader socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 on the health
crisis and humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are
concerned about the risk of further deterioration in both and a reduced capacity to
respond to crises, including the eleventh Ebola outbreak in Equateur province and
growing concerns of food insecurity.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call to investigate fully the allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse in 2018-2020 against those working on the Ebola
response in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sexual exploitation

18/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

and abuse are abhorrent, and the United Kingdom expects thorough investigations
whenever allegations are made.
The protection of civilians is of the utmost importance to peace and stability.
We welcome MONUSCO’s development of targeted provincial protection-ofcivilian strategies. Local and national ownership will be essential to their successful
implementation.
We call for the prompt implementation of mandated reforms to MONUSCO
and its Force Intervention Brigade. While we note the delays due to COVID-19, it
is crucial that all relevant stakeholders, particularly the relevant troop-contributing
countries, cooperate constructively to ensure the full implementation of the reforms
mandated by the Council.
Finally, we look forward to receiving MONUSCO’s exit strategy — developed
jointly with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo — later this
month. We expect the transition to be conditions-based, with clear and measurable
benchmarks. We call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate actively in planning MONUSCO’s exit. National ownership will be
critical in ensuring a sustainable exit.

20-1353619/26

S/2020/987

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing today. I would
like to express my appreciation to Ambassador Abarry for his update on the status
of the important work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The United States is deeply troubled by rising levels of violence in North Kivu,
South Kivu and Ituri, which were characterized by clashes between armed groups;
tit-for-tat militia attacks against civilians, including many women and children; and
the continued brutal campaign of the Allied Democratic Forces. We must use all the
tools at hand to work towards the peaceful resolution of historic drivers of conflict
and an end to impunity.
This is a policy priority for the United States. Our Ambassador to Kinshasa,
Michael Hammer, travelled to North and South Kivu last week to meet with key
officials and civil society to assess how the United States-Congolese partnership can
benefit local people.
With more than 1,300 civilians killed in attacks in the first half of 2020
alone, it is clear that the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) would benefit from additional
operational support. The United States supports the Organization’s efforts to add
three new Quick Reaction Force units to the Force Intervention Brigade. These
new units, together with the increase in the number of military staff officers and
new intelligence capabilities, will equip the Mission to enable it to more effectively
counter the threats that have contributed to the devastating death toll this year in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As President Tshilombo Tshisekedi said during his remarks to the General
Assembly last month (see A/75/PV.5), boosting the Force Intervention Brigade’s
operational capacity can help to stop asymmetrical attacks on Congolese civilians
living in insecurity for more than two decades now — two decades too long.
We also welcome the President’s call for increased efforts by international
actors to dismantle armed group networks. As just outlined by Ambassador Abarry,
we remind all armed group actors and their business associates that sanctions under
resolution 1533 (2004) remain in place. We view appropriate, targeted and effective
sanctions as an essential tool against actors and entities that undermine the peace
and security of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The path to sustainable peace will require political solutions to localized
conflicts, as well as improved governance. We were encouraged by the initial
surrender of more than 450 Nduma défense du Congo Rénové fighters in August,
and would urge more progress on the Government’s disarmament, demobilization,
and reintegration of the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri armed group.
But sustainable peace can take root only when accompanied by broader
political and economic reforms. To that end, we applaud the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the steps it has taken to improve governance
and human rights, fight impunity and stop trafficking in persons and child soldier
recruitment. We hope to see progress in reducing the number of human rights
violations committed by State security forces and increased prosecution of both
State and armed-group actors for human rights violations and abuses. We also urge
more accountability for those with command responsibility and call for the improved
20/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

prevention of sexual violence in conflict and stronger support and protection for
survivors.
We also congratulate President Tshilombo Tshisekedi for taking steps to
professionalize the Congolese military by appointing new leadership this summer, as
well as for appointing the first woman Constitutional Court judge and a new director
of the country’s financial investigation unit. While there is a long road ahead to
sustain these gains, we think it is important to recognize progress to date.
With that in mind, we are very concerned about the recent allegations of
widespread sexual exploitation and abuse by personnel who claimed to be employed
by international organizations and private relief agencies in North Kivu as part of
the Ebola response. The United States takes these allegations very seriously and calls
upon the organizations and agencies involved to conduct a thorough investigation and
hold offenders accountable. The United States will continue to work with the United
Nations to develop programmes and capabilities to conduct thorough investigations
and prosecute these crimes.
We remain concerned about similar allegations perpetrated by MONUSCO
peacekeepers against civilians. Of all missions, this Mission continues to have the
second-highest number of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. We urge all
troop- and police-contributing countries to enforce the Organization’s zero-tolerance
policy and swiftly and credibly address criminal allegations. We urge MONUSCO
and the United Nations to take prevention seriously, including by repatriating
contingents that display a pattern of abusive behaviour.
Finally, as requested in the mandate adopted in December, we look forward
to receiving — later this month — a joint exit strategy with measurable benchmarks
for progressively transferring MONUSCO’s tasks to the Congolese authorities, the
United Nations country team and other stakeholders, with the goal of achieving a
responsible exit of MONUSCO in the coming years.

20-1353621/26

S/2020/987

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ambassador Abdou Abarry, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for their insightful briefings.
My delegation is pleased to note that, during the reporting period, there were
continuous efforts to ensure an overall environment conducive to the advancement
of the political process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite ongoing
tensions. We also welcome regional diplomatic efforts with neighbouring countries
and reaffirm the key role of subregional organizations and the importance of
cooperating with them.
However, we are deeply troubled by the continued deterioration of the security
situation in some parts of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially
in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri. Confrontations between armed groups,
intercommunal conflicts, attacks against civilians by the Allied Democratic Forces
and various other armed groups, as well as the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo, and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) are of particular concern.
Numerous recent attacks claimed tens of civilian lives and affected United
Nations personnel on the ground. We strongly condemn those attacks and urge
all parties to heed the ceasefire appeal of the Secretary-General. We would
also like to reiterate the vital importance of ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations personnel.
In addition, Viet Nam is concerned over the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where over 25.6 million people are currently
in need of assistance. Various health challenges, including the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the re-emergence of Ebola in the west and measles and other dangerous
diseases, are putting increasing amounts of pressure on the already dire socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation in many regions of the country. We therefore call for
greater support from the international community to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo at this critical moment.
Against the current backdrop, my delegation would like to stress the
following points.
First, the protracted conflicts in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo serve to emphasize the need to work towards a sustainable solution. It
is important to find a comprehensive approach to address the root causes of conflict.
Greater focus should be placed on enhancing dialogue between communities and
addressing socioeconomic issues and the illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural
resources. We also support efforts relating to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, as well as security sector reform programmes.
Secondly, we would like to reiterate the importance of deepening regional
cooperation, which will also contribute to peace and security. As we have all
witnessed, stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region has
benefited from meaningful cooperation among countries. We would like to welcome
the commitments made by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and his counterparts in
promoting cooperation and reconciliation in the region. In this regard, we salute
the contributions made by the Southern African Development Community, the
22/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

Economic Community of Central African States, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the African Union.
Last but not least, Viet Nam has full confidence in the role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and MONUSCO in favour of peace
and stability in the country. The close partnership between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO represents the vital need for
our support for the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome
MONUSCO’s close contact and cooperation with the President and various local
authorities to help address the root causes of conflict and develop targeted provincial
strategies for the protection of civilians.
We look forward to further discussions on the joint strategy for the transition
of MONUSCO and would like to stress the importance of preserving what we have
done our utmost to achieve in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

20-1353623/26

S/2020/987

Annex XII
Statement by the Minister Counsellor of the Permanent Mission of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations, Paul
Losoko Efambe Empole
[Original: English and French]
First of all, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its accession
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month of October 2020 and to
thank its delegation to the United Nations for taking the initiative to organize today’s
meeting concerning the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his determination and commitment to
the cause of my country. I would like to associate these thanks with all the members
of the Security Council for the attention they continue to pay to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My delegation took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) (S/2020/919) and thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, for briefing us on it. I also thank
Ambassador Abarry, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
his briefing.
Allow me to add the voice of my delegation to this discussion on the concerns
raised by the report of the Secretary-General and to make a few comments, mainly
on the security, humanitarian, human rights and economic situation in my country.
The security situation, which has remained generally calm, has nevertheless
been marked by attacks carried out by remaining and still active armed groups and
other militias in the east of our national territory. In flagrant violation of human
rights, these armed groups continue to attack MONUSCO peacekeepers, the civilian
population and the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
in well-identified localities in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. They
commit kidnappings, massacres and killings — often in reprisal against civilians.
As we have repeatedly reminded the Council, the conflicts imposed by the armed
groups in this part of my country have caused significant loss of human life, massive
destruction of property and infrastructure and numerous violations of human rights.
Worryingly, some of these groups, which showed signs of losing steam after
the recent offensive launched by the FARDC, are unfortunately resuming recruiting
young people into their ranks. This represents a real danger for the future — one
that we must quickly stop; youth must be used for building the future of the country,
not for its destruction. In this regard, the FARDC is determined to continue its
offensives, with the support of its partners, including MONUSCO, until the complete
eradication of these negative forces.
Furthermore, and as described in paragraph 11 of the report before us today,
looting and control over natural resources increasingly seems to be the main
motivation behind these conflicts and the proliferation of armed groups in the east
of my country. Indeed, as stated by His Excellency Mr. Félix Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo, President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, these armed groups,
which are engaging in unconventional and asymmetrical warfare, have the means that
allow them to continue their activities, and these means often come from the illicit
exploitation of natural resources flowing outside the Democratic Republic of the
Congo through well-established networks and with the help of certain accomplices.
24/26

20-13536

S/2020/987

In this context, my delegation would like to reiterate the appeal launched by
the President of the Republic to the international community through the General
Assembly for appropriate, targeted and effective sanctions against these armed
groups, networks and other accomplices, which, through their harmful activities,
are destroying all our efforts aimed at conservation and the sustainable management
of biodiversity and the protected areas located in the east of our country. It is true
that it will be very difficult to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to completely
neutralize these armed groups without eradicating their sources of supply and
support, namely, these networks and other accomplices.
My country’s Government welcomes the support of MONUSCO, in particular
the logistical facilities provided to the FARDC and the Congolese national police in
their effort to restore order and security. My Government also welcomes the ongoing
collaboration between its experts and those of MONUSCO in their discussions
within the framework of the dialogue on, and strategic review of, the transformation
of the United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
as also underlined by the Head of State, prior to agreement on the final contours
of the future of MONUSCO on the national territory, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo wishes to see the strengthening of collaboration within MONUSCO
units and with the FARDC on the ground during the period when MONUSCO is
preparing its departure, so that the firepower expected to protect the population and
restore peace, security and the full authority of the State over the entire national
territory, including in localities where the presence of armed groups is still visible,
is effective. In the meantime, the Government is also continuing to explore, with the
help of certain partners, the options for non-military solutions for dealing with both
national and foreign armed groups in order to bring peace definitively to the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is a constant concern for
the Government, which guarantees respect for freedoms linked to the democratic
space and which strives to strengthen its action in the fight against impunity,
unethical acts and human rights abuses, including the fight against sexual violence
and in favour of access to justice for victims, the improvement of prison conditions,
the professional supervision of public demonstrations and the resolution of
intercommunal violence, in particular through the creation and implementation of
transitional justice mechanisms. It is with this objective in mind that the country’s
Agency for the Prevention and the Fight against Trafficking in Persons, the National
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and the Agency for the Prevention and Fight
against Corruption were created, with a view to strengthening policies to prevent
corruption among those in charge of the executive and the private sectors and to put
an end to certain bad practices in the management of public affairs.
With respect to the rights of women — and of young girls in particular —
the Government has been tirelessly stepping up efforts aimed at promoting and
protecting them, in particular by combating all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence through the promulgation of several legal and administrative instruments.
In addition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be happy to see the United
Nations and the contributing countries concerned follow up on investigating the
allegations of sexual abuse of Congolese girls and women committed by MONUSCO
peacekeepers, in accordance with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on
this matter.
In the context of the fight against violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed against children in territories affected by conflicts, a
road map has been drawn up with a view to putting an end to recruitment and the use
of children in armed groups and ensuring their protection against sexual violence.
20-1353625/26

S/2020/987

With this road map, which has been signed by a dozen commanders of armed groups,
more than 553 children have been freed from the hands of the warlords.
The humanitarian situation remains dire in the east of the country, as does the
security situation following the multidimensional crisis triggered by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic as well as by the numerous displacements of
populations fleeing atrocities in conflict zones. Moreover, as was stated in the
Security Council meeting held on 17 September 2020 on this subject (S/2020/930),
and specifically in connection with the follow-up to resolution 2417 (2018), after
decades of armed conflict, the escalation of violence is again driving worrisome
levels of food insecurity and hunger in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
For its part, and in order to meet the varied and complex challenges that have
been brought about by the pandemic in the health, economic and security sectors,
the Government has set up a multisectoral committee and a technical secretariat that
have developed a structured response plan against COVID-19 and an emergency
multisectoral programme to mitigate the impacts of the pandemic, which was
launched by the President of the Republic on 18 June 2020. It is through these efforts
that my country has been able to reduce the case fatality rate of the pandemic from
10 per cent in the early days of the outbreak to less than 2.5 per cent today.
As stated by the Secretary-General in paragraph 8 of his report, the economic
situation has been further weakened by the collateral effects of the coronavirus
pandemic. Indeed, the current context marked by COVID-19 represents a real
challenge that slows the pace of achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Also, as I just mentioned, the Government has developed an emergency multisectoral
programme to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 in order to cushion the shock
associated with the health crisis on the socioeconomic environment and to support
the revival of economic activity. In addition, in order to stabilize the situation, the
Government signed a stability pact with la Banque Centrale du Congo, which has
already started to bear fruit.
With regard to the 1533 Committee, the Government took note of the
appointment in July of the new team from the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and intends to work in close collaboration with the 1533
Committee and the new team for the fulfilment of their mandates, with a view to
seeing an improvement in the situation in the country.
I would like to reaffirm the determination of the President of the Republic and
the entire Government of my country to put an end to the vicious circle of armed
conflict and insecurity in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and to bring
about a return to normal life in that part of the national territory and the region
after more than two decades of conflicts. To that end, they would like to count on
the support of all partners without distinction, including the United Nations and the
Security Council, in the achievement of this objective.
Finally, I could not take the floor today without saluting the memory of all those
who have lost their lives for this cause, in particular the MONUSCO peacekeepers.

26/26

20-13536
