UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/36
11 December 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3953rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 December 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of
31 August 1998 (S/PRST/1998/26) on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It remains deeply concerned about the continuing conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which threatens peace, security and
stability in the region, and about its grave humanitarian consequences.
"The Security Council reaffirms the obligation to respect the
territorial integrity, political independence and national sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other States in the region,
including the obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations. It also
reaffirms the need for all States to refrain from any interference in each
other’s internal affairs, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
"The Security Council, in this context, calls for a peaceful solution
to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including an
immediate ceasefire, the orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces,
arrangements for security along the international borders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the re-establishment of the authority of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the whole territory
of the country, and the initiation of an all-inclusive national
reconciliation process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo which fully
respects the equality and rights of all, irrespective of ethnic origin, and
of a political process which leads to the early holding of democratic, free
and fair elections.
"The Security Council expresses its support for the regional mediation
process begun by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of the
Southern African Development Community, and currently led by the President

98-39154 (E)

111298

/...

S/PRST/1998/36
English
Page 2

of Zambia, takes note of the steps, including the establishment of the
ad hoc liaison committee, that have been taken towards a peaceful
settlement of the conflict and encourages the President of Zambia to
continue his efforts.
"The Security Council welcomes in particular the initiative taken by
the Secretary-General at the Twentieth Conference of Heads of State of
Africa and France, held in Paris from 26 to 28 November 1998, to bring
about an end to the conflict and reach an immediate, unconditional
ceasefire. The Council welcomes the public commitments made in Paris in
this regard by the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Presidents of Uganda and Rwanda and the Presidents and heads of delegation
of Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola and Chad. It strongly urges them to give
effect to these commitments. To that end, the Council calls on all the
parties concerned to participate at the highest level possible in the
upcoming summit to be held in Lusaka on 14 and 15 December 1998, and urges
them to work in a constructive and flexible spirit with a view to the
signing of a ceasefire agreement as a matter of urgency. The Council also
encourages participants at the meeting of the central organ of the OAU, in
Ouagadougou on 17 and 18 December 1998, to use this opportunity to take
urgent steps towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
"The Security Council is prepared to consider, in the light of efforts
towards peaceful resolution of the conflict, the active involvement of the
United Nations, in coordination with OAU, including through concrete,
sustainable and effective measures, to assist in the implementation of an
effective ceasefire agreement and in an agreed process for a political
settlement of the conflict.
"The Security Council condemns any violations of human rights and
humanitarian law, including acts of and incitement to ethnic hatred and
violence by all parties. It urges all parties to respect and protect human
rights and respect humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and the Additional Protocols of 1977, as applicable to them, and
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of
1948.
"The Security Council notes with particular concern that the worsening
of tension is resulting in a deterioration of the food situation for the
civilian population and an increase in the flow of refugees and displaced
persons. In this context, the Council reiterates its call for safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian agencies to all those in need in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and once again urges all parties to
guarantee the safety and security of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel.
"The Security Council also reaffirms the importance of holding, at the
appropriate time, an international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region under the auspices of the United
Nations and OAU.

/...

S/PRST/1998/36
English
Page 3

"The Security Council strongly encourages the Secretary-General to
continue to work actively with the Secretary-General of OAU and with all
the parties concerned to help find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
conflict. It requests him to keep it informed about efforts to achieve a
peaceful solution and to make recommendations on a possible role of the
United Nations to this end.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
