S/PV.7096

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7096th meeting

Monday, 20 January 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Judeh .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Estreme
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Asselborn
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cho Tae-yul
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nibishaka
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-20976 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1420976*

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Secretary-General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important meeting on the situation
in the Middle East.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General and the ministers and
other representatives present at today’s meeting. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of Brazil,
Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Guatemala, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco,
Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

2/32

20/01/2014

Before I start, let me say just a few words on the
situation regarding the talks on Syria. Participants
will be aware of the latest developments concerning
the Geneva conference on Syria. Intensive and urgent
discussions are under way, and I will have more to say
about the situation later in the day. For the moment, let
me just appeal again to all involved to keep the needs of
the Syrian people foremost in mind.
I have just returned from the region and my fifth
visit to Iraq. The country is again facing serious threats
to its stability. I discussed my concerns with many
Iraqi leaders and urged all sides to remain committed
to political dialogue and to uphold respect for the rule
of law and human rights. I was reassured by their
pledge to hold parliamentary elections as scheduled
on 30 April. Today, I reiterate my message to the
Iraqi political leaders to fulfil their responsibilities to
ensure inclusive dialogue, social cohesion and concrete
political progress.
I also visited Kuwait. I am extremely grateful to
the many countries that pledged generous funding
at the Second International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference on Syria. In addition, I had a meeting
with the emir of Kuwait, and I am encouraged by the
improving bilateral relations between his country
and Iraq. We also discussed the implementation of
resolution 2107 (2013).
Turning to Lebanon, I commend President Sleiman’s
leadership in upholding the country’s disassociation
policy. That is vital to prevent the Syrian crisis from
exacerbating tensions in Lebanon, as we have seen with
the recent acts of terrorism and bombings. Nine years
after the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri, last week’s opening of the trial of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon is a reminder of the fight to end
impunity in Lebanon.
Violations of Lebanon’s border with Syria continue,
including a worrying escalation of rocket firing and
airstrikes into Lebanon’s Bekaa region. Refugees
continue to cross into Lebanon in large numbers, now
totalling over 860,000 — a sixfold increase over last
year.
The situation in the area of operation of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remains relatively

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

stable thanks to the cooperation of the Lebanese and
Israeli authorities to contain recent incidents. All must
build on the stability that has prevailed along the Blue
Line under resolution 1701 (2006).
The Security Council and the International Support
Group for Lebanon have called for generous support for
the humanitarian response and stabilization efforts, as
well as for the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia has pledged $3 billion in assistance to
the Lebanese army.
I welcome the momentum to form a Government,
and encourage all parties to ensure that presidential
elections are held on time. The people of Lebanon look
to their leaders to work together to steer their country
through this difficult time.
The year 2014 will be decisive in helping Israelis
and Palestinians draw back from a perilous and
unsustainable status quo. United States Secretary
of State Kerry has worked diligently to lay out a
framework on all core issues to address Israeli and
Palestinian aspirations in a fair and balanced manner
and to allow for continued negotiations towards a final
status agreement. I also pay special tribute to Jordan for
its essential role.
Israeli and Palestinian leaders will be required
to make bold decisions and painful compromises
for peace. They must prepare their peoples for these
necessary steps. The failure of political progress could
fuel a downward spiral on the ground. I am alarmed by
recurrent violence and incitement on all sides, as well
as by continued settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law. Building settlements is not
consistent with building a long-lasting peace agreement.
Both parties must act responsibly and with restraint.
Gaza also remains a cause for concern. Ultimately, a
sustainable two-State solution will require Palestinians
to overcome their divisions.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) will
begin 2014 with an expected end-of-year shortfall of
$67 million under its regular budget. I encourage all
Member States to explore ways to strengthen their
cooperation with UNRWA and provide additional
funding, in particular to its regular budget.
I hope that the parties will reach a framework
understanding. It must be fair and consistent with
principles on all core issues outlined in Security

S/PV.7096

Council resolutions, the Madrid principles — including
land for peace — the road map and the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative. Palestinians must be able to realize their
legitimate aspirations to statehood, self-determination,
dignity and freedom, including an end to the occupation
that began in 1967, with a just solution to the plight
of refugees and a resolution of the status of Jerusalem.
Israelis must be able to live in peace and security within
recognized borders, paving the way for their increasing
integration in a stable and secure region.
The realization of the Arab Peace Initiative will
yield socioeconomic, trade, and security benefits for
all the peoples of the Middle East. For Palestinians, a
comprehensive peace settlement holds the promise of
becoming a fully recognized Member State of equal
standing. There is no substitute for negotiations to
achieve this end. Only then can the United Nations
relationship with Palestine be truly transformed so
as to fully implement and complete the Palestinian
statebuilding agenda.
For Israel, too, only a negotiated solution will bring
security and recognition in the region and beyond.
Israel would be in a position to reap the full benefits
of all forms of cooperation within the United Nations
system. The United Nations and its Members would,
in turn, greatly benefit from what Israel has to offer.
I do not underestimate the difficulties, but the risks of
inaction or surrender are far greater. We face possibly
the last attempt to salvage the two-State solution. Quite
simply, this is too important to fail.
My message to President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu is clear. If they are prepared to take the bold
decisions required, I will push ahead on the positive
agenda of peace dividends for both sides and ensure
that the United Nations works towards realizing the
legitimate aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples within the framework of a comprehensive
regional settlement. We must make the most of the
prospect that Secretary Kerry has unlocked in order
to see the creation of two States living side by side in
peace and security that their peoples so desperately
desire and deserve.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement. I appreciate his
commitment and diplomatic activities. In the light of
ongoing events, I understand that he will now have to
leave the Chamber. I therefore wish him every success
in his good offices today.

14-209763/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank Mr. Nasser
Judeh, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, for
presiding over this meeting, and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I reaffirm the State of
Palestine’s gratitude for the principled efforts they have
respectively and consistently exerted for peace and a
just solution to the question of Palestine.
It is with immense pride that we see Jordan assume
the presidency of the Security Council, and we convey
our congratulations and wishes for success during its
tenure. Likewise, we extend sincerest congratulations
to the other new non-permanent members — Chad,
Chile, Lithuania and Nigeria — confident in their
adherence to the Charter and abilities to fulfil the
serious responsibilities of this organ, including
vis-à-vis the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which is the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and the goal of a just,
comprehensive solution, which is a matter central to
international peace and security.
On this occasion, we also express congratulations
to the outgoing members of the Council — Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo — on the
completion of their tenure, and reaffirm our appreciation
for the principled positions they have taken regarding
Palestine during the Council’s deliberations over the
past two years. I also welcome the ministers who are
among us today to participate in this deliberation.
Today, 20 January, is being observed in the United
States in commemoration of the life of the great civil
rights leader, Martin Luther King, Jr. Mr. King’s
wisdom inspired and transformed a generation, changed
the course of history, and continues to inspire today.
We recall today his declaration that
“[i]njustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere. We are caught in an inescapable
network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of
destiny. Whatever affects one directly, affects all
indirectly”.
This principle lies at the heart of the United
Nations aim to promote peace, security, human rights,
development and dignity for all peoples. It is a principle
acutely applicable to the injustice that continues to be
borne by the Palestinian people — an injustice that has
harmed our people, our region and global aspirations to
peace, security and friendly relations among nations.

4/32

20/01/2014

This is why the Palestine question has remained on
the United Nations agenda for nearly seven decades. That
is why the General Assembly has repeatedly affirmed
the permanent responsibility of the United Nations
until the question is justly resolved. That is also why
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People is annually observed on 29 November. And it
is why the Assembly rightly proclaimed 2014 as the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People.
The grave impact of this conflict — and, conversely,
the multitude of benefits that a peaceful solution would
have for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, the Middle
East and the international community as a whole — are
facts widely recognized. That was recently echoed
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry, who
continues to expend tireless efforts, along with the
Arab Ministerial Follow-up Committee, the Quartet
members — the European Union, the Russian Federation
and the United Nations — and many countries from
all over the globe in support of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations and a peaceful settlement. Secretary Kerry
has stated that
“[t]he stakes here are much bigger than just Israel
and Palestine. This is a conflict that is felt around
the world. It is a conflict that has implications with
every leader I have met anywhere in the world as
Secretary of State or a Senator.
“And President Obama is determined that the
United States of America and his Administration
will do everything in our power to exhaust the
possibilities of finding that peace.”
We recognize and commend that serious engagement
by the international community, and we urge that this
support be translated into intensified efforts for the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
during this year. As negotiations are ongoing between
Palestine and Israel, the international community and
the Council have clear responsibilities and cannot
remain on the sidelines. For decades, time, energy
and resources have been heavily invested towards the
realization of a two-State solution based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. Now
is the time to follow-through on that investment with
political will and courage.
of

The long-standing consensus on the parameters
the solution must be reaffirmed, not set

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aside — completely ending the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967; achieving the independence of the State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security based on
the pre-1967 borders; and ensuring a just solution to
the Palestine refugee problem based on the relevant
resolutions, including General Assembly resolution 194
(III).
The Security Council has a duty to ensure respect
for its resolutions, which form the backbone of a fair
and sustainable solution. The welcomed international
pledges to support and ensure the implementation of a
future peace agreement are surely based on the premise
that this will be a lasting peace, not one that does
not survive as more than ink on paper. That requires
respect for the principles of a just solution of all core
issues — refugees, Jerusalem, borders, settlements,
security, water and prisoners. It is vital that the
international community stand by those principles and
persuade Israel, the occupying Power, to respect them.
That is what will facilitate a permanent agreement and
guarantee its viability. And, in the immediate present,
that is what will foster an environment conducive to
credible negotiations, real progress and the ultimate
achievement of our collective goals.
On our part, the Palestinian Government and
people are committed to peace and justice and are
exhausting all efforts, conducting ourselves on the
basis of international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Council, the wellknown parameters of the peace process and the
agreements reached from 1993 onwards. We have
responsibly participated in all stages, rounds and
initiatives of the peace process for more than 20 years,
including the current negotiations. And we are doing so
on the basis of historic compromise and great sacrifice.
Yet the challenges we face on the ground are
formidable. Mistrust, cynicism and despair are rising
among the Palestinian people, as they continue to
witness and endure illegal Israeli practices, which, far
from bringing an end to the occupation, are further
entrenching it, deforming the two-State solution,
impeding socioeconomic development, inflicting vast
human suffering and diminishing the hopes that the
current peace process will lead to the realization of
their freedom and rights.
Since the resumption of negotiations, Israel
has announced plans to construct more than 7,600

S/PV.7096

settlement units, along with the construction under way
on thousands more units throughout the occupied State
of Palestine, including in and around East Jerusalem.
Israel is also continuing the construction of its wall,
destroying the contiguity of our land with such illegal
colonization measures. Israel is almost daily continuing
military raids in Palestinian areas, perpetuating
the violent, destructive face of the occupation.
Palestinian civilians continue to be killed and injured
by the occupying forces. Settler terrorism is rampant.
Provocations against Christian and Muslim holy sites,
including at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and Al-Aqsa Mosque,
in occupied East Jerusalem, persist, inflaming religious
sentiments and high tensions.
Moreover, despite the welcomed release of longterm Palestinian prisoners, during 2013 alone at least
4,553 Palestinians, including children, were arrested or
detained, adding to the ranks of the more than 5,000
Palestinians currently in Israeli jails. Also, Israel
demolished at least 200 Palestinian homes in the past
year, forcibly displacing hundreds of people. And the
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip continues to deepen
the isolation, poverty and humanitarian hardships of
our people, particularly our vulnerable refugees, whose
subsistence has been almost totally reliant on the
support of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
None of that engenders confidence in, or popular
backing for, the negotiations. On the contrary, the
continuation of Israel’s illegal actions and provocative
declarations further destabilize the situation and poison
the atmosphere, obstructing progress and preventing
peace from taking root on the ground and in the hearts
and minds of our peoples.
Of course, making peace requires negotiations. But
making peace also requires respect for international
law and requires a change in mentality, behavior and
discourse, consistent with the goals of the peace process
and essential for preparing the public for new realities.
The negotiations cannot be an objective in themselves
or be used as cover to perpetuate the status quo.
There must be an immediate halt to Israel’s
settlement activities and its attempts to assert control
over more territory, whether in Jerusalem, the Jordan
Valley or elsewhere, as well as a halt to the arrest of
Palestinian civilians, the demolition of homes and the
forced displacement of Palestinian families, and all
policies of collective punishment against our people,

14-209765/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

including in Gaza. That is imperative for creating trust
and an appropriate environment for negotiating an end
to the conflict, whereby the independent, sovereign and
contiguous State of Palestine and the State of Israel can
coexist in peace and security and just solutions can be
reached on all outstanding core issues.
A lasting solution must be founded on respect for
international law and human rights. Peace and security
cannot take root in the absence of those elements, as
justice and rights are essential for peace to prevail
anywhere. Therefore, in reaffirming Palestine’s
commitment to a peace based on two States, we reaffirm
also our commitment to redressing the injustice borne
by our people and fulfilling their national aspirations
and rights, including the right to return and the right to
self-determination.
The Palestinian leadership is acutely aware of
this moment’s significance and, despite the Israeli
obstructions, is negotiating in good faith. If the
opportunity for peace before us is lost, it will not be
for a lack of effort by Palestine or by the international
community, including the Arab States, whose historic
Peace Initiative stands and is backed by intensive efforts,
including the support of the 57 member countries of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Should Israel
choose to persist with colonization, annexation and
oppression rather than choosing the path of peace, the
response by the international community, including the
Council, must be firm and based on the law and the
global consensus on the conflict. The message to Israel
must be clear: illegal actions entail consequences, and
Israel will be held responsible should its actions lead to
the collapse of peace efforts and the two-State solution.
Once again, before concluding, I must convey our
grave concerns about the tragic situation of Palestinian
refugees in Syria. As the conflict rages, our refugees,
like other civilians in the country, continue to suffer
death, injury, destruction and displacement, even
including the starvation to death of children, women
and men. The plight of thousands of Palestinian
refugees trapped in the Yarmouk camp is shocking
and inhumane. It is a humanitarian catastrophe. We
urgently appeal for humanitarian access to the camp
and to all civilians suffering in the conflict, in line with
international law.
This crisis reconfirms the extreme vulnerability of
the Palestinian refugees and the need for a just solution
to their plight in the context of any peace agreement and

6/32

20/01/2014

of regional peace. We commend the efforts of UNRWA
and other humanitarian organizations that are providing
emergency aid to the Palestinian refugees in Syria and
to those who have fled to Lebanon, Jordan and other
countries. As the Geneva Conference approaches, we
appeal for the exertion of maximum efforts to ensure
the protection of all civilians in Syria, including the
Palestinian refugees, and to find a political solution to
end this horrific conflict.
I thank you, Mr. President, and the SecretaryGeneral and the members of the Council, including the
Ministers of Luxembourg and the Republic of Korea,
for participating in the meeting and for their attention
to these important matters.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Before I begin, I want to
express Israel’s condolences on the death of United
Nations personnel in Friday’s terrorist attack in Kabul.
There is no excuse for targeting civilians and United
Nations workers.
Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
Jordan on its election to the Security Council. We
thank the Secretary-General, Foreign Minister Judeh,
Mr. Jean Asselborn and Vice-Minister Cho Tae-yul
for being here today. We also congratulate the new
non-permanent members — Chad, Chile, Lithuania
and Nigeria — on joining the Council. As ambassadors,
they are privileged to represent their countries in the
Chamber, and I wish them luck.
The Middle East is known as the cradle of
civilization — the birth place of history’s greatest
empires and three world religions. The region was once
admired for its inspiring art, striking architecture and
significant innovations. Today, the world looks at the
Middle East and sees a region shaken by violence. From
the Arabian Sea to the Mediterranean Sea, not a day goes
by when we do not read about brutality and bloodshed,
or new threats looming on the horizon. Amid that sea of
hostility, Israel is an island of stability and democracy.
It is a nation in which the majority governs, but the
minority enjoys equal rights, a nation that embraces
diversity and welcomes diverse opinions, a nation that
leads the world in human rights and encourages women
to be leaders.
Israel is proud of its democracy and yearns for
peace with its neighbours and security on its borders.

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7096

The people of Israel are still mourning the loss of
their legendary statesman and soldier, Ariel Sharon.
He was a fearless leader who knew the heavy price of
war and was willing to take bold steps for peace. The
State of Israel is still willing to take courageous steps
for peace and is committed to serious and meaningful
negotiations with the Palestinians. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the United States, in particular
Secretary Kerry for his tireless devotion to promoting
peace in our region.

Is that mutual respect? Grieving Israelis watched as
Palestinians celebrated men like Abu Harbish, who
threw a firebomb at a bus, murdering 26-year-old Rachel
Weiss and her three young children. To everyone in the
Chamber I ask, How would you feel if you had to watch
your family’s murderers being celebrated? Would you
call into question the so-called peaceful intentions of
your neighbours? President Abbas could learn a great
deal from King Hussein of Jordan about demonstrating
his commitment to making peace.

Twenty years ago, I recall watching King Hussein
and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin meet in the Arava
Desert to sign the historic peace treaty between our two
countries. At the signing, King Hussein said,

Since peace talks began in July, hundreds of
examples of Palestinian incitement against Israelis and
Jews have occurred. From cradles to kindergartens and
from schools to soccer stadiums, Palestinian children
are besieged by messages of hate. They are born in
hospitals named after violent Palestinian groups, attend
schools named after terrorists and are taught from
textbooks that equate Zionism with racism. In their free
time, Palestinian children play on sports teams named
after murderers and watch television programmes that
teach that Jews are “our enemies and should be killed.”

“This is a peace with commitment. This is our gift
to our peoples and the generations to come.”
Fifteen years after his death, King Hussein’s legacy
of peace lives on. Israelis from across the political
and religious spectrum still admire King Hussein’s
towering morality and his profound belief in the
sanctity of life and the dignity of every human being.
I and most Israelis will never forget the sight of King
Hussein consoling the Israeli families whose children
had been killed in a terrorist attack. After learning
that a Jordanian soldier had murdered seven Israeli
schoolgirls, King Hussein travelled to Israel to visit the
homes of the bereaved families. One by one, he sat with
the grieving parents, held their hands, offered words of
condolence and hugged and kissed them. King Hussein
told them,
“I feel that if there is anything left in life, it will
be to ensure that all the children enjoy the kind of
peace and security that we never had in our times.”
That is the legacy that his son, King Abdullah, proudly
continues today.
Contrast that picture with a picture from just a few
weeks ago. In December, Israel once again made the
heartbreaking decision to release convicted Palestinian
terrorists in an effort to advance the peace process.
The released terrorists were given a heroes’ welcome
by the Palestinians and embraced by President Abbas.
Murderers were met with fireworks and festivities
and showered with candies and congratulations. The
Palestinian Authority (PA) is rewarding terrorists
with tens of thousands of dollars. The motto of the
PA’s pension plan seems to be “the more you slay, the
more we pay.” Is that coexistence? Is that tolerance?

Rather than condemning that incitement, the
Palestinian Authority is amplifying the messages of
intolerance. President Abbas’ Fatah party regularly
displays maps that erase Israel. In one map, for example,
the Palestinian flag flies over the entire geographic
area of the State of Israel. This map extends from the
Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River and is entitled
“Palestine”. In a speech on Christmas day, President
Abbas declared that Jesus was a “Palestinian messenger”
and suggested that Israel was to blame for the exodus
of Christians from the Holy Land. That is a blatant
attempt to rewrite history and erase any connection
between the Jewish people and the land of Israel. Today
we are witnessing a mass exodus of Christians from the
Palestinian territories and the Arab world because of
the constant persecution and discrimination that they
face by the Arab States. Abbas’s made-up maps and
mythical accounts could join the fables of the book The
Thousand and One Nights.
We have already lost an entire generation to
incitement. How many more children will grow up
being taught hatred instead of peace, violence instead
of tolerance, and martyrdom instead of mutual
understanding? The international community must
finally confront Palestinian leaders and publically
demand an end to incitement.
The glorification of terrorists, combined with
unrelenting messages of hatred, are having deadly

14-209767/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

consequences. In 2013, there were 1,500 attacks against
Israelis, 700 of which occurred after peace negotiations
had begun in July. In recent months there has been
a sharp increase in terrorist attacks, including the
murder of five Israelis. Just last month, a Palestinian
sniper murdered 20-year-old Saleh Abu Latif, an Israeli
Bedouin civilian. Two days later, a bomb exploded on
a civilian bus in a suburb just outside Tel Aviv. Had it
not been for the quick thinking of the bus driver and
an alert passenger, dozens of people would have been
killed. A successful attack could have had disastrous
consequences for the peace talks.
In the face of the violence and bloodshed, we
have yet to hear President Abbas and the Palestinian
Authority utter a single word denouncing those attacks.
They even remained silent when it was revealed that
one of the bus bombers was, surprisingly, a member of
the Palestinian police force. While most police forces
have officers that uproot terrorism, that police officer
was busy planting bombs.
The Palestinian leadership has yet to learn that real
peace requires real commitment. You cannot condemn
terrorism to international media and congratulate
terrorists on Palestinian media. You cannot victimize
others and then insist that you are the victim. And you
cannot use this forum to spread destructive messages
and then expect constructive results.
How many times have we heard that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is the major conflict in the Middle
East, and that if we solve that conflict we will solve
all of the conflicts in the Middle East? Some in this
Chamber have even repeated that fiction. Really? The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the major conflict in the
Middle East? Wow. People who say that need an eye
doctor to help them to see clearly — beginning, maybe,
with the ophthalmologist from Damascus, Bashar
al-Assad, who is butchering his people every day. I am
sure that is really connected to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Shiites fighting Sunnis fighting Alawites;
extremist groups battling one another in Libya, Yemen
and Tunisia; Al-Qaida forces overrunning major cities
in Iraq — all of that is, of course, caused by the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. That is a revelation. The truth is
that Israel is an island of stability in a sea of tyranny.

20/01/2014

done — how desert land can be transformed into
an oasis of brotherhood and democracy. Peace for
Israel means security, and that security must be a
reality”.
I think it should be obvious that the violence and
instability afflicting the Middle East have nothing to
do with Israel. We must solve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict on its own merits because it is important for
us. Solving the conflict is not a prescription for curing
the epidemic of violence plaguing the Middle East.
Despite what is constantly heard, the core of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict has never been about borders or
settlements. The major obstacle to peace remains the
refusal of the Palestinian leaders to accept the Jewish
State in any border. We will never hear President Abbas
or any Palestinian leader utter the phrase “two States
for two peoples”.
Let me understand that. The Palestinians call for an
independent Palestinian State, but want millions of their
people to flood the Jewish State. It will never happen.
It is a complete non-starter. Many in this Chamber are
very vocal in telling Israel what to do, but begin to
stutter, mumble and fall silent when it comes to telling
the Palestinians what they must do. Each and every one
present here must tell the Palestinians that there will
never be peace as long as they refuse to recognize Israel
as the nation State of the Jewish people and insist on a
so-called right of return.
Despite what many believe, Israel dedicates a
great deal of its energy and resources to assisting
the Palestinian people. Today, more than 100,000
Palestinians earn their living in Israel and their income
constitutes more than 10 per cent of the Palestinian gross
domestic product. Israel helps generate solutions to
energize the Palestinian economy. We transfer millions
of dollars in electricity, water and natural gas to power
Palestinian homes, schools and hospitals. When a giant
storm struck last month, Israel delivered humanitarian
aid and water pumps and facilitated the passage of fuel
and cooking gas to Palestinians in need.

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., whose legacy is being
celebrated today, once described Israel as

Yet for every truckload in the name of coexistence,
we seem to be feeding a Palestinian opposition that
challenges our very existence. It is time for Palestinians
leaders to lead; it is time for them to set a course
towards coexistence; and it is time for them to build the
Palestinian people up, rather than to tear Israel down.

“one of the great outposts of democracy in the
world and a marvellous example of what can be

The Middle East is plagued by a reign of tyrants and
a drought in leadership. Millions of people have taken

8/32

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the streets demanding better lives, better economies
and greater opportunities. The first peaceful protests
in the region were in the streets of Tehran, where the
Government brutalizes it citizens and throws innocent
people into jail. Many in the international community
believed that the new Iranian President would set a new
precedent. It has been almost six months since President
Rouhani took office, and Iran is still persecuting
minorities, imprisoning journalists and targeting
political adversaries. The Iranian Government has
executed more of its citizens, per capita, than any other
Government. Last year alone, the regime executed
almost 600 people, including 367 since President
Rouhani took office in August.
Iran does not confine its violence and extremism to
its own borders. From Buenos Aires to Burgas, Iran is
the world’s primary sponsor of terror. Just this month,
Iranian Foreign Minister Zarif paid tribute, on behalf of
the Islamic Republic, at the grave of one of Hizbullah’s
most notorious murderers. Rather than cleaning
house, the new President believes that he can sweep
Iran’s atrocities under the Persian rug by introducing
United Nations resolutions that condemn violence and
extremism. Iran’s so-called WAVE resolution, entitled
“A world against violence and violent extremism”
(resolution 68/127), may have made a splash at the
United Nations, but messages of intolerance and
violence continue to trickle down from the top.
Behind Iran’s smiling façade, President Rouhani
and Ayatollah Khamenei continue to preach hatred
and provoke hostility. Ayatollah Khamenei recently
appeared on State television and delegitimized Israel,
using disgusting profanity that does not bear repeating.
The ink is barely dry on the interim nuclear agreement
and Iran is already showing its true colours. It is a
regime that crosses red lines, produces yellow cake and
beats its citizens black and blue. Meanwhile, some in
the international community are willing to serve Iran
its yellow cake on a silver platter. Permitting Iran to
keep its enrichment capabilities today means that Iran
will retain its ability to break out and build a nuclear
bomb tomorrow.
Violence is encoded in the Iranian regime’s DNA.
It does not take a crime-scene investigator to see Iran’s
fingerprints on the violence erupting in parts of the
Middle East.
In the Gaza Strip, Iran backs the Hamas terrorist
organization, which uses Palestinian schools, hospitals
and mosques to launch rockets at Israeli citizens. We

S/PV.7096

are barely three weeks into the new year, and Hamas
has already launched 17 rockets at Israel, attacks that
have closed schools and kept tens of thousands of
children in southern Israel at home.
The international community has yet to find the
time to utter even a single word of condemnation of
those attacks, attacks that could derail the peace
process. It has also yet to condemn Hamas for
deliberately exploiting children. Schools in Gaza have
become the training ground for the next generation of
terrorists. Last week, Hamas graduated 13,000 students
from paramilitary camps geared at training children to
fight Israel.
In Lebanon, Iran has helped Hizbullah hijack the
Lebanese State and transform it into an outpost for
terror. For years, Hizbullah insisted that it needed a
private army to defend Lebanon against, of course,
Israel. Today, that army has sent 2,000 fighters to
butcher the Syrian people and shoot rockets into Israel.
Hizbullah has positioned 60,000 missiles and
rockets in the heart of southern Lebanon’s civilian
population. General Hajizadeh, a senior commander of
the Aero-Space Forces of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary
Guards Corps, recently boasted that Hizbullah had
improved its missile capabilities and could now hit and
destroy any target in Israel.
Hizbullah intentionally hides those missiles in the
basements of homes, in the playgrounds of schools and
in the back rooms of hospitals. In doing so, Hizbullah
is committing a double war crime: first, by using
Lebanese civilians as human shields and, secondly, by
targeting Israeli citizens.
The Government of Lebanon cannot continue to
ignore what is happening in southern Lebanon, and it
can no longer ignore its international obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006). Throughout December, armed
terrorists fired shots across the Blue Line into northern
Israel. In one incident, a member of the Lebanese
Armed Forces shot Israeli soldier Shlomi Cohen in a
ruthless and unprovoked attack.
It is time for the Council to hold accountable all
those who arm, train and harbour terrorists. It is time to
speak out against those who callously disregard human
life. As we have seen in Syria, the failure to do so has
disastrous consequences.
The war in Syria is approaching its fourth year,
and the death toll continues to climb. The Syrian

14-209769/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Government has resorted to new depths of brutality by
dropping barrel bombs packed with explosives, nails
and other shrapnel on markets and hospitals. In just a
few days, more than 700 people have been killed and
over 3,000 injured.
The State of Israel and the Jewish people are deeply
troubled by the suffering of the Syrian people and are
reaching out to help them. While some in the region
are aiding the murderous Al-Assad regime, Israel is
providing medical aid.
Sunnis, Alawites and Shiites are running to Israel,
the so-called enemy, because they know that Israel
will treat anyone without prejudice and regardless of
ethnicity, religion or gender. We will continue to lend
humanitarian assistance to the victims with open arms
and an open heart.
Today, the Middle East stands at a critical juncture.
There are two roads before us. The first is the future
offered by Iran and Syria, a future of more extremism
and greater violence. The second is the road towards
equality, reform and stability.
Study after study has shown that there is a clear
connection between advancing peace and advancing
equal rights. When a woman receives an education,
her children are healthier and more likely to get an
education. When a woman generates her own income,
she reinvests 90 per cent in her family and community.
But women can help drive a nation’s economy only if
they are allowed onto the driver’s seat.
As we begin the new year, the international
community must call upon Arab leaders to choose the
path of progress and abandon the road of repression.
Tell them that tyranny will fail, tell them that peace
is built on tolerance, and tell them that every man
and every woman is entitled to equal rights and equal
opportunities.
As Winston Churchill said, “All the great things
are simple, and many can be expressed in a single
word: freedom ... honour ... hope”. The international
community must stand on the side of human rights
and human dignity. We must speak up and speak out
so that the people of the Middle East can finally enjoy
freedom, honour and hope.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
and Expatriate Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan.

10/32

20/01/2014

I am honoured to preside over today’s meeting
of the Security Council on the item “The situation in
Middle East, including the Palestinian question”.
First, I would like to take the opportunity to express
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s appreciation
for the States Members of the United Nations for the
confidence they have shown my country by electing
it, almost unanimously, as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the 2014-2015 term. We
assure the Council that, God willing, we will prove that
we are worthy of that confidence, by working with a
spirit of cooperation and harmony with other members
of the Security Council, entrusted with the primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security on behalf of the international community.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al
Hussein, has a singular record of accomplishment,
for which the entire international community has
expressed appreciation. It is a record of relentless and
fruitful efforts to promote the purposes and principles
of the United Nations: achieving global harmony,
peace, justice, security and stability. Jordan has also
made remarkable contributions, distinguished by both
quality and quantity, to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in many regions of the world. I can assure
the Council today that we will continue to honour that
outstanding track record and will work diligently, with
a positive spirit, to build on those achievements.
Unfortunately, the Middle East region continues
to be gripped by chronic tensions with repercussions
and ramifications that threaten international peace and
security. That painful continuing reality has imposed on
the Council agenda the tradition of regularly convening
a special meeting on the Middle East, because the
situation in the region is a constant source of concern
owing to its direct impact on world peace.
We have no doubt that the continued absence of
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between the
Arabs and Israel is the source of most tensions in the
Middle East. Hence the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace would give rise to dynamics that
would lead to the elimination of other tensions in the
region. The key to a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace
lies in the implementation of the two-State solution,
with an independent and fully sovereign Palestinian
State established within the 1967 lines, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace and security

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and within secure borders with all countries in the
region, including Israel. Such a solution should be in
line with the relevant terms of reference adopted in this
regard, including the numerous resolutions adopted by
the Council, such as resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), in addition to the Arab
Peace Initiative, whose importance has been repeatedly
acknowledged by the Council.
Based on that conviction, we support the ongoing,
much-appreciated efforts led by the United States
and undertaken personally by its Secretary of State,
Mr. John Kerry, aimed at reaching a Palestinian-Israeli
agreement that adopts the two-State solution and
addresses all core issues, namely, refugees, Jerusalem,
security, borders, water and settlements, in accordance
with the aforementioned international terms of
reference and resolutions of international legitimacy.
We also deeply appreciate the efforts being made by
Secretary Kerry to ensure that an agreement is reached
by the bodies directly concerned and not by proxy. We
have consistently stressed this issue.
In that context, I deem it imperative to stress that
we in Jordan believe that the implementation of the twoState solution and the establishment of an independent
and fully sovereign Palestinian State within the June
1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital, constitute
a higher interest for Jordan. In fact, all of the core issues
directly affect higher, factual Jordanian interests. We
are the world’s largest host of Palestinian refugees,
and most of the refugees on our territory are Jordanian
citizens in addition to their status as refugees. The
protection and restoration of their legitimate rights,
as recognized by the international terms of reference
pertaining to the peace process, lies at the heart of our
responsibilities.
As a host country, we, in turn, have rights owing
to the burdens we have shouldered. Regarding East
Jerusalem, His Majesty King Abdullah II is ensuring
the maintenance and protection of Christian and Islamic
holy sites there, as part of the historical Hashemite
custodianship of East Jerusalem. We will continue to
play that role and to address all Israeli violations, which
continue in defiance of several resolutions issued by the
Security Council that stipulate that all Israeli actions in
occupied East Jerusalem are null and void and should
be halted immediately, and that the Israeli occupation
of East Jerusalem must end. Moreover, the world
rejects Israel’s settlement activity, which is illegal and
continues even as we speak. In addition, the issues of

S/PV.7096

security, borders and water directly affect the security
of Jordan and its interests.
Accordingly — and although we are not a party
to the negotiating process yet are a main party in the
context of the process as a whole — let me stress that
all agreements on the core issues should take into full
account and, indeed, meet Jordan’s vital and higher
interests. Our unyielding commitment to achieving
peace is based on our firm conviction that ending
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would lead to an end
to the broader Arab-Israeli conflict, which would, in
turn, result in the elimination of many other sources of
tension in the region. I cannot fail to point to the tragic
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in the Gaza Strip, and urge the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities
in that regard.
The tragic, bloody crisis in Syria continues to rage.
This bloodshed must stop immediately. Syria must work
to end the crisis there, especially since it has spilled
over beyond Syrian borders and now threatens regional
and international stability. That threat is associated not
only with displacement and an influx of refugees into
neighbouring countries, but also with the unrestrained
flow of people and weapons into Syria’s neighbours.
That has become an alarming phenomenon that poses
a real security threat to some of those countries, the
entire region and even beyond, as international peace
and security are at stake. We in Jordan are convinced
that a political solution is the only way to end this
tragedy.
The upcoming international conference to be
held in Montreux, Switzerland, is an opportunity that
should not be wasted to put this political solution on the
right track through the cessation of hostilities. Such a
political solution must meet the aspirations of the Syrian
people, for which so much blood has already been shed.
The envisioned political transition should immediately
lead, through a consensus among all parties, to the
establishment of an inclusive executive transitional
body representing the entire Syrian spectrum. It should
have full authority and act immediately to restore
social cohesion in Syria, with complete jurisdiction
over the entire territory of the country, in a manner
that ensures Syria’s territorial integrity and political
independence. Such a body should also have full
control and sovereignty over Syria’s weapons arsenals,
pave the way for a pluralistic and democratic political
system, and work to restore security and stability in

14-2097611/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/01/2014

order to encourage the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees in neighbouring countries, with
Jordan at the forefront. As the Council is aware, we
are currently hosting about 1.3 million Syrian citizens,
including nearly 600,000 who have been refugees
in Jordan since the outbreak of the crisis three years
ago. We are sharing with those brothers and sisters our
already limited resources, with the cost of their hosting
estimated at $1.7 billion for 2013. We anticipate the cost
to reach $2.8 billion in 2014.

Nevertheless, addressing the wave of extremism,
sectarian and religious tension and incitement in the
region is a challenge to regional security and stability,
as its effects can be seen to be spilling over into our
neighbouring countries, not just in Syria. It requires
us to make concerted efforts to counter such ideas.
Building on the Amman Message and the “A Common
Word” initiative, and under the guidance of His Majesty
King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein, we in Jordan have
embarked on an effort to address those phenomena.

We call upon the international community to
help us meet the challenge to which we have risen on
behalf of humankind. We have previously extended an
invitation to the Council to visit the camps so as to get
a close look at the situation on the ground. Moreover, I
wish to express our gratitude to the State of Kuwait and
to the Secretary-General for hosting the International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria. It could
be useful for the Security Council to adopt the results of
the aforementioned international conference when they
are achieved. It would also be useful if it were to adopt
a resolution that makes it mandatory for all parties to
implement those results. Let me take this opportunity
to express our appreciation for all who have made such
great efforts to facilitate the holding of this important
conference, particularly several States members of the
Security Council, namely the initiating countries, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America,
and others that have played an important role in that
regard.

In the context of that effort, an Islamic conference
was convened in Amman last summer, at which
participants voiced their complete rejection of the use
of and incitement to sectarian conflict. It was stressed
at the conference that the freedom of opinion and belief
and the sanctity of human blood were sacred. The
conference rejected the apostatizing approach and the
use of such practices in political conflict. The conference
was followed by another, entitled “Challenges facing
Christian Arabs”, at which His Majesty stressed that

There is no doubt that the unending conflict in the
Middle East and the unusual circumstances in some
countries of the region are all interlinked because they
have been unfolding in a time of war. Such circumstances
have produced internal tensions in some countries in our
region that in turn have led to practices that have fuelled
sectarian, ethnic and religious polarization, opened the
door wide to interference by external powers, incited
parties against each other and interfered in the internal
affairs of some countries in the region, driven by their
desire for hegemony and expansion. The result has been
a deepened state of polarization that is spilling over
into other countries. It poses a real threat to regional
and international peace and stability. It is therefore
the duty of all to firmly confront violence, extremism
and all forms of terrorism, as well as religious, ethnic
and sectarian polarization, and to tirelessly work to
eliminate the root causes of phenomena that threaten
internal and international stability.

12/32

“[w]e believe that the protection of the rights of
Christians is a duty rather than a favour. Arab
Christians have played a key role in building
Arab societies and defending the just causes of
our Nation [and that] “[w]e support every effort to
preserve the historical Arab Christian identity and
safeguard the right to worship freely, based on the
principle in both the Christian and Islamic faiths
that emphasizes the love of God and of neighbour,
as embodied in the ‘A Common Word’ initiative”.
Finally, I thank the Council again and reiterate that
Jordan, as the world has always known it to do, will
continue to work hard and earnestly for the development
of cooperation and cordial relations between the
countries of the world and its peoples. It will pursue its
approach and mission to enhance international security
and peace and counter isolationism, despair and hatred.
Jordan will tirelessly work to promote harmony and
respect among all nations and peoples, cultures and
civilizations. That will bring us together under the
umbrella of humanity, which is an ideal that will yield
the greatest benefits to all.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate Jordan on its election to

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Security Council, and on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, at a particularly
important juncture for the Middle East. Your presence
among us, Mr. President, highlights the significance of
this open debate, at the beginning of a crucial week for
efforts to end the conflict in Syria, the impact of which
represents a very heavy burden for your country and
the other neighbouring countries of Syria, above all for
Lebanon.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
I also thank the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements.
First, I would like to address the Middle East
peace process. There is today a historic opportunity
to build peace between Israelis and Palestinians. The
announcement six months ago of the resumption of
negotiations was an important first step. It is now
our shared responsibility to support the efforts of
the United States and the indefatigable commitment
of Secretary of State John Kerry in order to help the
parties take the difficult yet indispensable decisions to
realize the vision of the long-term interests of the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples. To succeed, the negotiations
process requires a favourable political environment and
measures that strengthen mutual trust. Some steps still
need to be taken. Unilateral acts that feed the logic of
distrust must cease.
The year 2013 ended on a positive note, with Israel’s
freeing of a third group of 26 Palestinian prisoners.
However, we remain deeply worried about the pursuit
of the Israeli settlement policy, which is illegal under
international law and represents a real threat to peace
and goes against the principle of good faith negotiations.
Nobody will believe that the efforts to achieve peace
can succeed if settlement activities continue, if the
Gaza blockade persists, if the separation wall keeps
on grabbing Palestinian land, and if the destruction of
Palestinian infrastructures intensifies.
We are also highly worried by the continuing rocket
attacks launched by certain Palestinian factions from
the Gaza strip against Israeli territory. Nothing justifies
that blind and unacceptable recourse to violence, which
clearly does not serve the Palestinian cause. We must
end every kind of provocation and respect the borders
of the Palestinian people and the security of the Israeli
population; both are closely intertwined.

S/PV.7096

The American initiative is probably the last
chance to end the occupation, implement the twoState solution based on the borders of 1967 and create
a sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, with Jerusalem as the capital of both
States. We must take advantage of this opportunity, and
Luxembourg will continue to engage with its European
Union partners to contribute to the ongoing efforts, in
close cooperation with key stakeholders, the Quartet
and the countries of the region.
The Secretary-General has just recalled the
objective of the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
which starts the day after tomorrow in Montreux — the
cessation of hostilities, an end to all violence and the
beginning of a political settlement on the basis of the full
and comprehensive implementation of the 30 June 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). That must
lead to the establishment of a transitional governing
body exercising full executive powers and formed on
the basis of mutual consent. We welcome the decision
taken on 18 January by the Syrian National Coalition
to attend the second Geneva Conference. I can only
encourage the Syrian National Coalition to maintain
the courageous position it has taken. I also call on Iran
to commit to playing a constructive role to put an end
to the Syrian conflict by explicitly signing onto the
implementation of the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012 and the establishment of a transitional governing
body exercising full executive powers, as called for in the
Secretary-General’s letter of invitation. The authorities
in Damascus must now allow the Syrian people to take
their destiny into their own hands, and they must stop
rejecting the principles of a political transition, which
were agreed in the Geneva communiqué.
The needs and rights of all Syrians must be taken
into account — in particular those of the Syrian women,
who, together with the children, have borne the brunt of
the repression since it started. With others, Luxembourg
is working towards the full participation of women in
the political transition process in Syria, in accordance
with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013). In order
for the negotiations process to lead to lasting peace, it is
indeed important that, from the beginning, women are
empowered to make their voices heard and express their
point of view, share their experiences, their concerns
and their specific needs.
The humanitarian and security challenges can be
resolved only through a negotiated political settlement

14-2097613/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the crisis. Faced with the spiral of violence that
threatens the region, however, we cannot wait for the
conclusion of a future political process, and we cannot
turn a blind eye to the long list of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, which bring Syria each day
closer to its destruction. Given the bombing of hospitals
and schools, the deliberate and indiscriminate attacks
against civilians and medical and health-care workers,
the targeting of pharmacies, the use of starvation as a
weapon of war to pressure the people of Ghouta, the
sieges and massacres, and the use of chemical weapons,
Scud missiles and barrel bombs, nothing seems to
be off-limits any more in Syria and a climate of total
impunity prevails. In the face of those horrors, I want
to repeat here what we have been saying for a year:
the Council must refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
The humanitarian crisis has reached catastrophic
proportions. We know this. More than 9 million
Syrians, about half the population of the country, are
in desperate need of emergency aid, in particular those
who are trapped in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
Confronted with that crisis, the world is mobilizing:
more than $2.4 billion in assistance was pledged at the
second conference held in Kuwait City on 15 January. I
personally participated in that conference to announce
a new contribution of Luxembourg representing an
increase of more than 60 per cent compared to our
pledge of 2013.
Unfortunately, the pledged aid will not be able
to achieve its aim if there is no progress in terms of
humanitarian access on the ground. Without immediate,
safe and unhindered access, the survival of half the
Syrian population is at stake. The same goes for the
Palestinians trapped in Yarmouk. The Syrian people
cannot be content with a few localized and fragile
ceasefires, or the liberation of a few political prisoners.
It cannot be content with concessions made here and
there by the authorities in Damascus when it is in their
strategic or political interest. The authorities must
respect their obligations and they must implement the
demands of the Council. Without significant progress in
terms of access, the Council will need, in our opinion,
to assume its responsibilities and adopt a humanitarian
resolution.
I shall conclude my statement by addressing the
situation in Lebanon. In the past months, the number
of deadly attacks have multiplied. I will mention only
the attack in Beirut on 27 December 2013, which cost

14/32

20/01/2014

the life of former Minister Mohamad Chatah, a man of
dialogue. That is a very worrying sign of the growing
impact of the Syrian conflict on the security and
stability of Lebanon. The very clear message sent by
the Council in its presidential statement of 10 July 2013
(S/PRST/2013/9) and in the numerous press statements
that followed remains more than ever valid today. That
message calls on all those who disregard the Baabda
Declaration to put an end to their actions, which
threaten the model of unity in diversity that is Lebanon.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate our support to
Lebanon, its institutions and its policy of dissociation.
Finally, I welcome the opening, on 16 January, before
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon of the trial in absentia
of four members of Hizbullah accused of assassinating
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005. I hope that
the trial will mark the beginning of the end of impunity
for the crimes committed in Lebanon.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): First of all,
I would like to express my deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for your devoted efforts in organizing
today’s open debate. Let me also extend my sincere
thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
comprehensive briefing.
During the final weeks of 2013 and the beginning
of the new year, critical developments have transpired
in the Middle East at a steady pace. Some are positive,
giving us cause for cautious optimism, while others
present uncertainties and concerns. The great Syrian
poet Adonis once wrote, “To whom do these distances
belong that separated us and that now bind us?” Indeed,
disagreements and differences among us are the very
origin of the challenges we face. At the same time,
such differences also highlight our interconnectedness
and push us towards a renewed resolve to address the
problems before us.
We welcome the second Geneva Conference on
Syria, to be convened later this week. As a participant,
the Republic of Korea will play its due part in order
to achieve meaningful progress. We would like to
commend the efforts made by all parties who made the
conference possible.
In nearly three years of fighting, the conflict has
resulted in more than 120,000 deaths, 2.3 million
refugees and 6.5 million internally displaced persons.
Comprehensive and action-oriented peace talks are now
an absolute necessity, and an unconditional ceasefire
and expanded humanitarian access are urgently needed.

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

From now on, every second is of infinite value,
and we must seize the moment to stop further human
suffering. Recently, there has been a brutal campaign
waged by the Syrian Government with the use of heavy
weapons, such as barrel bombs, in densely populated
areas. We condemn such attacks and urge the Syrian
Government to halt that indiscriminate killing. Clashes
between predominantly foreign Al-Qaida-affiliated
groups and local opposition forces are also a matter of
deep concern. We are deeply troubled by the reports
of massacres, mass graves and forced religious
conversions.
On the other side of recent developments, we welcome
the continued progress made in the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). We commend the joint efforts
by the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to eliminate Syria’s
chemical weapons, even in the face of an incredibly
challenging environment. Together with the outcome of
the humanitarian aid donor conference held in Kuwait
last week, those are good signs that our joint efforts are
making progress. I sincerely hope that such efforts will
provide the basis for the success of the second Geneva
Conference.
Another worrying example of the spillover from
the Syrian conflict is the recent attacks against the
city of Fallujah in Iraq, which were perpetrated by the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. The Republic of
Korea is deeply concerned about the increased human
losses and the worsening humanitarian situation in that
area. We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue
its close cooperation with local leaders to fight back
the extremist militia. We hope that Iraq will achieve
lasting peace and stability through an inclusive political
process and reconciliation.
The escalating violence in Lebanon is also of
serious concern to many of us in the Chamber. The
Republic of Korea strongly condemns the recent spate
of terrorist attacks in Beirut and Hermel. The attack
on the Iranian Embassy in Beirut, the assassination of
the former Minister Mohamad Chatah and the targeted
attacks on civilians in south Beirut are all a reflection
of the continued spillover from the Syrian conflict into
Lebanon. The Korean Government urges all parties
in Lebanon to respect the disassociation policy and to
refrain from any involvement in the Syrian crisis, in
accordance with their commitments as set out in the
Baabda Declaration.

S/PV.7096

The Republic of Korea also extends its support
to the United Nations-backed Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, which convened last week in The Hague. We
hope that the perpetrators of the 2005 terrorist attack
that killed former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 21
others will be brought to justice. We view the Special
Tribunal as a historic opportunity to combat impunity
in Lebanon.
It is an indisputable fact of life that the prompt
and long-overdue settlement of the Middle East peace
process constitutes a foundation for peace and stability
in the entire Middle East region. In that regard, the
Korean Government commends Israel and Palestine
for remaining committed to peace negotiations, and
notes with appreciation the continued efforts of the
United States Government to make progress in the right
direction. We believe that working towards an agreed
framework that establishes concrete guidelines to
deal with the core issues will lead to the much-needed
breakthrough in the ongoing peace talks.
At the same time, we sincerely hope that the
continued settlement activities and the demolition of
Palestinian buildings will come to an end. We condemn
the continued rocket attacks on Israel from Gaza, which
threaten the fragile peace. It is also important that
security in the West Bank improve in order to foster
the necessary confidence and enable the negotiations
to move forward.
We all know that, in today’s ever interconnected
world, no single country can enjoy peace and stability
in separation from the rest of the world. That is why the
international community must work together in dealing
with regional conflicts. The Republic of Korea would
therefore like to emphasize the importance of sustained
efforts to promote peace and stability in the Middle
East. In that regard, it is imperative that the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, play
its due role, serving to forge a united voice.
The President: I would like to say that, as we mark
Martin Luther King Jr. Day today, Dr. King’s message
of peace, equality, freedom and justice resonates across
the globe to this very day.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The Middle
East has often been prey to the turbulence of conflicting
forces, but rarely have we seen efforts towards peace
and the staggering human costs of war so vividly and
so simultaneously evident. That contrast is especially

14-2097615/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

striking in Syria, where diplomatic initiatives have
intensified against the backdrop of an ever-more brutal
civil war.
The best way to begin to bring that war to an end
is through the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
scheduled to start in Switzerland on Wednesday.
My Government has been working closely with the
international community and the Syrian opposition
coalition to prepare for that Conference. We welcome
the coalition’s courageous decision this past weekend
to participate in the talks, the purpose of which is to
ensure the implementation of the Geneva Action Group
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). That document
calls for the establishment, based on mutual consent,
of a transitional governing body with full executive
authority, including over military and security entities.
It is vital that all participants in the opening ministerial
meeting and in subsequent talks support that core goal.
As of this morning, however, Iran has yet to
demonstrate its willingness to subscribe to the full
implementation of the Geneva communiqué, which is
a minimum requirement for participation in the peace
process.
The Syrian Government’s recent and deadly
bombing campaign, including the use of Scud missiles
and barrel bombs in the Aleppo and Damascus suburbs,
provides further demonstration of the Al-Assad
regime’s cruelty and of the fact that there is no military
solution to the conflict. That is why we are so focused
on a negotiated political transition of the type to be
discussed in Geneva.
The urgency of diplomatic progress is highlighted
by the deepening of the humanitarian crisis created
by the war and by the Syrian Government’s failure
to implement the Council’s presidential statement of
2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).
In recent days, the Syrian regime has seemingly
agreed to improve humanitarian access to besieged
areas, but we have not seen evidence of meaningful
implementation on the ground. For months, communities,
including Yarmouk, East Ghouta, Daraya, the Old City
of Homs and Moadamiya, have been besieged and cut
off from food and medical supplies. It is not just the
case that food cannot get in; people — starving people,
desperate people — cannot get out. On the very rare
occasions that evacuations from besieged areas have
been organized, the regime has taken inhabitants away

16/32

20/01/2014

to be screened. In many cases, the whereabouts of those
individuals are unknown and remain unknown today.
East Ghouta is an egregious example of Syrian
obstruction. It is an area where international chemical
weapons inspectors were allowed access but where
160,000 civilians remain cut off from humanitarian
aid. Pro-Al-Assad snipers regularly target residents
attempting to travel through checkpoints. The
Government has blockaded fuel supplies, and residents
have electricity for only a couple of hours per day. A
young child even died of carbon monoxide poisoning
because his family had been compelled to burn
firewood inside their house to keep warm. Let us be
clear: if inspectors can obtain access to East Ghouta, so
too should the providers of medicine and food.
Yarmouk provides another tragic example. It has
been under constant siege since July 2013. Recent reports
of more than a dozen malnutrition-related deaths among
children and other Palestinian residents are horrifying
and should shock the conscience of all of us. We received
reports from the United Nations in recent days that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East was finally able to carry in
a small amount of food parcels — 200 parcels, which
will feed 1,000 people for one month. There are 18,000
people in Yarmouk who are under siege, lacking food
and medicine. It is devastating to imagine how starving
people will divide up the food parcels. Humanitarian
providers who managed to deliver those food parcels
literally had to dodge sniper fire.
Although the regime is primarily responsible for
denying humanitarian access, some opposition groups
have also been culpable in such communities as Nubal,
Zahra and Foua’a. That is unacceptable. The deliberate
blocking or withholding of life-giving aid by any party
cannot be justified and must stop now before more
innocent people die.
The plight of Syrian civilians and refugees is heartbreaking and makes last week’s conference in Kuwait
all the more important. The United States pledged
$380 million in new funds to help tackle the crisis,
bringing our total commitment since the fighting began
to more than $1.7 billion. We welcome the new pledges
from other donor nations, as well as the international
community’s renewed commitment to assisting the
Syrian people and the neighbouring countries that are
providing a safe haven for refugees.

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the brief period before the second Geneva
Conference, it is critical that we make concrete
progress on humanitarian access issues. We must also
do everything that we can to halt the violence. To that
end, we call urgently on all parties to agree on local
ceasefires and to move ahead with prisoner releases.
We commend your country, Jordan, Mr. President,
for sheltering some 600,000 refugees, and we recognize
the enormous economic and social toll the conflict has
taken on your country. Jordan has opened its doors
for an emergency situation, and we know that that is
draining its domestic resources. The international
community has an obligation to ensure that Jordan’s
generosity does not become an unsustainable burden
on its population.
In Lebanon the situation has grown even more
perilous, as the Syrian war has exacerbated the security,
financial and social pressures faced by the nation’s
leaders. More than 1,600 Lebanese communities bear
the burden of hosting more than 900,000 refugees from
Syria. My Government continues to help Lebanon
tackle its massive challenges via the recently established
International Support Group for Lebanon. We urge
other donors also to provide aid that is consistent with
International Support Group priorities. A stable and
united Lebanon with strong democratic institutions
is in the best interests of the Lebanese people and of
citizens throughout the Middle East. In that context, we
encourage the formation of a new Cabinet to address
the country’s security, economic and humanitarian
challenges and to meet its international obligations.
The Syrian civil war has contributed to rising
sectarian violence and political friction inside Lebanon.
As has been said, the assassination, on 27 December
2013, of the widely respected former finance minister
Mohamad Chatah was an outrage. The 2 January
suicide bombing in southern Beirut’s Haret Hreik
neighbourhood killed 5 people and wounded many
more. Meanwhile, sporadic violence has continued for
weeks in Tripoli and near the Syrian border.
In that respect, we note Saudi Arabia’s commitment,
announced last month, to provide generous amounts of
additional aid to the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF). We
will continue to partner closely with Lebanon’s security
services, which have a pivotal role to play in support
of Lebanon’s security and sovereignty. We condemn
the violence, urge all parties to exercise restraint, and
commend the LAF for its efforts to stem the violence.

S/PV.7096

The Lebanese Government’s policy of disassociation
from the Syrian conflict, as enshrined in the Baabda
Declaration, must be upheld.
It is equally vital that all relevant Security Council
resolutions be implemented, including resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006), which call for the disbandment
and disarmament of all militias in Lebanon. The United
States strongly condemns the 29 December 2013 rocket
attack that was launched from Lebanese territory into
Israel.
Finally, we welcome the start of the trial before the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon of four persons charged
with the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq
Hariri and others who were killed in the bombing. That
trial is a positive step towards justice and away from the
acceptance of impunity for political violence, and we
commend the Lebanese Government and other donor
countries for supporting the Tribunal.
Turning to the subject of Middle East peace, the
United States is continuing its efforts to assist the
Israelis and Palestinians in reaching a final status
agreement that recognizes two States for two peoples,
living side by side in peace and security. Secretary of
State Kerry returned to the region earlier this month in
support of a proposed framework that addresses all core
issues. As the parties consider the difficult decisions
ahead, the United States remains convinced that the
benefits of peace for both sides can best be achieved
through the kind of process in which we are presently
engaged. Accordingly, the United States reiterates
its view that all parties should refrain from actions
that might undermine the atmosphere required for
ongoing negotiations. Steps that diminish trust, such as
continued settlement activity, only feed scepticism on
both sides.
Further, we are deeply troubled by the escalation
of violence leading to civilian casualties. We condemn
rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel and the attempt
to kill civilians by placing a bomb on a public bus in
Tel Aviv. We are also seriously concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, and urge all
parties to cooperate in expanding access for people,
goods and humanitarian supplies.
The consistent support of peace efforts by key
partners is essential. We particularly welcome the
European Union’s generous pledge last month to provide
unprecedented political and economic support for Israel
and the Palestinians in the context of a final status peace

14-2097617/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

agreement. We are gratified as well by the decision of
the League of Arab States, whose representatives met
with Secretary Kerry in Paris on 12 January, to reaffirm
its commitment to those negotiations.
Finally, on Iraq, I thank the Secretary-General for
reporting on his recent visit and would like to commend
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
for their efforts to ensure the delivery of aid to the
people of Anbar province. The United States strongly
condemns the attacks carried out by forces affiliated
with Al-Qaida in Anbar and elsewhere in Iraq. Their
brazen attempt at destabilization cannot be allowed
to succeed. As the Council made clear in its recent
statement,
“no terrorist act can reverse the path towards peace,
democracy and reconstruction in Iraq, which is
supported by the people and the Government of Iraq
and the international community” (S/PRST/2014/1).
In that spirit, we are encouraged by the cooperation
being shown by Iraq’s Government, its national
security forces and local tribal leaders in trying to
restore stability, resist terrorist aggression and ease the
hardships faced by Iraqi civilians.
I, too, note that today is a national holiday in the
United States. Martin Luther King Jr. taught the citizens
of my country and people everywhere to pursue justice
and the resolution of differences by peaceful means. In
his words, “returning violence for violence multiplies
violence, adding deeper darkness to a night already
devoid of stars”. The wisdom in that warning is always
and everywhere relevant, but never more so than now
in the Middle East, where peace initiatives demand our
support amid the anguish of continued conflict.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence here today. We acknowledge Jordan’s
efforts to promote a Middle East peace, and we thank
Jordan for bearing such a difficult burden in sheltering
so many of those who have fled the Syrian conflict. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We all know that 2014 will be a critical
year — maybe a decisive year — for the Middle East
peace process. The final status negotiations under
way offer the best chance for peace in the region, and
Australia of course fully supports those negotiations
towards a just and lasting two-State solution, with
Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace

18/32

20/01/2014

and security within internationally recognized borders.
We appreciate United States Secretary of State Kerry’s
perseverance and the effective engagement of all parties
in the negotiations. Great courage and statesmanship
will be required in equal measure to achieve peace, and
we offer our full support to Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas at this critical juncture in the
negotiations. For this best chance to succeed, we call
on both parties to avoid any provocative actions that
would undermine confidence in the talks. Australia
itself stands ready to assist in any way it can to support
the negotiations.
At the same time, we remain deeply concerned at
the growing impact of the Syrian conflict on peace and
stability in the region. We welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations to start a
process this week that will hopefully lead to a political
solution based on the principles agreed at the first
Geneva conference in 2012. Australia has accepted the
Secretary-General’s invitation to participate. The goal
of the the second Geneva Conference on Syria must
remain the establishment of a transitional governing
body with full executive powers, as agreed in the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We urge the
Syrian Government and the Syrian National Coalition
to participate constructively, and countries with
influence to lend their full support to the process. The
Syrian parties should also heed the Secretary-General’s
insistence that their delegations to the Conference
include broad and substantial representation of women.
We are concerned by the increasing presence
in Syria of groups with links to Al-Qaida. Those
organizations have no place in Syria’s future, and
existing Council sanctions against them must be
implemented by all States.
The recent admission by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that the
situation on the ground in Syria is now so bad that it can
no longer update its estimates of the conflict’s death toll
is a chilling fact. It is obvious that a political process
that can bring an end to this conflict is desperately
needed. The urgency of the humanitarian crisis was
underscored last week by the discussions in Kuwait,
where States met to discuss the unprecedented appeal
by humanitarian agencies. We welcome the pledges that
were made, and urge that they be swiftly honoured and
coordinated closely with the United Nations.
We are also pleased to have been able to make
our own contribution to the joint mission of the
14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the United Nations and its vital work in removing
all chemical weapons from Syria. We must not allow
that work to be delayed, and Syria itself must meet its
obligations to eliminate all elements of its chemical
weapons programme.
Foreign Minister Asselborn has just described
the terrible magnitude of the humanitarian crisis.
We endorse his comments. It is imperative that
humanitarian assistance reach people in need. We again
call on the parties to the conflict to adhere immediately
to the provisions of the Council’s presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of October 2013 regarding access for
humanitarian workers and supplies. We are especially
concerned about the large numbers of civilians still
trapped in besieged towns. All parties to the conflict
must ensure that humanitarian supplies can get
through, including through the development of urgent
local ceasefires. Those States with influence with the
parties should reinforce this message in accordance
with the work plan agreed in the high-level group on
humanitarian challenges in Syria convened by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
As we know, the conflict has had a hugely
destabilizing impact on Syria’s neighbours. One
year ago, neighbouring countries were host to over
half a million Syrian refugees. Today, the number is
almost 2.5 million — more than 10 per cent of Syria’s
population. The Council must be conscious of the
fact that Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq are all
shouldering enormous burdens as part of the conflict.
That underlines the need for continued efforts by the
Council on Syria.
In Lebanon, the destabilizing effects of the conflict
are all too apparent, given the recent spate of car
bombings, including the assassination of the former
Finance Minister and the attack on the Iranian Embassy.
We commend the efforts of the Government of Lebanon
and the Lebanese Armed Forces to maintain security
and urge all parties to adhere to President Sleiman’s
policy of disassociation from the Syrian conflict.
Lebanon’s political parties need to work together
and form a Government quickly, so that Lebanon’s
challenges can best be addressed.
In concluding, we condemn the violence perpetrated
in western Iraq in recent weeks by the Al-Qaida-linked
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its associates.
We must continue to support the ongoing anti-terrorist

S/PV.7096

efforts of the Iraqi Government, together with tribal
leaders, in combating that aggression. Resolving that
threat will be important so as to ensure that there is
no delay in the 30 April electoral timetable. Timely
credible elections will help to facilitate an inclusive
political dialogue in Iraq. Such an inclusive dialogue
is essential. We encourage Iraq’s various community
leaders to continue to work together to achieve that and
to resolve the country’s challenges.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to express Argentina’s satisfaction
at seeing you, Sir, preside over this meeting of the
Security Council at such a critical time for the Middle
East. I would like to convey to you my country’s thanks
in particular for being here with us today.
I would like to talk about two issues: the Syrian
crisis and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. With regard
to Syria, Argentina welcomes the progress made in
the recent weeks and days, in particular the meeting
of senior officials of the United States, the Russian
Federation and the United Nations, which opened the
way for the convening of the second Geneva Conference
on Syria. As we are all aware, it is a historic opportunity
to put an end to the conflict in Syria. The process that
will begin there will not be easy. Given the extent
of the hostility among the parties and the amount of
violence and mutual distrust, reaching agreements will
be an extremely difficult task. We appeal to all parties
to avoid any action that could undermine the process
of the Conference. In that context, we endorse the call
by the Secretary-General for a ceasefire, allowing the
United Nations to support peace talks between the
Syrian Government and the anti-Government forces.
In order for the second Geneva Conference on
Syria to be successful, the regional and international
actors supporting both parties in the dispute must be
fully convinced that only a political solution is possible.
As we have said on other occasions, Argentina believes
that peace in Syria depends, to a large extent, on what
key regional or international actors do or fail to do. All
those that have a decisive influence on the parties must
play a role in support of the process, without which it
will be difficult for the second Geneva Conference on
Syria to succeed. We also appeal to all parties to commit
to the negotiating process in order to put an end to a
conflict that has now lasted for more than 33 months,
caused great loss of life and threatens to destroy Syria.
In that context, allow me to say that we are greatly
concerned about the activities of the rebel groups

14-2097619/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that maintain links with Al-Qaida, not only because
of the serious terrorist threat but also owing to their
effect on the rest of the region, which could become
a serious threat to regional stability and international
security. In addition, we reiterate that the continuing
supply of weapons to both sides in the dispute has
been instrumental to the increasing militarization of
the conflict. We insist that the provision of arms to the
parties must stop. There is no doubt that the weapons
in Syria are being used to commit violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.
We welcome the progress made in implementing
resolution 2118 (2013) with regard to chemical weapons.
We in particular welcome the ongoing progress made
in eliminating the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic. That is an indication that the
close cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
continues to be fruitful and that the Syrian Government
continues to cooperate with the United Nations Joint
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic and its objectives
and upholds its commitment to meet its obligations.
With regard to ending the second phase and for
the next phase, the strong commitment and support of
the international community, including the Security
Council, are required. We reiterate that it is essential,
in that regard, that those States with influence on the
parties, in particular the opposition groups, use that
influence to promote the success of the Mission and, in
particular, to call for ensuring the safety and neutrality
of the Mission and its staff.
We must also reiterate our concern about the loss of
human lives as a result of the Syrian conflict. The vast
majority of those lives have been lost owing to the use
of conventional weapons by both the Government and
the armed opposition. Argentina firmly condemns the
deaths of an unacceptable number of civilians.
We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation of half of the Syrian people, who are in urgent
need of help. In that regard, we welcome the results
of the recent donor conference, held in Kuwait. The
continuing impediments to access for humanitarian aid
make the civilian population even more vulnerable and
exacerbate their already distressing living conditions.
We call on all parties to allow access to humanitarian
aid in accordance with international law and, in
particular, international humanitarian law.

20/32

20/01/2014

Another distressing element of the Syrian conflict
is the flow of refugees to neighbouring countries and
the serious humanitarian situation that those countries
face as a result. I would like express our gratitude to the
Government and people of Jordan for their commitment
and their efforts to provide assistance and safety to
those fleeing the conflict. Argentina is convinced
that the war crimes, the crimes against humanity and
the serious violations of human rights cannot remain
unpunished. We therefore reiterate that the Security
Council must consider referring the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court.
Argentina views with cautious optimism the fact
that the Palestinians and Israelis are continuing to
participate in the negotiations on the peace process.
However, progress is slow and extremely difficult.
We believe that, in order to make greater progress, it
is necessary to move forward on the basis of the long
and broadly agreed principles, without questioning
the parameters of the two-State solution enshrined in
international law and supported by the vast majority of
the international community. Two States on the basis of
the 1967 borders, with the agreed land swaps, Jerusalem
as the future capital of the two States, the necessary
security arrangements and a fair solution to the refugee
issue should be the foundation for any negotiation.
Furthermore, although gestures have been made,
such as the release of Palestinian prisoners prior
to the Oslo Agreement, there continue to be other
developments that are completely incompatible with
the peace process, exacerbate the lack of trust and
do not help towards creating favourable conditions
for dialogue. Those include, in particular, the recent
announcements of illegal settlements on the West Bank
and in East Jerusalem, the approval by the Ministerial
Committee for Legislative Affairs of the State of Israel
of a bill for the annexation of the Jordan Valley, the
marked increase in attacks by Israeli settlers against
Palestinians and the missile launches from the Gaza
Strip and the resulting military responses, as well as
the continual rhetoric of confrontation. We call on the
parties to renew their commitment to the peace process
and to abstain from all action that may undermine
efforts to move forward in the pursuit of a lasting peace.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the coming
months will be decisive in ending an occupation
that has lasted more than half a century and violates
international law. It also is morally reprehensible,
politically unacceptable and strategically unviable.

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Argentina wholeheartedly believes in the importance
of the international community’s meaningful assistance
in the negotiations. The lack of progress or a new
failure in that effort might seriously harm the two-State
solution, with serious consequences. In that connection,
we reiterate our belief that the Security Council must
pronounce itself on the situations I have mentioned,
take concrete steps to complement the negotiations
and show the way towards a two-State solution — for
example, by accepting Palestine’s request to become a
State Member of the United Nations, as a follow up to
General Assembly resolution 67/19.
It is for the Council, in compliance with its
obligations, to send out clear messages, and not to
remain indifferent in the face of actions that undermine
regional and international efforts to provide a solution
to the conflict.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to
thank you, Foreign Minister Judeh, for convening this
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
update on the situation in Middle East.
In Syria, the total destruction of the country’s
economic and social fabric, displacement and
starvation, increasing fragmentation, sectarianism
and the spread of extremism are the price of the
Government’s failure, three years ago, to respond to its
people’s peaceful demands for reforms. The effects of
the war in Syria are felt throughout the region, with
neighbouring countries struggling to accommodate
the refugee flows, and Al-Qaida affiliates and other
extremists using the crisis for their ends. The failure
to put an end to the extraordinary human suffering
and continuous massive violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law in Syria is deeply
troubling. We note the ongoing efforts, under extremely
challenging circumstances, aimed at the removal of
chemical weapons from Syria, and take note of the
Syrian Government’s reassurances that it is fully
committed to the process.
At the same time, we stress that further delays in
the removal of chemical weapons, including the most
dangerous chemical agents, must be avoided. All
necessary equipment is in place. It is now up to the
Syrian Government to ensure that all chemical materials
are delivered to the port for removal. All parties to
the conflict have the responsibility to make sure that
the task is carried out on time and without incidents.
Furthermore, progress on the chemical-weapons track

S/PV.7096

must be accompanied by tangible and sustained progress
on the humanitarian track. Let us not forget that civilians
in Syria continue to die from the indiscriminate use of
heavy weapons, aerial bombing, including incendiary
barrel bombs, and mortar shelling. We condemn in the
strongest terms the ongoing violations of international
humanitarian law and strongly urge all the parties to
the conflict, in particular the Syrian authorities, to live
up to their legal obligations to protect civilians.
We also urge the warring parties to take all the
necessary measures to provide safe and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout the country, ensuring
the full and immediate implementation of the Security
Council presidential statement of 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/15). We note the fact that some supplies
to places that have been sealed off for months, including
Camp Yarmouk, were allowed through in the past few
days. However, as Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos stressed in her latest report, such exceptions
should become the rule. We commend the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other international humanitarian actors
for their efforts, under very difficult circumstances,
to provide relief assistance to the suffering population.
Lithuania has contributed before, and will continue
to do so, in response to the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people.
In a couple of days, the second Geneva Conference
on Syria will offer a window of opportunity to end this
devastating war. We strongly urge all parties to fully
commit to the dialogue and prove that commitment
by their actions. The only solution to the conflict
is a genuine political transition in Syria, based on
the full implementation of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). Syrian women must be part
of that solution. Their active participation must be
ensured at all stages of negotiation, reconciliation and
peacebuilding.
Let me turn briefly to Syria’s neighbourhood. In
recent weeks, Lebanon has been shaken by a series of
terrorist attacks. Rocket fire and cross-border strikes
from Syria have caused casualties and are adding to
the tensions in the country. We appeal to the Lebanese
people to preserve their national unity, and appreciate
the policy of disassociation from the Syrian crisis. We
welcome the opening of the Hariri assassination trial
at the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. It is essential that
those who commit acts of terror be held to account.
Impunity cannot be allowed to continue.

14-2097621/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The recent attacks in Anbar province and elsewhere
in Iraq, which claimed multiple lives, remind us of
the gravity of threat posed by terrorism. We express
our support to the Government of Iraq in countering
that threat. We appreciate the efforts of Iraqi security
forces, local police and tribal leaders aimed at defeating
Al-Qaida affiliates. At the same time, we stress the
importance of continued national dialogue and an
inclusive political process to ensuring the country’s
long-term stability and security. We look forward to the
holding of free and fair elections in April.
Let me now turn to the Middle East peace process.
Lithuania strongly supports the current United
States-backed direct peace negotiations and commends
the personal involvement and commitment of Secretary
of State John Kerry. We applaud the political courage
and statesmanship shown by both Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas. That is a unique
opportunity for a breakthrough in the peace process,
which could lead to a viable two-State solution and
enable Israel and Palestine to live side-by-side in
peace and security. It is crucial, therefore, that both
parties — Israel and Palestine — refrain from any
unilateral actions that could undermine the negotiations.
In that context, new settlement announcements by Israel
could potentially be very damaging and could derail
the process. Rocket attacks from Gaza to Israel and the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza are both a
great concern and do they not contribute to the peace
process. We underline the importance of the Arab
Peace Initiative in achieving peace in the Middle East.
All the relevant parties should do everything possible
to ensure that those negotiations succeed. Together
with our European Union partners, we look forward to
working with everyone to achieve a lasting success.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would to congratulate and thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
Two decades after the signing of the Oslo Accords
between the State of Israel and the then Palestine
Liberation Organization, the transitional provisions
have given way to a status quo that unfortunately
continues to this day. Thus, after 20 years of progress
and setbacks in the negotiations, there is still no sign of
the desired two-State solution reflecting the principles
established in the pertinent United Nations resolutions
to allow the creation of an independent and sovereign

22/32

20/01/2014

Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with the State of Israel, within secure and
internally recognized borders. The peoples of Israel
and Palestine and their future generations deserve no
less.
Chile recognized the State of Palestine in 2011.
In that same year, it supported Palestine’s full
membership in UNESCO. Subsequently, in 2012, we
were a sponsor of General Assembly resolution 67/19,
which accorded Palestine the status of a non-member
Observer State at the United Nations. We view that
policy as a contribution to the peace, as it strengthens
the capacities of the Palestinian State.
Owing to the foregoing, Chile welcomes the fact
that the parties resumed direct negotiations under
United States auspices last August. In particular, we
welcome the personal commitment shown by Secretary
of State John Kerry, who has visited the region on
numerous occasions. In order for the negotiations to
move forward, the parties must strengthen dialogue
and build trust. That requires ongoing actions and the
avoidance of unilateral acts that undermine or destroy
confidence. The release of hundreds of Palestinian
prisoners is pointless if, at the same time, Israel
announces the construction of thousands of homes
in the settlements located in Palestinian territory, in
contravention of international law.
It is also necessary to more strongly condemn
the attacks affecting the civilian population of Israel,
and measures must be taken to avoid provocative acts
and incitement. I take this opportunity to reiterate my
country’s condemnation of all terrorist acts, in whatever
form and whatever their motivation. Terrorism has no
place in the world.
Chile supports the Palestinian reconciliation
process between Fatah and Hamas, agreed in Doha and
Cairo in 2012. We believe that the Islamic Resistance
Movement must renounce the use of arms and recognize
Israel’s right to exist. Chile will continue to encourage
the constructive, consistent commitment of Palestine
and Israel to the current peace negotiations aimed at
achieving a just and lasting peace in accordance with
international law. It is our hope that that will be possible.
The conflict in Syria is of particular concern, as it
has caused over 100,000 deaths. Regrettably, in nearly
three years, the Council has been unable to adopt a
resolution that, it was hoped, would end the tragedy.
Nevertheless, the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013)

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

marked a turning point. Thanks to the joint work of
the Council and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, progress has been made towards
destroying the Syrian chemical arsenal through an
unprecedented effort of the international community.
However, it should be recalled that that is only one
aspect of the conflict, in which conventional weapons
have caused the most victims. Our country therefore
reiterates that the provision of military supplies to any
of the parties must halt in order to avoid exacerbating
the conflict and the suffering of the civilian population.
The humanitarian crisis requires the Security
Council to make every possible effort to call on the
parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligations in
relation to international humanitarian and human rights
law, while guaranteeing the protection of civilians
and the rapid and unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel. We call for the urgent implementation
of the Security Council’s presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October 2013. The International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference, held in Kuwait,
which dealt with humanitarian and refugee assistance,
represents a step in the right direction.
Chile supports the efforts made by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi towards the convening of the second
Geneva Conference on Syria and hopes that that meeting
will generate momentum for a political agreement. The
participation of all international actors in a position to
influence the parties is necessary in order to ensure
a political agreement. For their part, the parties must
agree not to undermine the principles of the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex),
whether or not they participated in that meeting. It is
our hope that the parties will implement humanitarian
measures to address the critical situation and efforts
towards the building of mutual confidence in order to
achieve the necessary political agreement. We reiterate
the importance of women being represented at every
level in the debates on the Syrian Arab Republic in order
to ensure that their concerns are be duly considered and
acted upon.
The deterioration of the security situation in
Lebanon is reflected — inter alia — in the clashes
between pro-Al-Assad and anti-Al-Assad demonstrators
in Tripoli, the attack on the Iranian embassy, the
assassination of former Minister Mohamad Chatah
and the recent bombing in the southern Beirut suburb
of Haret Hreik and the town of Hermel. Chile appeals

S/PV.7096

to the Lebanese political leaders to promote the
agreements needed to ensure the country’s institutional
functionality. In addition, it is important to encourage
Lebanese society to implement the dissociation policy
established in the Baabda Declaration.
We believe that it is the will of the international
community to support Lebanon by promoting stability,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, especially now
that the Special Tribunal created to try the suspects in
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
has started its hearings, which form a crucial element
of the task of combating impunity.
Chile maintains far-reaching ties with communities
in the Middle East and stands ready to join with the
international community in mapping out the road to
peace and progress for the inhabitants of the region.
I conclude by thanking all of those that have
welcomed my country upon its election as a
non-permanent member of the Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you today,
Mr. Minister, as President of the Security Council.
We also congratulate Jordan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council.
The General Assembly has designated the year
2014 the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People. The Russian Federation shares the
Secretary-General’s belief that the year represents an
important stage in achieving the two-State solution
and stands ready to make every effort to ensure that
it becomes a reality. However, as in any quarrel, the
resolution of this out-dated dispute must be worked out
by the conflicting parties. We are carefully following
the Palestinian-Israeli settlement process, including
attempts — first and foremost by the United States
of America — to bring the parties towards an agreed
framework to define the future principles of the final
status solution.
Russia is in favour of a comprehensive, equitable,
long-term settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
based on the well-known international framework
of the establishment of an integral, independent
Palestinian State within internationally recognized
borders, existing in peace and security with all of its
neighbours. Naturally, any solution must be acceptable
to both sides; imposed or inequitable solutions will
not last long. We continue to actively participate in

14-2097623/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis on a
bilateral or multilateral basis and, especially, within the
framework of the international mediators of the Middle
East Quartet.
In that context, we note the scaling-up of efforts at
the level of Special Representative, in which context the
most recent meeting took place in Paris on 12 January.
We believe that that meeting was most useful. It is our
continuing belief that the Quartet’s efforts should also
draw upon the work of the League of Arab States. In
our contacts with Palestinians and Israelis, we continue
to urge both sides towards substantive negotiations on
all final status issues. In two days, my country will
welcome the President of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, to Moscow.
We are extremely concerned regarding the situation
on the ground. Settlement construction continues,
effectively annulling even small good-will gestures,
such as the freeing of Palestinian detainees who had
been in Israeli prisons since the signing of the Oslo
accords. We are also concerned about continuing
raids by the Israeli military in the West Bank, which
have resulted in the killing and wounding of many
Palestinians, as well as rampant settler violence.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the number of Palestinians
evicted from homes that were demolished by Israel in
2013 totalled 1,100, representing a 25 per cent increase
over the previous year. We also adamantly condemn
the launching of rockets against Israeli territory,
whatever justification might be presented. Security
breaches along the Gaza Strip must cease. All of these
aggravating incidents are far from conducive to the
holding of negotiations.
The situation in the Gaza Strip is not improving; on
the contrary, the isolation of Gaza from the rest of the
world is growing, which only exacerbates the negative
social, economic and humanitarian consequences. The
problem of Gaza should be resolved comprehensively,
including through the full lifting of the Israeli blockade
and the restoration of a united administration in the
Palestinian territories. We remain convinced that
bridging the existing Palestinian split on the basis of
the Palestinian Authority’s platform and the Arab Peace
Initiative would be in line with the aspirations for peace
for Israel and Palestine. Achieving a comprehensive
Palestinian-Israeli solution — and, even less likely,
consolidating its results — will clearly be impossible
without Palestinian unity.
24/32

20/01/2014

We attach great significance to the launching
of talks between the Government of Syria and the
opposition, with the constructive assistance of the
international community. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s responsible and principled approach in issuing
an invitation to participate in those efforts to all those
who could directly have an influence on the situation
in Syria, including Iran. Not ensuring the participation
of such key players would be an unforgivable error.
Those who would call into question that need are
clearly not interested in an equitable resolution of the
Syrian crisis. We call upon the National Coalition of
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, which
has decided to attend the Conference, and invite it
to cease the practice of imposing preconditions. We
find it unfortunate that the opposition delegation does
not include the participation of patriotic groups of
internal opponents, such as the National Coordination
Committee and a number of leading Kurdish groups,
which constitutes an attack on the credibility and the
representative nature of the opposition.
We would nevertheless like to note the intention
and full readiness of the Syrian Government to send
to Switzerland a representative and a fully mandated
delegation. We also note other measures taken by
Damascus, such as its response to the Russian appeal
concerning the humanitarian situation. That pertains
to the delivery of humanitarian goods in residential
areas in Guta and other areas, including Damascus
and Aleppo. In that regard, we have seen a willingness
to exchange civilians taken hostage by fighters in
exchange for prisoners in Government prisons. The
practical implementation of those measures requires
cooperation by the armed opposition in ensuring
safe access for humanitarian goods. We hope that the
Government, which has stood ready to do that, will be
met with similar steps by the opposition. We expect
that the pledges made in Kuwait will be honoured
soon. It is important that the United Nations streamline
the contributions and distribute the various types of
assistance that have been offered.
We continue to work tirelessly to bolster inter-Syrian
dialogue to finally put an end to the bloodshed, to stop
making Syria into a hotbed of international and regional
terrorism, to ensure conditions for peace and calm,
and to ensure that the country retains its sovereign
territorial integrity and as a secular and an independent
State where all rights of ethnic and interreligious
groups are ensured.

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of the State of Palestine for their statements.
I shall touch on several points — the IsraeliPalestinian peace process and the situation in
Syria — before saying a few words about Lebanon.
In the Middle East, everything must be done to
ensure that the efforts of the United States Secretary
of State are crowned with success. France lends its full
support to the efforts of the United States, particularly
those of the Secretary of State, to drive forward the
negotiations that are under way. The parametres for
a solution are well known and have been set forth in
several Security Council resolutions. The eventual
acceptance by the parties of an initiative by the
United States on a framework for the negotiations,
broadly outlining a resolution to the conflict, could
constitute significant progress towards a definitive
peace agreement. Twenty years after Oslo, any interim
formula must be discarded.
In order to ensure progress in the current efforts,
the parties must refrain from any gesture likely to
undermine the process, particularly as far as settlements
are concerned. Along with its European partners,
France has condemned the publication of a call for
proposals by the Israeli authorities, on 10 January, to
build more than 1,800 homes in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank, following the approval given on 5 January to
build new homes in the settlements of Ofra and Karnei
Shomron in the West Bank. The French President called
on the Israeli authorities to totally and finally halt the
settlements when he visited Israel and Palestine from
17 to 19 November 2013.
In its conclusions of 16 December, the European
Union presented the details of the unprecedented
special privilege partnerships that would be offered
to the parties in the event of a definitive agreement,
which is of course the goal of the current efforts. That
partnership would cover economic, political, security
and social aspects, thereby allowing for stronger
cooperation between the European Union an the two
States, bolstering and helping with the construction of
the Palestinian State and promoting trade and economic
and human development in the region.
On Syria, gGiven the suffering of the people
and the destruction of the country, fatalism must not
prevail. We hope that this week will prove a decisive

S/PV.7096

one. The second Geneva Conference on Syria will
begin in Montreux on Wednesday, 22 January. France
and its international partners have done everything in
their power to assist the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces to prepare for that
important Conference. We should welcome the decision
taken this weekend in Istanbul by the Syrian opposition
to participate in the Conference under the aegis of the
National Coalition.
That decision was not an automatic one. The
ongoing brutal repression, especially in Aleppo; the
fact that civilians are caught in the fighting; the lack
of humanitarian access to areas under the control of the
opposition, in which Yarmouk is one of the most tragic
examples; and, finally, the provocative statements about
maintaining President Bashar Al-Assad in power at all
costs in the midst of presidential elections, which no
reasonable person would recognize as legitimate; and the
outrageous reply from Mr. Mouallem to the SecretaryGeneral’s invitation to the Conference — everything
has been done by the regime to deter the opposition
from participating in that exercise.
The Secretary-General’s invitation to the second
Geneva Conference on Syria was unambiguous. The
goal of the Conference is the full implementation of the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex), namely, the
establishement of a transitional Government with full
executive powers, including, of course, over the armed
forces and the security services. We are in agreement
in acknowledging that this document is a reference
point for a political solution in Syria. The attempts by
the regime to impose its interpretation on the second
Geneva Conference on Syria will not fool anyone.
When it comes to Iran, it must be clear to everyone
that any participation in the second Geneva Conference
on Syria is conditional to the explicit acceptance of
the mandate laid down in the invitation letter to the
Conference from the Secretary-General, to which I have
just referred. One cannot claim to support a political
process out of the crisis in good faith while rejecting
the goal and the parametres. In that connection, the
questions raised by the Syrian National Coalition are
legitimate and should be answered.
Although this is obvious, I would also remind the
Council that those with blood on their hands — those
who bear responsibility for the crimes committed in the
course of more than two years — must not play a part
in the political transition. We wish to see those matters
brought before the International Criminal Court.

14-2097625/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Against that backdrop, we must also send a message
of support to Lebanon. We support the determination of
the Lebanese authorities to protect themselves from the
political repercussion of the Syrian crisis, in line with
the Baabda Declaration of June 2012, as they combat all
forms of terrorism and commit to combating impunity.
The opening of the trial at the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon marks a decisive stage in combating impunity
for terrorist acts.
Lebanon urgently needs a Government capable of
taking decisions, given a political, economic and social
situation increasingly fraught with difficulties. It must
also be able to count on functioning institutions that
can help with the influx of almost 1 million refugees
from Syria. We must continue to mobilize to support
that country, particularly within the context of the
International Support Group for Lebanon.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to warmly
welcome you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you on
Jordan’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. I wish also to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, which has
provided us with a wealth of insights into the current
situation in the Middle East.
Our intervention will focus on three aspects: peace
between Israel and Palestine; Syria; and Lebanon.
We believe, first, that the immediate attainment of
peace between Israel and Palestine is central to the
normalization of the situation in the Middle East and
also of vital importance to global peace and security.
I take this opportunity to reiterate Nigeria’s
support for a two-State solution that would allow Israel
and Palestine to live together side by side in peace
and security. Peace between Israel and Palestine, we
believe, will not only have a beneficial impact on both
countries, but also constitute the key to peace in the
Middle East as a region.
On 29 July 2013, direct final-status talks between
Israel and Palestine resumed after a long hiatus. We
commend the efforts of the United States Government
and Secretary of State John Kerry’s personal
commitment in restarting the talks. The international
community can lend momentum to this effort by
supporting the current peace process.
We note that a period of nine months was decided
upon within which a comprehensive settlement of all
outstanding issues would be reached. We are now in

26/32

20/01/2014

the sixth month, and we urge all parties to make greater
strides in their efforts towards the attainment of peace.
The United State-brokered peace talks are now at
a critical stage. The recent announcement of the Israeli
Government’s plan to build 1,400 housing units in
Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem and the West Bank
may not be helpful to the peace process. We urge Israel
to reconsider this plan, which is capable of derailing the
peace talks.
Nigeria is not unmindful of the need to guarantee
Israel’s security and continued existence as a
sovereign State. It is for this reason that we support
the comprehensive discussion of all final-status issues
so as to leave no room for continuation of the conflict,
which has lasted far too long for any side’s comfort or
interest. We encourage both sides to carefully examine
the United States plan for security arrangements, with
a view to moving forward towards the adoption of an
accord that would address those proposals.
We also note that the members of the Quartet
met at the highest level on 27 September 2013 and
reaffirmed their determination to lend effective
support to both parties. We wish to stress, however,
that efforts to strengthen the Palestinian economy
and build Palestinian institutions should be seen as
supportive of the peace process and not necessarily as
supplanting it. We believe that priority must be given
to the establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State.
We note and welcome the meeting held in Amman
between King Abdullah II and Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu last Thursday, 16 January, to discuss the
peace process and seek ways to move it forward. We
encourage such exchanges as confidence-building
measures and transparent attempts in the search for
lasting peace in the Middle East.
Concerning Syria, while we welcome the progress
recorded in the elimination of the country’s chemical
weapons under the supervision of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons/United Nations
joint mission, we urge the world not to lose sight of the
ongoing civil war in the country, which has claimed over
100,000 lives and displaced millions of people, both
internally and across Syria’s borders. The humanitarian
dimension of the Syrian crisis remains a matter of great
concern to Nigeria, especially considering the fact
that millions of children are reported to be among the
victims.

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The gender dimension of the crisis is also of
concern to us. We are deeply disturbed by reports of
women being increasingly targeted for assault and
violence, particularly in refugee camps, where they are
supposed to feel safe and, indeed, protected. We deplore
and condemn such acts of violence against women and
would like to see the perpetrators brought to justice.
The hardship and indignities that Syrian women face in
the refugee camps deeply diminish our humanity, and
we call on all sides in the conflict to ensure, at all times,
the safety and dignity of women embroiled in the crisis.
Today the need for the return of peace to Syria is
more urgent than ever. It is our hope that the second
Geneva Conference on Syria, scheduled for this week,
will create the conditions necessary to attain that
much-desired objective. We encourage all parties to
the conflict to participate in the Conference without
preconditions. We reaffirm our stance that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian crisis. Only a political
solution attained through a transparent and inclusive
process can lead to peace in Syria. Nigeria’s desire is
to see, in the very near future, a peaceful, prosperous,
united and democratic Syria taking its rightful place in
the world.
Turning to Lebanon, we are unequivocal in our
condemnation of the recent spate of terrorist attacks,
which left several Lebanese citizens dead and dozens
injured. Such attacks threaten the peace and stability
of the country and add another dimension to an already
difficult security situation. President Sleiman has
stated that immunizing Lebanon against such attacks
will require solidarity between the leaders and the
people. We urge the people of Lebanon to unite and
stand firm with their leaders against any attempt
to inject despair and disunity into the body politic.
Attacking innocent and defenceless people will not in
any way address the political differences of the parties
or, indeed, advance the unity and progress of Lebanon.
Only honest dialogue and recourse to peaceful means
can prove beneficial and long-lasting in the attainment
of any political agenda.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I welcome your Foreign Minister’s
presence in the Security Council today, and I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
contributions to this debate.
As we enter 2014, we are at a moment of opportunity
for the Middle East peace process. Entering back into

S/PV.7096

direct negotiations last year was a bold step forward. It
was a welcome move towards peace in a troubled area.
It is the responsibility of all of us here to support the
parties, led by the United States, to capitalize on this
opportunity.
My Government continues to put its full support
behind Secretary Kerry and his team, and we urge the
Israeli and Palestinian leaderships to continue their
admirable focus and commitment.
This year started on a positive note, with the
implementation of Israel’s brave decision to release
the third tranche of Palestinian prisoners. The United
Kingdom firmly believes that such steps, despite their
difficulty, are important to achieving a lasting peace
and security.
However, we are very concerned by Israel’s
decision to announce further settlement-building in
East Jerusalem and the West Bank. My Government
condemns these announcements and considers such
actions as a serious threat to peace. We urge Israel
to avoid any further illegal settlement activity and to
reverse the advancement of plans. The United Kingdom
has also been clear that for this process to be a success,
the people on the ground, both Israelis and Palestinians,
need to see the real and tangible benefits of peace.
We therefore remain deeply concerned about the 663
Palestinian-owned homes and livelihood structures
demolished in Area C and East Jerusalem in 2013.
Demolitions and evictions are harmful to the peace
process and in all but the most limited circumstances
are contrary to international humanitarian law.
Reports of price tag attacks, including on a mosque
in Deir Istiya village on 15 January, are also of serious
concern. We condemn such acts and urge the Israeli
authorities to bring those responsible to justice. We are
also concerned about rocket fire from the Gaza Strip
into Israel and, in particular, condemn the rockets fired
at Ashkelon on 16 January in violation of international
law. All parties must respect the 12 November ceasefire
agreement in full. The people of Gaza and Israel will
only lose from further violence.
There will be difficult decisions in the months
ahead, but we urge all those involved to keep their
shared goal in mind — a negotiated two-State solution
leading to a sovereign, viable and contiguous Palestinian
State living in peace and security alongside a safe and
secure Israel. The United Kingdom stands ready to do
its part. That is why we strongly back the European

14-2097627/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Union’s readiness to offer an unprecedented package of
political, economic and security support to both parties
in the event that a final status deal is reached.
On Syria, the Secretary-General has made clear
that the aim of this week’s second Geneva Conference
on Syria is to assist the Syrian parties in ending the
violence and achieving a comprehensive agreement for
a political settlement, implementing fully the Geneva
communiqué (S/2013/523, annex), while preserving
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria. As the permanent members of the Council
agreed on 30 June 2012, and as was endorsed by the
full Security Council in resolution 2118 (2013) last
September, that means agreeing to the establishment
of a transitional governing body in Syria with full
executive powers formed by mutual consent to meet the
aspirations of the Syrian people.
Yesterday, the Secretary-General announced that
he was extending an invitation to Iran to attend the
opening of the Conference at Montreux on the basis
that it acknowledges that the Conference’s purpose
is the full implementation of the original Geneva
communiqué. If the Iranians are to attend, it is now vital
that their Government confirm publicly and clearly that
they share that understanding. We have also urged the
United Nations, as mandated by the Security Council
in many resolutions, including resolution 2122 (2013)
of October 2013, to ensure a full role for women in the
Syrian peace negotiations.
It is important to remember that those negotiations
will be a process, not a single event. We should not
underestimate the formidable challenges ahead, and
we must not lose sight of the desperate situation that
Syrian civilians are facing on a daily basis. The Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights now puts the death
toll at over 125,000 people. In Aleppo and across all
of Syria, we have seen the regime continue to attack
its own civilian population with barrel bombs. That
indiscriminate bombardment is yet another war crime
on the part of the regime, and Al-Assad and those
around him should have no doubt that the world will
hold them to account. The situation in Syria should be
referred to the International Criminal Court.
The humanitarian crisis has reached catastrophic
proportions. Eleven million Syrians are in desperate
need of urgent assistance, particularly in besieged and
hard to reach areas. It is an unparalleled crisis, and the
world needs to respond accordingly.

28/32

20/01/2014

We welcome the $2.4 billion of pledges made at the
Kuwait pledging conference last week. My Government
announced a further pledge of $163 million in
humanitarian assistance, bringing our total contribution
to nearly $1 billion — the largest sum that the United
Kingdom has ever committed to a single crisis. The
funding is going towards meeting the basic life-saving
needs of Syrians affected by the conflict, both inside
Syria and in Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq. We
pay tribute to those neighbouring countries, including
Jordan, for the burden they are carrying to help alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people.
But increased funding can make a difference
only if there is progress on access and protection for
humanitarian actors in Syria, where 21 United Nations
staff members remain in Government detention
and 47 humanitarian workers have now been killed.
Progress on implementing the Council’s presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) remains
extremely limited. It is unacceptable that humanitarian
organizations are being deliberately obstructed by the
regime from delivering aid. The regime has shown that
it can facilitate access for chemical weapons inspectors;
it needs to show the same commitment to ensuring aid
reaches those most in need.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
we warmly welcome you to the Security Council and
congratulate you on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Council.
I would like first of all to commend the Council
for its initiative to include the situation in the Middle
East on its agenda and for the constant interest it has
shown in that question. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and the representative
of Israel and observer of the State of Palestine for their
statements. I would also like to welcome all delegations
that have joined the list to speak in the Council today.
When talking about the situation in the Middle
East, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict comes first to
mind despite the seriousness of the Syrian crisis
and its impact on its neighbouring countries such
as Lebanon. Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict — which, given its enduring nature, complexity
and regional implications, remains a major concern of
the international community — we, like many others,
believe that in the absence of a final, just and equitable
solution that will guarantee security for Israel and
an independent and viable State for the Palestinians,

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

it would be difficult to claim that an effective and
lasting peace has been achieved in the Middle East. In
that regard, legal frameworks and possible potential
solutions to conflicts having disastrous consequences
that have lasted for far too long are already contained
in the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002 and existing agreements between the
two parties.
Therefore, Palestinians and Israelis must make
greater efforts to continue negotiations to reach a
comprehensive resolution of all issues inherent in
final status that will put an end to the occupation and
conflict. These include the issues of territory, security,
the status of Jerusalem, refugees, settlements and water,
all of which should be based on the principle of two
States living side by side, where each party recognizes
the legitimate right of the other to live in peace and
security. In our humble opinion, only a negotiated, just
and lasting settlement is likely to enable the Palestinian
people to regain their basic rights and the Israeli people
to live in peace and security within the borders of 1967.
The option for peace is naturally incompatible with
the continued colonization of the occupied territories,
the continued blockade of Gaza, air strikes on civilians
and rocket attacks against innocent Israeli citizens.
Those actions not only undermine the peace process
but also undermine the efforts of the international
community, which is working towards the two-State
solution.
For us, it is clear that the time has come to
recognize a State of Palestine alongside the State of
Israel. We must have the courage to take that step as
it is essential to advancing peace between the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples. In that regard, we welcome
the General Assembly decision in resolution 67/19 to
grant to Palestine non-member observer State status
in the Organization and UNESCO’s decision to admit
Palestine as a member. In any event, we welcome and
encourage the efforts of the international community
in general, and of the United States of America, in
particular, to revive direct negotiations between the two
parties to the conflict. Those efforts, however laudable,
are insufficient in and of themselves; both parties must
still demonstrate a genuine political will to overcome
the current impasse so that a new impetus can be given
to negotiations.
We therefore urgently call on the entire international
community, including the United Nations, the European

S/PV.7096

Union, the League of Arab States, as well as States
with influence on both parties, to further encourage
the State of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to take
steps to build mutual trust in order to resume direct
negotiations.
We are deeply troubled by the situation in Syria.
It calls on us all to act because the current situation is
particularly serious. We do not have the right to let an
entire population fall to its demise. The use of chemical
weapons, which speaks to a dramatic escalation of the
civil war in that country, is an affront to the human
conscience and the ideals that led to the founding of
our Organization. While we welcome the process to
destroy Syrian chemical weapons launched following
the agreement between the United States and Russia,
my country would like to see those who have used those
weapons identified and brought before an international
tribunal.
Moreover, we are horrified to see Syria deteriorate
to this point and to see Syrians kill each other with
such violence. The international community must
spare no effort in stopping that tragedy. The alleged
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the bombing of civilians and
summary executions must be categorically condemned
and the perpetrators — whoever they may be — must be
prosecuted. We also express our dismay at the atrocities
committed by terrorist groups linked to Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant, which are
exacerbating the situation with their fierce fighting,
leading to hundreds of deaths, not to mention the abuses
of which they are guilty.
Given that chaos, we hope that the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, scheduled to begin on 22 January,
will provide an appropriate solution to the Syrian crisis
by bringing together all segments of Syrian society and
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
Chad hopes that the Syrian National Coalition does not
backpedal on its courageous decision to take part in the
Conference.
We strongly hope that the Conference can stop the
cycle of violence and provide a lasting solution to the
Syrian crisis. If the negotiations at the second Geneva
Conference lead to a solution to the crisis, which we
dearly hope for, the international community must
immediately start thinking about support measures for
Syria in its reconstruction and peacebuilding efforts.

14-2097629/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Finally, I want to talk about the situation in Lebanon,
which has borne the brunt of the consequences of the
Syrian crisis. Recently, Lebanon has become a stage for
car bombings and other deadly terrorist attacks, which
we firmly condemn. In that regard, allow me to welcome
the opening last Thursday in The Hague, before the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, of the trial in absentia
of the alleged assassins of former Prime Minister of
Lebanon Rafik Hariri and 21 other individuals.
The cycle of attacks and reprisals committed
since the past summer in Lebanon could exacerbate
intercommunal tensions and threaten the already fragile
national unity. Besides the violence, the presence in
Lebanon of more than 1 million Syrian refugees is also
a source of tension, which could further complicate
the situation. Given the risk of the destabilization of
Lebanon, the international community must pay greater
attention to the situation of that country in order to help
it better withstand the consequences of the Syrian crisis
and preserve its unity, cohesion and stability.
Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): Allow me to express my
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestian question, as well as on the peace prospects
in the region.
Rwanda wishes to express its appreciation to all
stakeholders involved in the Middle East peace process,
particularly the United States Government through
Secretary of State John Kerry. We commend his tireless
efforts in bringing both sides to direct negotiations,
and we hope that the parties will seize this opportunity
to chart the way forward towards a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestian conflict. The current
negotiations are at a critical moment that requires
both sides to demonstrate not only trust, decency and
sincerity, but also readiness to sacrifice some of their
important positions so as to reach a genuine peace
agreement.
Rwanda is confident that the two parties can reach
a two-State solution for both peoples, with a viable
independent State of Palestine living side by side in peace
with a secure Israel. In order to reach that agreement,
there must an intentional show of good will and
confidence-building between Israel and the Palestinian
people, such as refraining from cross-border attacks
and from all provocations, including negative media
propaganda and all forms of incitement to violence that
would jeopardize the ongoing negotiations.

30/32

20/01/2014

In that regard, we commend the Israeli Government
for continuing to honour its commitment by releasing
the third batch of 26 Palestinian prisoners, and we
welcome the recent measure undertaken by the
Palestinian Authority and facilitated by the Government
of Israel to respond to the direct impact of the recent
storm, which included permitting the delivery of water
pumps, humanitarian assistance and 1.2 millions litres
of industrial fuel to the Gaza power plant, as part of
the Qatari donation. However, my delegation strongly
condemns the continued rocket attacks into southern
Israel from Gaza, which remain a significant concern of
ongoing negotiations. We call on all parties concerned
in Gaza to participate in the peace process, which is
the only viable channel to the stability of the region.
Acts of that kind threaten to worsen the already fragile
situation on the ground and could derail the ongoing
negotiations.
With regard to the Syrian conflict, Rwanda is
extremely concerned by the deteriorating situation
in that country, which makes it more urgent to put an
end to the violence and to the suffering of the Syrian
people, and to find a political solution. We still believe
that there is no military solution to the Syrian conflict
and the cost of war is too high to endure. The crisis
has already claimed more than 100,000 innocent lives,
with over 9 million in urgent humanitarian need. We
urge all parties to respond positively to the opportunity
to find a political solution through the second Geneva
Conference on Syria and to cease hostilities. It is also
important that the concerned States, particularly the
permanent members of this body dedicated to peace
and security, stop supplying weapons to conflicting
parties that are responsible for gross violations of
human rights.
In that connection, I extend my heartfelt
appreciation to the United States and the Russian
Federation, as well as to the United Nations through the
Joint Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for their efforts in bringing all parties together to
resolve the crisis in Syria. In that context, Rwanda is
concerned about the thousands of innocent civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, who have
been trapped or besieged in contested areas and cut off
from aid for a month now due to continued fighting
between the Government and the rebel forces.
We welcome the high-level pledging conference for
Syria that took place on 15 January in Kuwait, and we
thank the donor community for its strong commitment.

14-20976

20/01/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We urge all those who pledged to honour their
pledges in time to serve the critical conditions of the
Syrians. We also call on all parties in Syria to take all
appropriate measures to facilitate safe and unhindered
access to populations in need of assistance, as put
forward by the presidential statement of 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/15). It is important that the parties to
the conflict observe local ceasefires in order to help
humanitarian assistance to reach the needy, and that
they respect all their obligations under international
law.
With regard to Lebanon, we welcome the opening
of the trial by the Special Tribunal for Lebanon of four
suspects nearly nine years after the heinous attacks that
killed former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 21 other
people. Nevertheless, the overall situation in Lebanon
seems to be deteriorating. Rwanda strongly condemns
the recent series of violent attacks in Beirut and in
the northern city of Tripoli, as well as the shelling in
the Bekaa Valley that resulted in several deaths and
injuries. Of equal concern is the continued sectarian
tension in Lebanon, which is identified as part of the
spill-over from the Syrian conflict. We reiterate that
the only path to ending these sectarian tensions and
violence in Lebanon will entirely depend on a positive
outcome of the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
which is expected to end the Syrian conflict.
My delegation continues to urge the Lebanese
Government to remain steadfast to the Baabda
Declaration, setting out a policy of disassociation with
regard to the conflict in Syria. We further encourage
all parties in Lebanon to show commitment and
compromise in forming a new Lebanese Government,
which will facilitate the ending of tensions.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the presence of Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, to preside over today’s
open debate. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing. China also listened carefully to the
statements made by the representatives of Israel and
Palestine.
The question of Palestine has always been a core
issue of the situation in the Middle East. It has remained
unresolved for a long time, which has not only brought
severe suffering to the Palestinian people but also made
it impossible to achieve peace between Palestine and
Israel, much less peace and stability in the Middle East.
Establishing an independent State of Palestine and the

S/PV.7096

peaceful coexistence of Palestine and Israel are the
only way forward and also an important guarantee for
achieving long-term peace and stability in the Middle
East.
China has always maintained that the parties
concerned should adhere to the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map for peace
in the Middle East, and, on this basis and through
political negotiations, establish an independent State
of Palestine, with full sovereignty based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
China supports the ongoing Palestinian-Israeli
peace talks, which are at a critical juncture. If they do
not forge ahead, they will suffer a setback. Palestine and
Israel should recognize each other’s right to exist and
accommodate the other’s reasonable concerns. This is
indispensable for the progress of any negotiations. We
sincerely hope that Palestine and Israel will seize this
opportunity, seek common ground and demonstrate
good will so as to promptly find a definitive solution
and promote early substantive progress in the peace
talks.
China is opposed to Israeli settlement activities
in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and other occupied
Palestinian territories. In the current circumstances,
an end to settlement activities and violence against
innocent civilians, as well as the full lifting of the
blockade against the Gaza Strip, are of critical
importance to maintaining an environment conducive
to the peace talks.
The General Assembly has designated 2014 the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. With the ongoing turbulence in the Middle
East, the international community should proceed
on the basis of the overall goal of maintaining peace
and stability in the Middle East, strengthen the sense
of urgency in seeking a solution to the PalestinianIsraeli question, and enhance efforts to encourage the
relevant parties to achieve peace through talks. China
hopes that the Quartet will take concrete measures in
that regard. We support the Security Council in playing
a greater role in finding a solution to the PalestinianIsraeli question.
China has always attached great importance to
the question of the Middle East and is committed to
promoting the peace process. In May 2013, for the first
time ever, China received simultaneous visits from

14-2097631/32

S/PV.7096

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian and Israeli leaders. President Xi Jinping
put forward a four-point proposal for a solution to the
Palestinian question, fully demonstrating the Chinese
Government’s sincerity and positive attitude in
promoting peace in the Middle East. In December 2013,
Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi visited
Palestine and Israel and further encouraged both parties
to achieve peace through talks. China will continue to
follow the four-point proposal put forward by President
Xi Jinping, work hard to promote peace talks between
Palestinians and Israelis, and play a greater role so as to
make it due contribution to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
China has closely followed the situation in Syria.
Developments over the past three years have fully
demonstrated that military means will not settle the
question of Syria. Political settlement through dialogue
and negotiation is the only correct choice and is also
the object of international consensus. It is also, more
importantly, the direction that all the parties must
follow in the future.
We welcome and support the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, to be held on 22 January in
Switzerland. Yesterday, Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs Wang Yi put forward a five-point proposal
for a political solution to the question of Syria. First,
the Syrian issue must be resolved through political
means. Secondly, the future of Syria must be decided
by its own people. Thirdly, an inclusive political
transition process must be promoted. Fourthly, national
reconciliation and unity must be achieved in Syria.

32/32

20/01/2014

Fifthly, humanitarian assistance must be delivered in
Syria and its neighbouring countries.
The second Geneva Conference on Syria will mark
the beginning of dialogue and negotiations, which
should be an ongoing process. We hope that all the
parties in Syria will work with the future of the nation
and the overall interests of the entire Syrian people in
mind, demonstrate political will, seize the opportunity,
come to the negotiating table and seek common ground
so as to find a solution that meets national needs and
takes into consideration the interests of all of the parties.
The international community should firmly
uphold the Charter of the United Nations and the basic
norms guiding international relations; commit itself
to maintaining the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria; respect the will and
choice of the Syrian people; adopt a just, balanced
and impartial attitude; play a constructive role in
promoting peace talks; create favourable conditions
for the political transition; and support the efforts of
the Secretary-General and Mr. Brahimi, Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria, so as to maintain and fully
leverage the United Nations leading role in good offices
and mediation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

14-20976
