S/2020/427

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 21 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith copies of the briefing provided
by Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, as well as the statements delivered by the
representatives of China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, the Niger, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam, in connection
with the video-teleconference on the Middle East (Syria) convened on Tuesday,
19 May 2020. Statements were also delivered by the representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, these briefing
and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.

(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-07030 (E) 010620 080620

*2007030*

S/2020/427

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
I will focus my briefing today on two areas: first, the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) in Syria and the preparedness and response measures under
way; and, secondly, the humanitarian response across Syria and the findings of the
Secretary-General’s review of United Nations humanitarian cross-line and crossborder operations (S/2020/401), which was circulated last week.
Let me start with the latest update on COVID-19 cases. To date, the Syrian
authorities have confirmed 58 cases in the country, including three fatalities. Another
six cases have been recorded in the north-east, including one fatality. No cases have
been confirmed in the north-west.
Building up the limited laboratory and case investigation capacities remains
a major priority, and the United Nations is reinforcing this effort across Syria. That
includes considerable support from the World Health Organization (WHO) for
the progressive expansion of testing capacities in Damascus, Aleppo, Latakia and
Homs — from conducting repairs to providing essential equipment, reagents and
on-site training of laboratory technicians.
Testing capacity is not yet sufficiently established for epidemiological evidence
across the country, including in the north-east, where further efforts are under way
with support from national and international partners. The United Nations, including
the World Health Organization, stands ready to further support the expansion of
testing capacities across Syria in accordance with the epidemiological situation
and needs.
Support is also under way for infection prevention and control — from risk
communication and community engagement to isolation centres. Some $23 million
has already been allocated from the Syria Humanitarian Fund, administered by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to support COVID-19
preventative measures. I thank the donors whose contributions have paid for that.
However, there remain significant shortages of personal protective equipment
and other medical items across the country. Let me echo what Geir Pedersen said
to the Council yesterday (see S/2020/420), further to the Secretary-General’s global
call for the waiver of sanctions that can undermine the capacity of countries to
ensure access to food, essential health supplies and medical support to respond to
the pandemic. Like Geir, I note the public assurances by relevant States that their
sanctions programmes relating to Syria neither ban the flow of humanitarian supplies
nor target medicine and medical devices. I welcome their commitments to fully and
expeditiously apply humanitarian exemptions. I continue to follow this issue closely.
As in many other countries, we are seeing the economic impact of the
pandemic before we see infections peak. After an initial jump at the end of March,
the average price of the national reference food basket for April is 15 per cent higher
than the March average, and more than double the average recorded in April 2019. It
is now higher than at any time since the crisis began.
In the north-west, which relies heavily on imported goods, the Syrian pound
continues to lose value against the United States dollar. Local sources report that,
as of this morning, the exchange rate in some parts of Idlib has fallen as low as
1,950 Syrian pounds to the dollar. That is a depreciation of 54 per cent since the end
of April. The cost of a dollar has more than trebled in the past 12 months; the rate
was 570 Syrian pounds to the dollar in May 2019. The consequences of this for the
purchasing power of local communities are severe.
2/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

In early 2020, before the economic impacts of COVID-19 were felt in Syria,
an estimated 80 per cent of people already lived below the poverty line. The added
impact of the pandemic is now driving food insecurity to record levels. The World
Food Programme announced last week that an estimated 9.3 million people in Syria
are now food insecure, up from an estimated 7.9 million people six months ago.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, warned this
month that killings of civilians across Syria are increasing, and various parties
to the conflict, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, appear to view
the COVID-19 pandemic as an opportunity to regroup and inflict violence on
the population.
I now turn to humanitarian operations in the north-west, where aid deliveries
continue at record levels.
In April, 1,365 trucks crossed from Turkey into the north-west through the
Security Council-authorized border crossings at Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Hawa.
This is an increase of more than 130 per cent on April 2019. There are three main
reasons for the scale-up. The first reason is the rapid deterioration of the humanitarian
situation since December, which continues to demand increased levels of assistance.
The second is the need to prepare for the impact of COVID-19. As I have said before,
the north-west is considered at extremely high risk of an outbreak. The third pressure
stems from the uncertainty under which we are operating.
The authorization of cross-border assistance under resolution 2504 (2020)
represents the sole channel for the United Nations to deliver life-saving assistance to
millions of people in north-west Syria. It is up for renewal in less than two months.
Members have received the Secretary-General’s review of cross-line and crossborder operations. In paragraph 1, the Secretary-General highlights that he has
submitted the review ahead of schedule to allow the Council to take a timely decision
and avoid the disruption of aid. The findings of the review are clear — meeting the
enormous humanitarian needs in the north-west requires a renewal of the crossborder authorization for the Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Hawa border crossings for
an additional 12 months. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism should be
extended for the same period.
That decision cannot be left to the last minute. Too many lives are at stake.
Sustaining pipelines in this massive operation requires weeks, and often months, of
lead time. An environment of uncertainty risks the continuity of aid. It undermines
the ability of humanitarian organizations to save lives.
In the meantime, our colleagues involved in the operation, from the loading
staff and the drivers to the United Nations coordinators and monitors, are relentlessly
at the border every working day during Ramadan, amid the challenges posed by the
pandemic, to scale up deliveries.
I now turn to the north-east and the ongoing efforts to increase cross-line
deliveries of medical supplies following the removal of Al-Yarubiyah as an authorized
border crossing.
I am pleased to report that on 10 May, the World Health Organization was
able to deliver a 30-ton consignment of medical supplies to Qamishli by road. A
second consignment of 23 tons is expected to arrive in the coming days. That is
the first overland delivery of WHO supplies to the north-east in two years. WHO is
committed to responding to the humanitarian needs of all Syrians in the north-east
by the most direct routes, particularly in order to reach the most vulnerable.
While this overland delivery is a very welcome step, let me be clear that much
more needs to be done to bridge the gap in medical assistance for the north-east. At
20-070303/25

S/2020/427

present, the medical supplies delivered cross-line to north-east Syria are reaching
31 per cent of the facilities that previously depended on the Al-Yarubiyah border
crossing for those supplies.
The findings of the Secretary-General’s review of cross-line and cross-border
operations are also clear with regard to the north-east. A combination of more
cross-border and cross-line access is required to sustain, and preferably increase,
humanitarian assistance. In the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/139) released in
February, several cross-border options were identified as alternatives to Al-Yarubiyah.
His report also described their limitations in comparison to Al-Yarubiyah.
Also in the north-east, the provision of water from the Allouk station has again
been interrupted and reduced many times since my last briefing (see S/2020/354),
creating severe disruptions in the water supply, especially in Al-Hasakah city
and internally displaced persons camps in the area. At least half a million people
are affected.
To compensate, humanitarian agencies have scaled up emergency water
trucking, but this is neither a sufficient nor a sustainable solution. Access to water
in all areas is all the more critical during this COVID-19 pandemic. Across Syria,
relevant parties need to ensure the provision of basic services to civilians.
I have briefed the Council on the ongoing COVID-19 response across Syria, as
well as the assistance being channelled through the cross-border operation. Let me also
highlight the broader response operation under way from within Syria in areas under
the Government’s control, where the United Nations and its partner organizations
reach most of those we assist. In the first quarter of 2020, the humanitarian operation
delivered food assistance for 3.3 million people; 3.3 million medical procedures;
more than 2 million medical treatment courses; life-saving water, sanitation and
hygiene assistance for 1.2 million people; education for 1.3 million people; and
nutrition support for almost half a million people.
In conclusion, I will reiterate my key ask to the Council today. The crossborder operation for north-west Syria, authorized by the Security Council, is a
lifeline for millions of civilians whom the United Nations cannot reach by other
means. It cannot be substituted. Its authorization must be renewed. An early decision
by the Council will avoid the disruption of that vital operation and help humanitarian
organizations to continue the scale-up that the current needs and the prospect of
COVID-19 demand. A delay will increase suffering and cost lives.

4/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. We have also
studied very carefully the report of the Secretary-General on cross-line and crossborder operations in Syria (S/2020/401). We welcome the presence of colleagues
from Syria and from Turkey to participate in this meeting.
China is paying close attention to the humanitarian situation in Syria. We are
worried that the humanitarian situation could be further exacerbated by the impact
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We welcome the ceasefire appeals made by
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, and we call on all parties to enhance
mutual trust and jointly safeguard the well-being of the Syrian people.
As we have stated repeatedly, the Syrian Government bears the primary
responsibility for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria, including
preventing and containing the spread of COVID-19. Its role cannot be replaced.
The Syrian Government has taken responsive measures to raise public awareness
of the virus and reduce the risk of community transmission. Those efforts should
be acknowledged. We encourage the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, other United Nations agencies and the international community to help
strengthen Syria’s capacity to respond to the pandemic. China has provided medical
assistance to Syria to combat COVID-19, and we will continue to do so.
Concerning cross-line humanitarian assistance, we are pleased to see
improvement in the scale of such operations. The Syrian Government has maintained
close contact with the United Nations in conducting cross-line operations as well
as assessment missions. We encourage further cooperation and coordination in
that regard. The relevant parties should enhance political dialogue and remove all
obstacles that hinder cross-line humanitarian access to the north-west and north-east
of Syria.
With regard to cross-border humanitarian assistance, our position has been
clear and consistent. We agree that all forms of humanitarian operations should be
modified to meet the new challenges posed by the pandemic and take into full account
the needs of the Syrian people. Meanwhile, we should remember that the cross-border
mechanism was established as a contingency or temporary measure. The sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria must be respected under any circumstance.
It is also our view that the humanitarian issue in Syria should be dealt with
in an integrated and impartial way. We call on all parties to continue to engage in
a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Civilians and their livelihoods must be protected. In that connection, we reiterate
the urgency of the immediate lifting of unilateral sanctions, which not only hinder
medical supplies, but also undermine a country’s capacity to mobilize resources,
develop its economy and improve people’s livelihoods. There is no way to justify
unilateral sanctions. We call for more analysis on the humanitarian implications of
sanctions in future reports on the Syrian humanitarian issue.

20-070305/25

S/2020/427

Annex III
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and,
through him, express our gratitude to the team that supported the SecretaryGeneral in providing the Council with the review of United Nations humanitarian
cross-line and cross-border operations (S/2020/401) in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Dominican Republic appreciates the level of detail provided in the review,
complemented by the Under-Secretary-General’s views today.
As we read through the report, we had one main question. How can we
alleviate the current and potential suffering of the people living in the north-west
and north-east of Syria, trapped in the uncertainties of a pandemic and the escalation
of violence at any moment?
In such a context, we agree that an all-modalities approach is the only way
to meet the growing needs of Syrians who are facing the dire consequences of a
long conflict, an economic crisis, food insecurity and now a potential public health
crisis for which they are not prepared. Conflict has been the trigger for all those
calamities. Therefore, as long as there is conflict, but, above all, as long as there are
humanitarian needs, we must provide the conditions for the international community
to address those needs in the most direct and effective way.
Protecting the dignity of those affected must be at the heart of any humanitarian
operation in Syria. That requires much more from within Syria. It requires for the
Syrian authorities to strengthen their capacity to work in coordination with the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations on the ground; to provide, without
delay, the much-needed humanitarian assistance to Syrians, whoever and wherever
they are, in a timely and principled way.
It also requires effective preparation for possible coronavirus disease outbreak
in the north-east, where we have seen a gap in the provision of medical assistance due
to the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah border-crossing point and given the difficulties
with cross-line access from within Syria. We believe that the report of the SecretaryGeneral is very clear in highlighting this gap. Now, to address it, the Security Council
will need to take appropriate action, in a constructive and unpoliticized way.
The position of the Dominican Republic is clear, and we stand ready to work
with all Council members to respond to these pressing challenges through an allmodalities approach.
In that regard, we recognize the efforts to upscale the cross-border assistance
to the north-west, which has, once again, proven to be life-saving for millions of
civilians. The Dominican Republic believes that this operation merits our full
support, and it must be improved with the aim of serving the affected population
even better.
To conclude, we reiterate our call for a sustainable, lasting ceasefire across
the entire Syrian Arab Republic to, first, facilitate humanitarian assistance to all
those in need and, secondly, to enable the only solution to this conflict — a political
solution based on the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and facilitated by
the United Nations.

6/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
We greatly appreciate the efforts of humanitarian workers on the front lines in
Syria. We also strongly support Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire amid
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing. It is encouraging to hear that the
ceasefire agreement in the north-east of Syria is holding. Estonia supports efforts of
Turkey and Russia to sustain this peace and find a permanent settlement.
Looking at cross-border and cross-line humanitarian aid, we want to stress
main conclusion of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA):
that these are complimentary mechanisms. In order to reach all Syrians, the Security
Council needs to maintain both of these mechanisms.
We can see how delicate the balance is by looking at what happened in the
north-east after the closure of Al-Yarubiyah in January. There is now an acute
shortage of aid in multiple locations. According to OCHA, the urgency of the situation
grows, as humanitarian aid only reaches one third of facilities previously supported
through the cross-border mechanism. We must seriously consider the reopening of
Al-Yarubiyah to get to help all those in need.
Estonia calls on Security Council members to support the efforts of the
humanitarian co-penholders, Belgium and Germany, in renewing cross-border aid
in July. That is even more important now, as Syria faces the spread of COVID-19.
Finally, as other members of the European Union (EU) have already explained,
the EU sanctions do not hinder humanitarian aid or the response to the virus. Lifesaving equipment and medical items will always freely reach Syria. EU members
also remain the largest humanitarian donors to Syrians across the whole region.

20-070307/25

S/2020/427

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
At the outset, I express my warm thanks to Mark Lowcock for his presentation.
The spread of the coronavirus disease in Syria is extremely worrisome. The
pandemic is becoming a multiplier of humanitarian needs in a country where more
than 11 million people rely on humanitarian assistance.
An immediate and sustainable nationwide ceasefire is more than necessary —
there is no alternative to fight the pandemic effectively. This is all the more crucial
as the ceasefire in the north-west remains fragile.
Unfortunately, the regime has not responded to the appeal by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire. We call on all parties, and
especially the regime, to work actively in that direction.
The United Nations must remain at the forefront of these efforts, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
I would like to reiterate the obligation on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law. The protection of civilians should be at the core of every
party’s concerns. All parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must ensure
humanitarian access.
It is crucial to overcome the shortage of essential supplies and equipment to
prevent and respond to the spread of the pandemic. They need to be shipped by the
most direct routes to reach their intended beneficiaries, the most vulnerable.
It can never be repeated it enough: the cross-border mechanism has never been
so relevant, in the north-west and the north-east alike. France remains determined to
preserve that life-saving mechanism. Its extension for 12 months, as required by the
Secretary-General, is essential.
In the north-west, the scaling up of the humanitarian delivery through the two
crossing points must absolutely continue. The risks are immense, both locally and
for the region.
In the north-east, gaps in medical supplies have widened as a result of the loss
of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point. The delivery of a World Health Organization
convoy last week is a positive step but should not fool us: Damascus is not providing
the United Nations with the sufficient and timely authorizations needed to compensate
for the loss of Al-Yarubiyah. The figures speak for themselves: only 31 per cent of
health facilities previously supported through cross-border assistance are receiving
aid. As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/401), the cross-line
modality is clearly not sufficient on its own to meet current needs in the north-east.
Indeed, cross-line coverage is largely similar to that recorded in 2019. This means
there has been no improvement in cross-line since 10 January. This is all the more
worrisome as the pandemic is spreading in the north-east. North-east Syria needs
cross-border assistance through a dedicated crossing point.
We support all efforts to prevent and punish human rights violations.
Mass atrocity crimes will not go unpunished. France will continue to strongly
support all efforts to collect and preserve evidence to support proceedings before
competent jurisdictions.

8/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

We reaffirm the importance of sharing the full report of the Board of Inquiry
with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism and the Commission
of Inquiry to further investigate incidents and bring their perpetrators to justice.
Lastly, as indicated yesterday (see S/2020/420), only a political solution in line
with resolution 2254 (2015) will bring an end to the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.

20-070309/25

S/2020/427

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing.
Niger salutes the daily efforts of humanitarian agencies to help people in need
throughout Syria, especially during the current pandemic.
My delegation would like to reaffirm its support for the cross-border mechanism
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/401), on the review of United Nations humanitarian crossline and cross-border operations in Syria.
The Niger commends the cooperation between the Syrian authorities and the
World Health Organization and national organizations in their efforts to prevent and
fight against the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Considering the fact
that even countries with better health care are struggling against COVID-19, we
remain concern about the capacity of the Syrian health infrastructure, degraded by
years of conflicts, to adequately cope with the situation.
Similarly, a large number of vulnerable people, including internally displace
persons and refugees, primarily women and children, are at high risk of contracting
the virus. That would create a larger crisis, given that social distancing is near
impossible in overcrowded camps.
The Niger calls on the Syrian Government and humanitarian agencies to work
out additional partnership initiatives to protect Syrians in all parts of the country.
We also call on all the stakeholders to fully comply with the calls of SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire in
Syria and beyond to enable an all-out effort against the COVID-19 pandemic.
We regret that the full capacity of the cross-border operation in north-east Syria
could not be realized. According to the estimates of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, only 30 per cent of prior humanitarian access has been
sustained since the border closure. This has resulted in aid not being delivered at its
optimum level. Therefore, improvements and enhancements need to be made. The
alternative modalities that the United Nations chose still require sustained crossborder and cross-line access. Moreover, COVID-19-related restrictions make the
situation more acute.
Furthermore, we call on the donor community to respond favourably to the
many appeals of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs concerning
the need for increased assistance to the millions of Syrians in need.
Therefore, the Niger reiterates its support for resolution 2165 (2014) and calls
for the opening of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing on humanitarian grounds. The
border crossing is necessary for United Nations agencies to provide aid and medical
support to the millions of Syrians in the north-eastern provinces of Syria.
In conclusion, the Niger calls on all stakeholders to ensure that the delivery of
humanitarian assistance is sustained and unhindered and that humanitarian workers
are protected in their work in all parts of Syria.

10/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
Let me, first of all, thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his briefing. We have heard a lot today with regard to the deteriorating
humanitarian situation.
We were not able to receive answers to our questions at the last meeting. We
hope it will be different this time.
We studied carefully the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/401) on the
review of the United Nations humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations,
and would like to flag the following points.
The report cites economic problems inside Syria, such as price increases
and shortages in some basic goods, but it ignores unilateral sanctions. We need the
Secretary-General’s assessments of how unilateral economic measures worsen the
economic situation and hinder the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
On humanitarian access to the north-west, according to reports of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), no COVID-19 cases have yet
been confirmed in that region. Why, then, does it say in paragraph 14 of the report
that the joint mission by the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to Idlib approved by the Government of
Syria was temporarily put on hold due to “concerns related to COVID-19”? What
were those concerns? We have different information, which says that it was Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham that blocked that mission. To us, the reason is obvious: Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham does not want it — it would undermine their monopoly control over crossborder assistance.
We all know that Idlib is controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, but the crossborder operations have always been regular. The resonating story with arbitrary
levies by terrorists at Bab Al-Hawa border crossing in Idlib in late 2018 did not
prevent the continuation of United Nations cross-border operations there. Even
the Board of Inquiry, in its report of 6 April, admitted the financial accountability
problems of humanitarian operations in Idlib — the United Nations does not know
to whom it pays and cannot track the final distribution of aid.
Over the past five years, we have continuously underlined the need to make
a list of implementing partners and detailed nomenclature of supplies, to perform
systematic and preliminary notification of Syrian authorities and to mark convoys.
But none of that has been taken on board.
We would like to get back to the Secretary-General’s February report on the
review of alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139),
since it contains much more food for thought, especially now that the ongoing
campaign to reopen Al-Yarubiyah heats up and new arguments are taken out of an
old box.
No clear explanation is provided for why five other crossing points to the east
of the Euphrates controlled by Damascus cannot be used. In the Secretary-General’s
report, it is clearly stated that using those five would not require Security Council
authorization. Our understanding of the problem with using those crossing points is
that it would entail a request for the consent of Damascus.
As for recommendations in the report on the improvement of cross-line
deliveries — which allegedly do not function properly but are in fact the source of
the bulk of humanitarian assistance in Syria — the solution depends on one thing
20-0703011/25

S/2020/427

only: whether there is strong interest on the part of humanitarians in delivering
aid to those most in need rather than in inventing artificial obstacles and blaming
Damascus.
When the Government of Syria is required, in paragraph 47 (c), to
“approve access to all areas and facilities within north-east to ensure that
assistance reaches all people in need, impartially and without discrimination”,
OCHA forgets that some of those areas are not under the control of Damascus and,
as such, Damascus simply cannot guarantee the demanded provisions. Such issues
must be negotiated with local authorities. Does the United Nations have a plan on
how to do it and how to guarantee, for its part, that the assistance will reach the most
vulnerable? That applies to wherever the assistance comes from.
Let us turn to another recommendation, that in para 47 (d), addressing the
“facilitation of deliveries by local authorities in the north-east to all locations without
delay”. Whose prerogative is it to negotiate with local authorities? Who should be
responsible for it? Who is the United Nations addressing this question to? Maybe our
American colleagues can help with it?
I wish to welcome the first road convoy of the World Health Organization to
the north-east. We definitely need to study this example carefully. The International
Committee of the Red Cross and the non-governmental organization Médecins sans
frontières continue working to the east of the Euphrates as well. That means that, no
matter how complicated conditions are, it is possible to deliver humanitarian aid to
the north-east of Syria. What is needed is the will to do so.
We would also like to welcome the intention of the United Nations to establish
a laboratory in Qamishli based at the city’s national hospital. We heard this good
news that in Geneva from the Resident Coordinator in Damascus, Mr. Imran Riza.
We would like to receive more information on United Nations plans in this regard:
among other things, how it will be equipped and how will test samples be collected,
especially in the hard-to-reach areas not under the control of Damascus?
Concerning sanctions, repetitive slogans on humanitarian exemptions are —
and I am sorry to say so — not worth a penny. I highly recommend that those
colleagues — in particular Christoph, who addressed me yesterday — who keep
insisting that unilateral restrictive measures are harmless to ordinary citizens should
Google a recent European Union (EU) Commission guidance note on the provision
of humanitarian aid to fight the COVID-19 pandemic in certain environments
subject to EU restrictive measures, dated 11 May, which is specifically and in a
timely manner focused on Syria.
That document fully proves quite the opposite. Let me quote just one excerpt:
“Sanctions may alter countries’ ability to fight COVID-19 by affecting the
procurement of certain goods and technologies, either because such goods are
subject to restrictions (for instance, dual-use goods which can also be used
for military purposes), or because the persons involved in their procurement
are sanctioned. In addition, there may be an indirect, but significant effect
caused by certain operators’ unwillingness to engage in transactions related
to a sanctioned country or individual, even if those are legitimate (overcompliance), for fear of accidentally violating the sanctions, or a lack of
economic incentives to engage in comparison to the risks stemming from
those transactions. In addition, those targeted by restrictive measures may
pass on to the civilian population the economic consequences of international
sanctions imposed on them, thus increasing hardship for the non-targeted
civilian population”.
12/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

This relates to the claims aimed at whitewashing illegitimate sanctions
regimes. As a recent example, I would cite the negative experience of the Norwegian
Refugee Council when, owing to these restrictive measures, it refused to buy
interactive educational programmes for children in Syria. I want to draw the attention
of our Belgian colleagues, since they are responsible in the Council for the dossier
on children.
To sum up, I would say to colleagues, having negotiated resolutions on the
cross-border mechanism each time we agreed on its urgent but temporary status,
that they should not pretend they do not know about it, or probably they want to
forget. They should stop cherry-picking their individual political dividends that have
nothing to do with humanitarian principles.
Today I would like to reiterate what I said last time. No time should be wasted
on efforts to reopen the closed cross-border points. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs should be encouraged to work with Damascus to find
routes and cross-border points as well as on cross-line deliveries to the north-east
and throughout Syria. And, of course, we want to hear answers to our new set
of questions.

20-0703013/25

S/2020/427

Annex VIII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations, Isis Gonsalves
At the outset, I wish to thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines once again reiterates the Special Envoy’s
call for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. As the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) rages across the world, it is imperative that all
parties pull back from hostilities and focus on combating the pandemic. In that
context, we are pleased that the ceasefire in north-west Syria, although fragile,
continues to hold.
Even before the emergence of the pandemic, Syria’s health system was in a
precarious position, having been crippled by a decade of war. Continued hostilities
will only disrupt efforts to fight the virus and cause further deterioration of an
already dire humanitarian situation.
We recognize that the pandemic has necessitated the implementation of
restrictions on movement. However, we reiterate the need to strike a balance
between these measures, aimed at containment and suppression, and the urgent
need to preserve, scale up and coordinate the critical humanitarian response through
all modalities.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s timely review of humanitarian crossline and cross-border operations (S/2020/401). The humanitarian situation is indeed
a complex one, and there is no perfect solution. Humanitarian needs across Syria
are great. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines therefore remains in support of the
most favourable access arrangements, which will ensure the rapid, uninterrupted
and direct provision of aid to all who need it.
Despite the pandemic, the scourge of terrorism remains and continues to
threaten Syria’s sovereignty, the safety of its people and vital humanitarian action.
We recognize the need for counter-terrorism measures in this regard. However, we
yet again reiterate that such measures must respect international law. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure must be protected, and their targeting can never be justified.
We echo the appeal for the lifting of unilateral sanctions to assist Syria in
addressing its pressing humanitarian needs. We further encourage members of the
international community to contribute to Syria’s reconstruction; without it, millions
will remain displaced and deprived of basic necessities.
The dual threat of COVID-19 and conflict is leaving more people vulnerable
than ever before. Humanitarian considerations must take precedence over political
tensions, and we must prioritize cooperation.

14/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
I would like to thank Mr. Lowcock for his comprehensive and frank briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Let me take this opportunity to thank
the hundreds of humanitarian actors, volunteers and implementing partners who
continue to risk their own lives for the improvement of the lives of others.
The humanitarian challenges facing Syria are a direct consequence of the
continued conflict. While we recognize the right of the Syrian Arab Republic to
restore its control over the whole of its territory, South Africa is concerned about
the conflict in the north-west region as well as the continuing conflict in the northeast of Syria, particularly its impact on the humanitarian situation. We urge all
parties to seek a peaceful resolution of the conflict. Such a peaceful resolution
requires a cessation of hostilities and a solution that upholds Syrian sovereignty
and territorial integrity. For this to occur, external support for armed groups must
cease immediately, as we cannot allow external role-players to use this devastating
conflict in Syria as a proxy for their own interests.
The humanitarian challenges are being compounded by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The last few months have demonstrated that even the
world’s best and most highly funded health systems are straining under the impact
and spread of the virus. In Syria, the last nine years of conflict have resulted in
a fragile health system with a shortage of qualified health personnel and medical
equipment and supplies, as well as damage and destruction to health and medical
facilities. A cessation of hostilities throughout Syria and the safe, unimpeded and
impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it, as well as
the easing of sanctions, thus remain imperative.
Millions of people whose lives have already been marked by suffering and
displacement have taken refuge in camps, shelters and informal sites that have
limited access to essential services such as medical services, shelter and water and
sanitation infrastructure. Social distancing and regular hand-washing are a luxury
many have no access to.
With confirmed cases of COVID-19 now in Syria, including the particularly
vulnerable north-east region, delivering life-saving assistance safely is now
more challenging than ever. Preparedness and response planning are an essential
component of any humanitarian response effort, and we commend the United Nations
and its partners for their comprehensive COVID-19 response plan and encourage
the international community to fully support those efforts. As has been mentioned
previously, refugees and internally displaced persons in overcrowded camps, along
with the elderly and people with underlying health conditions, are particularly
vulnerable to COVID-19.
As has been reported in the Secretary-General’s review of United Nations
humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations (S/2020/401), cross-line
deliveries in the north-east are an essential component of the humanitarian response
operation. Now is not the time to limit or reduce humanitarian assistance to this
region, particularly given the confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the north-east. Gaps
in the delivery of aid must be addressed.
In the north-west, the Secretary-General’s review indicated that there is no
alternative to the cross-border operations that can match the current scale and needs
of humanitarian assistance. Where there is a need for assistance, all efforts must

20-0703015/25

S/2020/427

be made to ensure that humanitarian cross-border assistance is provided, using the
most direct means.
In conclusion, all parties must respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law for the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We, as members of the Security Council and the international
community, must be united in support of both the political and humanitarian tracks
to avoid a further humanitarian catastrophe and additional loss of life. South Africa
calls on all parties to exert every effort to fully implement resolution 2254 (2015)
and bring peace, security and stability to all of Syria.

16/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

Annex X
Statement by the Minister Plenipotentiary of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Adel Ben Lagha
I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has made the challenge of
delivering life-saving assistance to those in need across Syria ever more difficult.
After nine years of conflict, Syria is enormously underequipped to deal with the
pandemic, and Syrian health infrastructure is largely downgraded, fragmented
or destroyed.
The restrictions imposed on cross-border and cross-line humanitarian
movements widen the gaps and compound shortages, thus amplifying risks and
vulnerabilities. It is critically urgent to narrow the gaps and scale up nationwide
preparedness and response capacity so as to avoid a potentially catastrophic and
overwhelming outbreak of the disease in Syria. A focused effort to fight COVID-19
requires sustained calm throughout Syria and the commitment of all parties to safe,
timely, durable and unimpeded access of humanitarian aid, including of medical aid.
The recurring disruption of the water supply in north-eastern Syria because
of the hostilities is yet another issue of serious concern, as it hampers sanitation
and hygiene measures and aggravates vulnerabilities in the face of COVID-19 for
nearly half a million people in the region. We call on the parties to protect civilian
infrastructure, including water-supply infrastructure, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We thank the Secretary-General for his updated review, in implementation of
resolution 2504 (2020), and take note of his recommendations on the way forward for
cross-border and cross-line operations.
Tunisia reiterates that a dual approach, combining cross-border and crossline modalities, that is firmly based on needs remains pertinent for ensuring
the principled and effective delivery of humanitarian aid in Syria, along with a
strengthened United Nations monitoring mechanism of cross-border operations. We
stress the importance of such an approach being incremental, in a way that respects
and ultimately preserves Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, cross-border and cross-line modalities
will need to be recalibrated in northern Syria to ensure an efficient and coordinated
health response. More cross-line modalities from within Syria will be needed in order
to strengthen the cohesion of the Syrian national health response to the pandemic
and prevent its further fragmentation across regions. In that regard, we welcome the
stepping-up of cross-line operations in recent months in the north-east, the latest
of which was the 10 May delivery by land of COVID-19 medical treatment items.
We urge further cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and the
Syrian authorities, including on outstanding approvals of vital medical aid.
We also look forward to the establishment of cross-line operations in the
north-west following the 14 April agreement of Syrian authorities on a joint mission
by the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent in the region.

20-0703017/25

S/2020/427

Annex XI
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
Let me just start, if I might, by saying that I think that it is really important that
we try to keep the politics out of our humanitarian discussions. That is one reason
that we separate out into political, chemical weapons and humanitarian meetings
each month on Syria, to enable us to focus on the evidence and the facts as we grapple
with how we keep people alive, which is surely the most vital responsibility that the
Council faces. I have to say that I listened with sadness today to one representative
whose intervention was an attack on those providing aid across Syria and those
paying for it. I want to remind everybody that the biggest donors to the Syria appeal
are the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and the European Union (EU),
including those areas under Al-Assad’s rule.
So what does an evidence-based approach tell us? Well, the United Kingdom
is deeply concerned about the potentially catastrophic impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) in Syria, as highlighted by the World Health Organization.
There are 48 confirmed cases in areas controlled by the Syrian authorities, as well
as confirmed cases in the north-east and reported cases in the north-west. There are
probably already many more. We cannot know because of the lack of testing capacity.
And as the United Nations scales up prevention and protection against COVID-19
in areas controlled by the Syrian authorities and in the north-west, it follows that it
must be allowed to do the same in the north-east. So it is gravely concerning the gaps
in medical supplies in the north-east have in fact widened at a time when facilities
should be urgently scaling up to prepare for the virus.
The United Nations has confirmed that, in terms of coverage or reach, crossline access in the north-east has not improved since 2019, when the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing was still operational. It is for that reason that in paragraph 19 of his latest
report (S/2020/401), the Secretary-General said,
“The pressing need to prepare for a COVID-19 outbreak in the northeast has further and starkly highlighted the gap left by the removal of the
Yarubiyah authorization”.
This could not be clearer. There is a clear problem in the north-east, and the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations have told us what the answer is. We
must not play politics with this virus when it is in our gift to enable aid to get through
and save lives. We believe that the mandate for the Al-Yarubiyah crossing should be
reauthorized as a matter of great urgency for as long as COVID-19 remains a threat
to Syria.
Now let me turn to the north-west. If our objective is to save lives, then it
is absolutely necessary that the Council renew resolution 2504 (2020) in a timely
manner. Monthly truck crossings in March and April were more than double than
over the same period last year. That increase in aid is in response to the increased
humanitarian need within the region. The renewal of resolution 2504 (2020)
therefore remains essential. There is no alternative. I wish to emphasize that, if
the resolution were to not be renewed, then no one should have any illusions that
the United Kingdom’s considerable humanitarian funding for the north-west would
automatically transfer to delivery via Damascus, particularly as serious questions
remain about assistance from Damascus reaching those most in need.
A number of colleagues have talked about sanctions. Goods and medical
supplies used for humanitarian purposes are not subject to EU sanctions, which are

18/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

now part of the United Kingdom’s national legislation, and additional exemptions
from sanctions are available for humanitarian activities in Syria.
In conclusion, the evidence is clearly set out in the Secretary-General’s report.
There remains a pressing humanitarian need across Syria. We must remember the
millions of lives at stake. COVID-19 has changed the world we all live in. It has
changed the situation on the ground in Syria. I believe it means that we must be
ready to change our approach. We must put aside our political differences and act on
the basis of humanitarian needs to authorize temporary cross-border access through
Al-Yarubiyah. And we must, of course, renew resolution 2504 (2020). There is no
other responsible course of action.

20-0703019/25

S/2020/427

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing,
which was very informative, as usual.
The overall humanitarian situation in Syria remains a great source of concern.
The plight of millions of people continues both in the north-west, with about 840,000
still unsettled recently displaced persons, and in the north-east, where there is an acute
shortage of medical supplies. Some other areas remain unreachable for humanitarian
aid delivery, such as Rukban camp, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2020/401) and by the Under-Secretary-General in his briefing.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic requires special attention
now, as it continues to raise the already-high level of complexity of the humanitarian
situation in the country. On the one hand, we welcome the renewed efforts by the
World Health Organization, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other humanitarian partners to provide humanitarian support for Syria during
this extraordinary time. We also take note of the efforts made by the Government of
Syria to cope with the pandemic. On the other hand, we feel genuinely worried about
the weak response capacity, in certain regions of Syria, of the health system, which
is now being seriously challenged.
We therefore urge all relevant parties in Syria to fully cooperate in creating
the most favourable conditions possible to ensure sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all parts of Syria in order to assist people in need.
The support of the international community in ensuring an effective
humanitarian response in Syria is undoubtedly of crucial importance — especially
during this time — to address the needs of Syrian people, including the food
security and health concerns. The COVID-19 pandemic is the fight of the entire
international community, and no one should lag or be left behind in this joint fight.
In that connection, we call for renewed and unconditional support to increase Syria’s
capacity and resources.
However, if that is to happen, we must address the daunting challenge of
ensuring security. While we welcome the calm in the north-west over the past two
months, we also reiterate our full support for the call of the Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy for a ceasefire in Syria, and call on all parties to heed their call.
We thank the Secretary-General for the recently released report on the review
of United Nations humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations, pursuant to
resolution 2504 (2020), and take note of his assessments therein. We will continue
to look into it and will engage in the discussion on the cross-border humanitarian
delivery mechanism with a view to best assisting the Syrian people.
In conclusion, we continue to call for peace. We need people to build peace
and to enjoy it. Let us put an end to what kills and maims the Syrian people —
conflict and COVID-19.

20/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
[Original: Arabic and English]
My country, Syria, both in its national capacity and in cooperation with several
other States Members of the United Nations, has sent a number of official letters
and appeals to both the Secretary-General and successive Presidents of the Security
Council demanding to put an end to the economic, commercial, financial and health
terrorism inflicted by unilateral coercive measures imposed by some Member States
on the Syrian people and other friendly peoples.
Our calls were positively received by the Secretary-General and several senior
officials of the Organization, including Mr. Geir Pedersen, United Nations Special
Envoy for Syria, the Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of the unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, the Special Rapporteur on the
right to food and representatives of the World Health Organization. All these senior
officials, together with 40 international and United Nations bodies, have demanded
an end to the measures imposed on around 2 billion people in affected countries.
Nevertheless, the United States Administration and its allies have continued
to violate international law, the Charter of the United Nations and human rights
instruments. Over the past two months, they have deliberately spared no effort to
thwart all initiatives and draft resolutions demanding an end to the negative impact
of unilateral coercive measures on the health and service sectors in affected countries
while they are fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
That is not all. The United States Administration announced an extension of the
unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people — in wanton disregard of
international law, the United Nations Charter and the relevant resolutions — despite
all appeals to do away with those measures.
The stance of the United States Administration manifests a new step in its
hostile policies towards my country and refutes the humanitarian claims presented
by the representatives of the Administration and its allies, whether inside or outside
the United Nations.
Over the past years, I have repeatedly briefed the Council on the catastrophic
impact of the coercive measures on the daily lives of 24 million Syrians and how
those measures hinder State institutions and the health, economic and service
sectors in Syria from effectively fulfilling their duties. The COVID-19 pandemic has
increased the magnitude of the workload and challenges created by those measures. I
once again highlight the hollow humanitarian pretences presented by some Western
Governments that recently even refused to allow Syrian airplanes to repatriate
Syrian nationals stranded in European countries.
The clarifications recently issued by the European Commission about coercive
measures demonstrate, once again, what we have always said — that these measures
only harm people. We therefore stress the fact that those Governments do not intend
to lift these measures, which lack any acceptable moral, economic or political basis.
The unilateral sanctions imposed by the European Union and the United States
cannot be justified, because they are illegal, attempt to circumvent the legitimacy of
the Security Council and seek to undermine the sovereignty of the Syrian State. As
a matter of fact, this is nothing but a desperate attempt by the Western Governments
that impose coercive measures on my country to humanize their vicious behaviour
and the economic terrorism and collective punishment practiced by them against the
20-0703021/25

S/2020/427

Syrians living in areas under Government control. We assure the Council that, due
to the imposition of a wide package of restrictions and preconditions on supplies,
the prospect of European and American humanitarian and medical supplies reaching
Syria is nil. Nevertheless, we will not be deceived by allegations made by those
countries, and we will not give in to their dictates in any way.
In that context, my delegation reiterates its demand that the Council
immediately insist that the Secretary-General submit to it a comprehensive report
on the disastrous impact of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian
people within the next 30 days. That is an essential part of our understanding of
the humanitarian concerns at play and the impartial, objective and professional role
of the United Nations in humanitarian work, international cooperation in fighting
the COVID-19 pandemic and the implementation of the principle of leaving no
one behind and other important principles that form the parameters of work of the
United Nations.
My Government reaffirms its position regarding Brussels conferences and
stresses that they are nothing but propaganda aimed at the implementation of the
agendas of the hostile countries that organize and sponsor such conferences in a
flagrant politicization of humanitarian work and the imposition of their preconditions
and deep-rooted obstinacy.
My Government reiterates that it does not recognize any Syria-related
initiatives or meetings without the participation of, and full coordination with, its
Government. My Government also renews its demand that the United Nations not
participate in such conferences, so as to maintain its impartial role and ensure its
respect of humanitarian work parameters, under resolution 46/182.
The Turkish occupation forces in north-west Syria, along with the American
occupation forces in the north-east and in the Al-Tanf area, where Rukban camp
is located, continue to support terrorist organizations and their proxy separatist
militias. That fact has been confirmed through the confessions of a number of
terrorists belonging to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams who were recently
been captured by the Syrian Arab Army, and who confirmed that they had been
trained by the terrorist Maghawir Al-Thawra group, under the supervision of
American occupation forces in Al-Tanf. Such behaviour has been met with absolute
silence in the Council, as some of its permanent members are seeking to transform
the Council into a platform for NATO and an umbrella for the defence of their allies
within it, all while turning a blind eye to their violations of international law and the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.
In the light of the sponsorship and investment in terrorist organizations, the
Al-Nusra Front and its partner terrorist groups have reorganized their forces in
their areas of presence in north-west Syria to launch further terrorist attacks, as we
witnessed a few days ago when Huras Al-Din and the Turkistan Islamic Party —
or “moderate terrorists”, as some like to describe them — reorganized themselves
and launched an attack on one of the Syrian army military points in the village
of Tanjara, adjacent to the Al-Ghab region in the north-west. That attack led to a
number of martyrs and wounded many others. Moreover, terrorists of the Turkishbacked Turkistan Islamic Party destroyed the Zayzoun power plant tower in the Idlib
countryside, which alone is worth about $44 million, after having jointly looted, with
Turkish technicians, the plant’s equipment, estimated at $660 million. They then
transported the equipment into Turkish territory through crossings — controlled by
the terrorist organizations and their Turkish sponsors, and claimed by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) as humanitarian crossings. That
is compounded by the crimes committed by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, the latest of

22/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

which is drilling to extract metal pipes, copper cables and landline wires to be sold
in the Turkish market.
The Turkish regime also continues to use water as a weapon against Syrian
civilians in the city of Al-Hasakah and its surrounding communities by cutting
off water from the Allouk station, thereby depriving 1 million Syrians of drinking
water, which is a documented war crime and crime against humanity. The Council
must meet urgently to put an end to such crimes and hold the war criminals in the
Turkish regime accountable, instead of covering up the crimes and holding numerous
supposedly urgent meetings on fabricated and artificial issues.
Today the Turkish regime is again violating its obligations under international
law and the agreements governing international waters and rivers by constructing
the Ilisu Dam along the Tigris River and starting to fill the dam’s artificial lake,
which will deprive millions of Syrians and Iraqis of water from the Tigris for years.
Furthermore, the United States occupation forces have prevented the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent from working in north-east Syria and have sought to replace it
with illegal organizations that are not recognized by the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. Moreover, the Turkish regime also attempted
to bring the Turkish Red Crescent to work in the areas it occupies in the north and
north-west of Syria and prevent the Syrian Arab Red Crescent from working there as
well. It has also attacked its offices, looted their contents and attacked its workers,
just as Israel — the occupying Power — has done since its occupation of the Syrian
Golan in 1967.
In that way, the Israeli occupation and the Turkish occupation are similar
in their violations of the decisions of the founding conference of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. What is worse is that the Turkish
regime has pitted its affiliated terrorist groups against the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and urged them to prevent humanitarian access from within Syrian territories as
a pretext for extending cross-border activities. That is a common practice that we
and our partners in humanitarian work have previously seen in a number of areas,
including the eastern and southern regions, with the aim of justifying the expansion
of cross-border activities and facilitating the smuggling of arms, equipment and
supplies to terrorist organizations.
Accordingly, my country reaffirms its rejection of cross-border activities and
again demands the closure of the OCHA office in Gaziantep, which has become an
instrument for anti-Syria Governments and armed terrorist groups, a mouthpiece
of lies and a platform to mislead the Security Council and world public opinion.
My country emphasizes that improving the humanitarian situation will require the
full cooperation of, and coordination with, the Syrian Government. In addition, the
politicization of humanitarian action must end, and hostile Governments should
refrain from enacting policies that impose coercive measures, preconditions and
obstacles on humanitarian and developmental assistance.
It is unfortunate to see that some Council members prefer starting fires to
putting them out, notwithstanding their duties as members of the Security Council.
It is crystal clear that Council members are not performing their duties in a realistic
and transparent manner; indeed, they are part of the problem, not the solution. They
are therefore unable to play a positive role in meetings of the Council designed to
help the Syrian people. When they use the term “regime” instead of “Government”,
they are showing their real intentions.

20-0703023/25

S/2020/427

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Hadi Sinirlioğlu
I thank the President of the Security Council for organizing today’s meeting.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing and salute the work
of all humanitarian workers intended to help the Syrian people.
More than 9 million Syrians live under the care and protection of Turkey.
Nearly 5 million of them live right across Turkey’s border with Syria. I am
participating in today’s meeting to voice what those individuals urgently expect
from the international community.
In the north-west, the situation in Idlib remains desperate. The regime’s
indiscriminate military campaign has made the health services in place unprepared
to confront the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Today only 55 per cent of the health
facilities in the region are operational, while 75 per cent of health workers have fled
or been killed.
There are currently no confirmed COVID-19 cases in the region. Yet, given
the population density, the number of highly vulnerable groups, the insufficient
means available and the inadequate measures taken, this is a high-risk region.
Against the backdrop of this imminent threat, United Nations cross-border
operations continue unabated, with the support and facilitation of my Government.
We have increased the duration and volume of deliveries via Bab Al-Hawa and Bab
Al-Salam. As a result, in March and April, the number of truck crossings per month
reached the highest levels.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Turkish
Red Crescent have dispatched masks, coveralls and ventilators to north-west Syria.
More than 10,000 test kits and thousands of other pandemic-related items have been
delivered to Idlib through the cross-border mechanism. However, these figures cover
only 1 per cent of current needs. It is crucial that all international stakeholders,
especially the World Health Organization, increase their humanitarian assistance.
Donors must also continue to prioritize funding for this response.
We must note that the United Nations cross-border assistance is the only way
to meet the humanitarian needs of these people. There is no alternative that can
match the scale and scope of these operations. In this time of pandemic, we must
strengthen the existing mechanism. In the north-east, the health-care system is
broken, and there is no capacity to mitigate the pandemic.
By disrupting the humanitarian response, the regime is weaponizing the virus
against Syrian civilians. In his review of United Nations humanitarian cross-line and
cross-border operations (S/2020/401), the Secretary-General reports that, since the
closure of Al-Yarubiyah border gate, diminished cross-line deliveries can cover only
31 per cent of the facilities previously supported. Again, the regime imposes death
or surrender as the only options.
To meet the needs of hospitals, we must urgently authorize the United Nations
to conduct cross-border humanitarian aid in the region. As recommended by the
Secretary-General, the Tel Abyad border gate is the most feasible alternative to
Al-Yarubiyah. The people of the region urgently need the inclusion of Tel Abyad
in the aid mechanism. Otherwise, the pandemic could create additional devastating
consequences for civilians. Once the Security Council provides the necessary
authorization, we are ready to immediately operationalize the Tel Abyad border gate
for cross-border assistance and meet all the humanitarian needs in the north-east.
24/25

20-07030

S/2020/427

I would also like to touch upon issues relating to water and electricity supplies.
Despite our repeated calls and initiatives, there is a serious shortage of electricity
and water supply in Ras Al-Ayn and Al-Bab. This is causing serious concern among
the local populations and impedes efforts to effectively combat COVID-19.
Electricity grids to the Ras Al-Ayn region and the water supply lines to the
Al-Bab region come from the south. The electricity supply from Tishrin Dam to
Ras Al-Ayn is interrupted on a regular basis by the terrorist organization People’s
Protection Units/Kurdistan Workers’ Party. Furthermore, the Tishrin Dam is the
only source of electrical power to the region.
As the water pumps operate on electrical power, the power cut in Ras Al-Ayn
affects the proper functioning of the Allouk water station and eventually constrains
the water supply from the south. As we have explained on numerous occasions,
the allegation that the water supply to the Al-Hasakah region has been deliberately
prevented is baseless. And, as it comes from the murderous Al-Assad regime, it is a
shameless lie.
In the last 10 years, the Al-Assad regime has killed hundreds of thousands
of people. The regime has used chemical weapons, shelled schools and bombed
hospitals. We thought we had seen the worst in Syria. But now we are faced with
a situation where the regime is ready to use COVID-19 as a biological weapon by
further restricting humanitarian access. Since February, the Secretary-General has
published three reports, all of which emphasize the suffering of the Syrian people at
the hands of the Al-Assad regime.
For more than nine years, my country has assumed the responsibility of
protecting the Syrian people on behalf of the international community, not only in
Syria but also in our own homeland. We will continue to do so until Syrian people’s
dignity is restored.
That can be achieved only with the strong support of the Security Council.
In the face of the pandemic, we need the cross-border mechanism more than ever.
Renewal of the mechanism with two current crossing points in the north-west and one
additional gate in the north-east is an absolute necessity. To enable the United Nations
and its partners for longer-term humanitarian planning under the unpredictable
circumstances resulting from COVID-19, the Security Council must authorize the
mechanism without delay and for at least 12 months, as Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock has requested.
This is not a political matter, but our humanitarian duty for millions of
Syrians. The Security Council has the obligation to prevent the recurrence of another
humanitarian tragedy in Syria. It is time for the international community to stay
united and act in concert. This is what the Syrian people expect from all of us now.
The previous speaker again repeated his usual delusional allegations and
shameless lies and does not deserve any response from me. It is the Syrian people
who will answer the criminal regime he represents when they save and rebuild their
country. These criminals — the Al-Assad regime and its representatives — will be
held accountable and brought to justice for all the war crimes and crimes against
humanity they have committed.

20-0703025/25
