S/PV.9187

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9187

th meeting
Wednesday, 9 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Fox Drummond Cançado Trindade
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Onanga
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Miley
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-68030 (E)
*2268030*

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The presidency takes note of the delayed issuance
of the International Criminal Court Prosecutor’s report
on Libya to the members of the Council. It is hoped
that in future the relevant provisions of note by the
Presidential S/2017/507, specifically paragraph 64,
which encourages that reports be made available at
least four working days before the Council is scheduled
to consider them, will be followed.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Khan.
Mr. Khan: I thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity of briefing the Security Council today.
I also wish to express my deep appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador Taher
Elsonni, for being present at today’s meeting.
Today is important because it is the first time that
a Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
has addressed the Council from the soil of Libya. It is
also the first time that an ICC Prosecutor has been to
Libya in a decade. I am very grateful for the support
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), and I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his
wonderful hospitality and support during this Human
Rights Council fact-finding mission.
My experiences over these past few days have
reinforced something that has been clear for a
while — that we need to do better and be more relevant,
that justice cannot be merely a value or an idea. Instead,
it needs to be felt by the people of Libya.
We have seen victims of detention from all parts
of Libya — Benghazi, Derna, Tajoura, Murzuq and
2/17

09/11/2022

Tawergha. Just two days ago, I went a couple of hours’
drive from Tripoli to a place called Tarhouna. There,
I saw a miserable sight — metal boxes, almost like a
workstation. We have accounts of people who were
forced to enter those boxes backwards and were kept
in absolutely appalling conditions that, by any metric,
amounted to calculated inhumanity. From there, I took
the same road to where some of those poor souls were
executed — to farms that became mass graves and to
refuse tips, and landfill sites, in which bodies were
thrown without ceremony.
I think it is only right to applaud the truly
courageous work of the Libyan forensic experts,
because in those deep tips, along with the plastic and
every waste product known to humankind, along with
the dead dogs and dead goats that we saw, they had
an extremely difficult technical task of clearing away
mounds of rubbish in order to find the individuals who
had been thrown in.
This was as a result, it seems, of crimes within
the Court’s jurisdiction. So far, 250 bodies have
been recovered, and far fewer have been identified. I
emphasized to the Attorney General’s Office, to the
Minister of Justice and to the forensic science service
that we, as the Office of the Prosecutor, are willing
to work as partners and to provide further technical
assistance and support to the forensic capacity in Libya.
Nevertheless, I must say that I have been impressed
with the effort and the focus of work the forensic team
has done. But the task is so great that assistance is
certainly needed.
From the Tarhouna landfill site, I went to another
location, and I spoke to victims, survivors. Around
the table were assembled heartbreak after heartbreak.
One man had lost 24 members, I believe, of his family.
Another had lost 15. A mother gave a compelling
account, with the quiet dignity that is very often part of
the Libyan character, that she had witnessed individuals
break in and take her sons from her. She has not seen
her sons since. There was a father who, very simply and
all the more powerfully for that, stated that he could
not bear to live in his own home because his children
were born in that home. The effect of that loss makes
it such that the home triggers trauma on a daily basis.
That is the type of heartbreak and suffering expressed
to us by survivors. That is why the Council’s referral
of the Libyan situation to the Office of the Prosecutor
and the work and collective obligation to deliver on
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9187

justice is not some abstract idea. It really matters a very
great deal.

as civil society both in The Hague and in Tunis, and
also elsewhere.

There is fatigue in Libya. There is a sentiment that
we have heard it all before. What is the international
community doing, and what is the ICC doing? We talk
about justice, but we do not see and do not feel it. One
survivor said:

In September, we joined a joint investigative
team in relation to human trafficking. I think that that
was a very important step, along with the wonderful
work of Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well
as the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation. That partnership is not cosmetic. It is
not simply to tick a box and say that we are building
partnerships. It has already managed to pay dividends
because, only a couple of weeks ago, in October, that
joint investigative team allowed very key individuals
to be transferred from Ethiopia to domestic courts of
Italy and the Kingdom of the Netherlands in relation
to the smuggling of people. Of course, allegations that
encompass torture and slavery in general terms can
now be determined by domestic courts. That shows
consistency with what I have repeatedly said with
regard to the fact that, in my view, the International
Criminal Court is not an apex court. It is a hub, and we
need to work together to ensure that there is less space
for impunity and greater efforts towards accountability.

“we keep hearing about justice, we keep hearing
about the ICC. Where are the results? We need
these promises to be turned into reality”.
I think those sentiments are absolutely fair, as 2011 is
a long time ago. The types of suffering are expanding,
and we need to make sure that we are seen to be
relevant. That message is not confined to Tarhouna.
I have heard similar messages from victims from all
parts of Libya. The team has also been involved with
investigations. Whether one is from Tripoli, Benghazi,
Misrata or elsewhere, those stories resonate with evergreater force. Victims want the truth to emerge. They
want their voices to be heard. And they want allegations
to be juridically determined by independent and
impartial judges. I understand those frustrations, and I
have a great deal of sympathy with them. That is why,
in my most recent briefing in April (see S/PV.9024),
I highlighted a new road map that would hopefully
provide greater results and greater transparency in our
work. We cannot allow the sentiment that impunity is
inevitable to become pervasive.
In April, I talked about increased resources for the
Libya team. I talked about an increased field presence
and a dynamic approach to investigations to ensure that
we had every chance of putting forward, with a degree
of transparency, measurable objectives. I am pleased to
report that, as set out in the report that Council members
have, we have made good progress in implementing
that new approach. That is in large part because of the
partnerships that we are seeking to build.
For the first time since 2011, I can report a regular
presence by staff of my Office in the region. In the
latest reporting period, I can announce that there
were 20 missions to six countries, in which a variety
of evidentiary material was collected, whether it be
satellite, witness statement or audio evidence. The
promise of greater engagement also manifested itself
in various ways, including in June, when the Deputy
Prosecutor, Ms. Nazhat Shameem Khan, came to
Libya and met with Government officials, as well

In April, I also put forward various benchmarks,
including a bid for accelerated action, having solid
investigations and, where appropriate, submitting
applications for warrants based on solid evidence.
Today I can announce that further applications for
warrants of arrest were submitted to the independent
judges of the ICC. They were submitted confidentially.
It is for the judges of the ICC to determine. I therefore
cannot speak at greater length and give greater details.
But there will be further applications that we will
make because the victims want to see action and the
evidence is available. It is our challenge to make sure
that we have the resources be prioritized for the Libya
situation to ensure that we can vindicate the promise
of the Security Council in resolution 1970 (2011). In
my respectful view, that approach represents a new
paradigm for action by my Office.
The increased momentum that may be apparent
in the report is not because of the activities of the
Office acting in isolation. Libya is a key stakeholder.
We are in Libya. This country is owned by Libya.
The overwhelming crimes are against Libyans. The
partnership that we are trying to refocus, build and foster
is absolutely pivotal if we are to move things forward.
Tomorrow I will meet with civil society from
different parts of Libya. Next week, Libyan civil-

22-680303/17

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

society members will join experts and civil society
from around the world during a thematic round table
that we will hold in The Hague regarding crimes against
and affecting children. I think that it is only right to
underline the importance of partnership, particularly
the work of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Younis
Menfi, President of the Presidential Council, because,
without his leadership, direction and unclogging of
blocks, I would not be here in Libya today giving this
briefing to the Security Council. The cooperation
is not perfect. We itemized areas of difficulty. I had
candid discussions with the authorities here in Libya,
but I think that, with candour, we can collectively move
things forward.
During the past few days, the meetings that I had
with the Office of the Attorney General, with the
military prosecutor and with the Minister of Justice
also focused on trying to build complementarity and
the obligation to work better so that we can achieve,
not for the sake of the reputation of the Office of the
Prosecutor or the obligations of Libya, pursuant to the
resolution, but for the people — for the men, women
and children of Libya, who deserve nothing less.
Yesterday I also met with those in the east. I met
with the military prosecutor in Benghazi, as well
as Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar. There I was crystal
clear. I made it clear that we had received evidence and
information regarding allegations of crimes committed
by Libyan National Army troops. I said that those
allegations would be, and are being, investigated. I
applied the common principle that I was refocusing the
work of the Office in Libya, that we were trying to have a
greater impact to make sure that we could move forward
with some purpose, that, whether one was from the east,
the west, the north or the south of Libya, and whether
one was a military commander or a civilian superior,
there was an absolute prohibition on committing crimes
within the jurisdiction of the Court and that there was
a fundamental obligation, which had reverberated since
Nuremberg, that military commanders and military
superiors had to prevent, repress and punish crimes
when they emerged. There is absolute clarity on that
point, and we expect cooperation, not as a favour, but
pursuant to the plain terms of resolution 1970 (2011), so
that we can advance our mandate.
I think that it is right that, in conclusion, I return,
if I may, to that poignant room in Tarhouna, with the
victims sitting around a table. There was a woman who
spoke at the end. After many other women had left, she
4/17

09/11/2022

stayed right to the end, and, in a very moving way, with
poise, but with the tears that perhaps only a mother or a
parent can shed, she said, “I accept the will of God. My
son has gone. I can accept that, but I just want to know
what happened and where he is so that I can bury him.”
At that moment, what can one say to a mother? It was
not the place for glib sound bites or some kind of pithy
response; I simply paused. The only words that could
emerge from my lips were the words of the prayer from
the Qur’an that Muslims say: “We belong to Allah, and
to Him we shall return.” (The Holy Qur’an, II:156)
That really shows what justice is about. It is really
not about power. It is not about the powerful. It is about
those who just want to have the very basics, to live in
peace and, when they have suffered loss, to know what
happened and to have a modicum of justice because
their loved ones’ lives mattered like the world to them.
While there is a lack of belief in the delivery of justice
and the possibility of peace, I also emphasize that
that is not an impossible mission. If we are willing to
forge new partnerships, look at new ways of working
together and coalesce around human values — not just
legal norms, but those legal norms emerge and spring
from those human values — I believe that we can do
much better in delivering justice for the people of
Libya. Hopefully, that will assist in bringing about a
wider hope for sustainable peace in this very ancient
and wonderful land.
The President: I thank Mr. Khan for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico thanks the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Karim Khan, and his
team, for the briefing on his twenty-fourth report on the
situation in Libya. We have noted that the Prosecutor
made his briefing from Tripoli, which indeed suggests
improved cooperation with local authorities.
We welcome our colleague the
Representative of Libya to this meeting.

Permanent

We acknowledge the progress made on the four
lines of investigation outlined in the road map presented
to the Security Council in April 2022. In particular,
we highlight that the continued presence of the Office
of the Prosecutor has allowed us to accelerate the
collection of evidence, which has had a positive effect
on the investigations, as well as on the linkage and
collaboration with victims and civil society. Mexico
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

shares the conviction that it is important to put victims
at the centre of the work of the Office of the Prosecutor,
and it reiterates in particular the importance of
providing victims with psychosocial care and support.
Cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor
and national authorities is essential, in accordance
with the principle of complementarity. We echo the
Prosecutor’s call for maintaining this cooperation at
the highest level with the Libyan authorities. We note
the results of the visits of the Deputy Prosecutor and
Prosecutor Khan, and hope that these exchanges will
continue in future.
We also highlight the active cooperation with
third countries, as well as with EUROPOL, which has
already yielded some results in the line of investigation
concerning crimes against migrants. In this context, we
highlight the arrest and extradition of two individuals
accused of human trafficking in Libya, who were
arrested in Ethiopia and extradited to Italy and the
Netherlands, respectively. Mexico considers it a
positive development that the Office of the Prosecutor
has become a member of the joint investigation team for
this type of crime.
With regard to activities related to the Court’s
jurisdiction, we note the conclusion of proceedings
in the Khaled and Al-Werfalli cases, once their deaths
were confirmed. We underscore the importance of
ensuring compliance with arrest warrants to prevent
cases from remaining inconclusive, and we hope that
new warrants will soon be issued in the light of the
progress of the investigations.

S/PV.9187

mechanism whenever necessary, inside or outside the
Security Council.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank prosecutor Karim Khan for his briefing
and welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya,
Ambassador Elsonni, to today’s meeting.
The political process in Libya continues to be
deadlocked at this moment, with elements of uncertainty
and instability on the rise. A political solution is the
only viable option for resolving the Libyan issue. We
welcome the recent resumption of dialogue between
the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State, and we hope that the Libyan parties will build
upon this by stepping up consultation and by reaching,
with the good offices of the United Nations, an early
consensus on the constitutional basis, and that they
will proceed to elections without delay so as to bring
the political process into a new stage. The international
community should uphold the Libyan-owned and
Libyan-led principle, fully respect the sovereignty
and the territorial integrity of the country and avoid
imposing a solution from the outside, with a view to
creating an enabling environment for the political
process in the country.
China’s position on the International Criminal
Court’s work on Libya remains unchanged. The Court
should continue to strictly adhere to the principle of
complementarity under the Rome Statute, fully respect
the legal sovereignty of the country, value the legitimate
demands and the views of the Government concerned
and work in a way so as to make a genuine contribution
to maintaining peace and stability in the country.

Mexico welcomes the allocation of increased
resources for the team investigating the situation in
Libya and stresses the importance of meeting the
budgetary needs of the International Criminal Court.
We therefore stress once again the importance of the
United Nations fully assuming the costs of the situations
referred to the Court by the Security Council.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing to the Security Council
on the International Criminal Court’s work on the
situation in Libya. I also want to take this opportunity
to thank him as Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and wish him continued success in that
role and in all his work.

Finally, as this is the last occasion on which Mexico
will make a statement on a briefing by the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court during our current
membership of the Security Council, we reiterate our
conviction that the referral of situations to the Court
has the potential to close impunity gaps. This tool,
provided for in the Rome Statute, makes the road to
accountability a reality for the victims of the most
heinous crimes, and we will continue to support this

The United States has historically been, and will
continue to be, a strong supporter of meaningful justice
and accountability for victims of atrocities — justice
achieved through appropriate justice mechanisms.
These are values best advanced working together
within the international community. Now more than
ever, we witness the need to support and uphold these
justice mechanisms as Russia continues its brutal war
in Ukraine.

22-680305/17

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

The work of the ICC in Libya is also a critical element
of our shared commitments to accountability, peace and
security there. We commend the efforts of the Court
to investigate and prosecute those most responsible for
the heinous atrocities committed against the Libyan
people since February 2011. We welcome the renewal
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the
appointment of the Special Representative, in addition
to the reinvigorated efforts to secure an agreement on
a constitutional framework for elections so that Libya
can hold free and fair elections as soon as possible. We
likewise welcome the report of the Independent FactFinding Mission on Libya (FFM) that was released in
June, as well as the detailed findings on the situation
in Tarhuna.
We note that the Fact-Finding Mission report called
for the need to urgently address the proliferation and
legitimization of armed groups acting as “islands of
control” in Libya, outside of any State authority. We
note that the report urged the international community
to provide support to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. It further encouraged States
to exercise universal jurisdiction to arrest and prosecute
perpetrators who are found on their territories and who
stand accused of committing the international crimes
detailed in the FFM’s reports.
It likewise called out social media platforms that
are active in Libya to exercise greater due diligence
in combating and prohibiting incitement to hatred,
particularly attacks on activists, human rights defenders
and vulnerable groups. As we have heard this morning
on the situation in Tarhuna, the Fact-Finding Mission
had found reasonable grounds to believe members of
the Al-Kaniyat militia had committed war crimes and a
number of crimes against humanity through underlying
acts of murder, extermination, imprisonment, torture
and forced disappearance, and other inhumane acts.
The FFM also identified three possible locations of
undiscovered mass graves. It has therefore offered to
assist the Libyan authorities in their search for buried
victims through the use of its findings. The FFM also
emphasized that the victims it spoke to demanded
truth, justice, reparations, peace and accountability,
just as the Prosecutor so eloquently told us. The FFM is
scheduled at this juncture to release a final report and
then, unfortunately, to conclude its excellent reporting,
which has helped to shed light on some of the atrocities
perpetrated in Libya. We commend its work and all
who have investigated and reported on those crimes.
6/17

09/11/2022

The United States continues to believe that resolving
political uncertainty and promoting accountability in
Libya will go a long way to addressing the chronic
instability that Libya continues to face, including
through the mobilization of armed groups. We therefore
call on the Libyan authorities to do more to support
and advance accountability efforts, including through
cooperation with the ICC in the areas identified in
the Prosecutor’s report, such as providing access
to key documentation, supporting greater technical
engagement and responding promptly to requests for
assistance and visas. Former senior officials of the
Al-Qadhafi regime, such as Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
who is still subject to an ICC arrest warrant on charges
of crimes against humanity and war crimes, must be
brought to justice. Victims and survivors deserve the
justice that has eluded them. It should be emphasized
that the Court’s investigation into the situation in
Libya and against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi have been
pending for more than 11 years, since 2011, yet the
Libyan authorities still have not cooperated in helping
to bring him to face justice in The Hague. That must
happen as soon as possible.
We remain deeply concerned about the fate of
migrants fleeing from Libya, including women and
children who experience sexual violence, and we
urge Libyan authorities to take credible measures to
dismantle the trafficking and smuggling routes.
In conclusion, promoting peace and security in
Libya remains critical. We call for the withdrawal of all
armed groups and mercenaries from Libya, in line with
resolution 2656 (2022) and the October 2020 ceasefire
agreement. The ICC plays a crucial role in our shared
commitment to accountability, peace and security, and
we support its efforts to help bring justice to the people
of Libya.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Prosecutor Karim
Khan for his briefing today with regard to Libya,
and I welcome the Ambassador of Libya to the
Security Council.
At the outset, I want to put it on the record that India
is not a signatory to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The referral of the situation in Libya to
the ICC has had no effect in bringing about a cessation
of violence or restoration of stability there. However, the
situation in Libya continues to be of concern to us. The
political stalemate and the subsequent mobilization of
armed groups in Libya have the potential to undermine
the gains made since the signing of the ceasefire
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

agreement in October 2020. We therefore reiterate that
there can be no military or armed solution to the issues
facing Libya. The immediate priority is to resolve all
outstanding issues in order to arrive at a constitutional
basis for the holding of presidential and parliamentary
elections. Holding elections as soon as possible in a
free, fair, inclusive and credible manner is an urgent
imperative. We also need to send a clear message that
violence in any form is to be condemned and would
undermine the progress achieved since 2020.
In conclusion, the political process in Libya should
be fully Libyan-led and -owned, with no imposition
or external interference. For its part, India remains
committed to supporting Libya and its people in their
endeavour to find lasting peace and stability.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Prosecutor Khan
for his briefing and for his Office’s twenty-fourth report
on the situation in Libya, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1970 (2011). We welcome the fact that the
Prosecutor is briefing the Council from Libya and take
note of his engagement with the Libyan authorities and
stakeholders. I also welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Libya in today’s meeting.
The first responsibility of a State is to deliver
justice and accountability to its people. That principle
forms the basis on which international support can be
extended to any Member State of the United Nations.
Kenya therefore reiterates its long-standing position
that international support with regard to justice and
accountability must be underpinned by the principle of
complementarity. In that regard, we reaffirm our support
to the people of Libya in their pursuit of accountability
and justice within the broader framework of the peace
process. The referral of the situation in Libya to the
Court under resolution 1970 (2011), as with any other
international or regional assistance or cooperation,
is also subject to the principle of complementarity.
Noting the increased interaction between the Court and
the Libyan authorities, as indicated in the Prosecutor’s
report for the current reporting period, we urge for an
increase in support for Libya’s national capacity in the
areas of investigation, prosecution and the judiciary, as
well as for closer collaboration in information-sharing,
including on the outcomes of fact-finding exercises.
During the Council’s meeting on 28 April (see
S/PV.9024), we called on the Prosecutor to provide
further reporting on crimes against migrants, which he
had said could constitute crimes against humanity and
war crimes. We take note of the Prosecutor’s reports on

S/PV.9187

the efforts deployed along those lines of investigation
and urge for greater efforts and action, especially
considering the increasingly complicated extraregional
interests at play with regard to migrations across the
Mediterranean from Africa into Europe. It is also
important to consider how the explicit and implicit
national policies of countries claiming to assist in
preventing irregular migration may be contributing to
the continued indignities visited on migrants, refugees
and asylum seekers. We continue to look forward
to further reporting on that issue, and we call on the
Libyan authorities, the European Union and other
interested parties to earnestly seek to address the push
factors of migration.
Finally, we want to assure the people of Libya of our
support in their quest for peace through a Libyan-led and
-owned peace process, and to reaffirm our commitment
to Libya’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing today and reiterating
Albania’s unreserved support for the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We view the Court as a key
component of the global struggle to end impunity and
hold individuals accountable for serious crimes. I also
welcome the presence of the Ambassador of Libya in
this Chamber.
Albania values the proactive approach of the Office
of the Prosecutor in delivering justice to the aggrieved
in Libya. We commend the tangible progress made
during the reporting period in terms of accelerating the
ongoing investigation, collection of evidence, protection
of witnesses and revitalization of investigations into
crimes committed in Libya between 2011 and 2021.
We see clear evidence that the new strategy of the
Office of the Prosecutor is paving the way for longawaited justice in Libya. We welcome the achievements
so far and consider them crucial elements in ensuring
that due process takes place, but they cannot come to
fruition without the full and unconditional cooperation
of the Libyan authorities. We take this opportunity to
urge the Libyan authorities to engage actively and in
good faith with the Office of the Prosecutor to move the
process of justice forward.
Albania takes note of the closer cooperation
between the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and the Office of the Presidential Council of Libya,
and welcomes the 6 November visit by the ICC Chief
Prosecutor and his meeting with the Minister of Justice,

22-680307/17

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

09/11/2022

Halima Ibrahim Abdurrahman. That is an encouraging
sign, but more is needed to produce concrete
cooperation in the interest of justice. The Office of the
Prosecutor requires full and secure access to the entire
territory and to the relevant documentation and crime
scenes, especially where key witnesses are threatened.
We call on the Libyan authorities to cooperate fully
with the Office of the Prosecutor. We also reiterate our
call on the Libyan authorities to hand over to justice
Al-Qadhafi’s son Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi so that he
can stand trial in a court of law, which is something that
he and his father denied to thousands of Libyans.

tangible progress of the Office on the four key lines
of inquiry — the 2001 violence, crimes in detention
centres, crimes that took place during the 2014-2020
operations and crimes against migrants. The constant
presence of the Office in the region throughout the
reporting period has strengthened its personnel’s
ability to engage with witnesses and victims, thereby
deepening their knowledge and understanding of the
challenges to achieving accountability. We welcome the
additional resources that the Prosecutor has allocated
to the Libya investigation team, in particular through
experts and Arabic speakers.

In addition to the challenges to the pursuit of
justice for past crimes in Libya, we are deeply worried
about the ongoing violence against migrants, reports
of torture in detention facilities, systematic and grave
human rights abuses and crimes against women and
children, including sexual violence. They are gross
violations that must be stopped at once. In that regard,
we welcome the progress made in collecting evidence
and issuing new arrest warrants for crimes against
migrants and sexual crimes and call on the Office of the
Prosecutor to continue to fully investigate all crimes
and hold the perpetrators to account.

The report also highlights the increased support
received from the Libyan authorities, including from
the Office of the President of the Presidential Council
of Libya ahead of the Prosecutor’s current visit to
Tripoli. We encourage the Libyan authorities to build
on that and to take the key steps outlined in the report
to increase further cooperation. A collective approach
and engagement among all relevant actors is needed
to uphold the rights of those who are still waiting to
receive justice. We welcome the formal membership of
the Office of the Prosecutor in the joint team on crimes
against migrants in Libya, together with the authorities
of Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom
and in conjunction with the European Union Agency
for Law Enforcement Cooperation. Their assistance
with the investigation of two key suspects of crimes
against victims of human trafficking and smuggling
led to their arrest and extradition, which is a significant
step towards justice for their victims.

We welcome and support the Office of the
Prosecutor’s road map in further empowering victims,
ensuring witnesses’ protection, security and safety and
putting them at the heart of its approach. The protection
of the families of the victims must be a priority, and
Albania encourages the Office of the Prosecutor in
referring more witnesses to the Victims and Witnesses
Support Unit. Specific attention must be provided to the
victims of sexual abuse, including women and children,
who suffer most.
In conclusion, let me emphasize the crucial
need for transitional justice in order to reach closure
with the dark past, and underline the central role of
Libyan authorities in moving away from the brink and
launching a process of reconciliation that should lead to
lasting peace and security in the country.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): I would
like start by thanking Prosecutor Khan for his twentyfourth report and for briefing us today on the work of
his Office.
We are pleased to note that the Office of the
Prosecutor has accelerated its investigative and
cooperation activities under the renewed strategy
outlined in the previous report. We welcome the
8/17

However, we note the difficult context in which
those results were achieved. The complex political
landscape, together with the ongoing executive impasse
and division, heightens the continued risk of violence.
In that regard, the United Kingdom was pleased to see
the appointment of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, and
the substantial 12-month renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. United
Nations leadership is vital to restoring Libya’s electoral
footing following the failed presidential elections of
December 2021. The interim Government of national
unity is charged with making the necessary preparations
for free, fair and inclusive elections, and it must fulfil
its obligation to do so.
In conclusion, I underline that the United Kingdom
remains committed to working with the Prosecutor’s
Office and the Libyan authorities and urge them to
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

build on the momentum that we heard about today
and accelerate progress towards achieving justice for
the victims.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): We thank Prosecutor
Khan for his briefing and appreciate the fact that he is
joining us from Libya. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya to this meeting. The visit of
Prosecutor Khan and the Deputy Prosecutor in June
attests to the Prosecutor’s prioritization of the Libya file,
well in line with his previous statements to the Security
Council. We fully support him and the International
Criminal Court (ICC), as the most important
international institution when it comes to ensuring
individual accountability for atrocity crimes. Norway
welcomes the appointment of Abdoulaye Bathily as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. We commend his clear support for the ICC
and encourage all parties to fully cooperate with him
and support his work.
As for the political situation in Libya, we remain
concerned. We call on all the parties to redouble their
efforts to agree on a constitutional framework for
holding free and fair elections. We also call on the
Libyan authorities, their partners and the international
community more broadly to cooperate with the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC. We thank the parties
involved for facilitating the Court’s visits to Libya
and the region and encourage the Libyan authorities to
make more efforts to provide access to evidence and
prompt responses to all requests for assistance by the
Office of the Prosecutor.
Norway supports the Prosecutor’s follow-up of the
renewed strategy and the road map for accountability
that he outlined in April (see PV.9024). We note that
more than 20 missions have been carried out to Libya
and other countries and that the Prosecutor’s Office has
a constant presence in the region. We also appreciate
the outreach to civil society and the work on behalf of
victims, survivors and witnesses. I want to highlight
the arrest of two key suspects of crimes against victims
of human trafficking who were recently extradited
to Italy and the Netherlands. It is a good example
of complementarity and of the Court’s importance
beyond the cases before the Court itself. We applaud
the Court’s cooperation with other institutions and
States. It is encouraging to see that it produces concrete
results. When it comes to arrest warrants, we thank the
Prosecutor for the updates about terminations due to

S/PV.9187

confirmed deaths and national proceedings. We note the
Prosecutor’s announcement today that new applications
for arrest warrants have been submitted. That is a core
part of the Court’s work.
Accountability for the most serious crimes
committed is key, and holding the perpetrators of such
atrocities to account will be crucial to reconciliation
in Libya. In conclusion, let me reiterate Norway’s
unwavering support to the Court and the Office of
the Prosecutor.
Ms. Miley (Ireland): We thank Prosecutor Khan
for his report and briefing today. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
Without accountability for international crimes,
even the strongest democracy will wither in time.
Impunity undermines efforts to resolve conflict,
perpetuating cycles of violence. Accountability for
atrocity crimes should therefore be central to Libya’s
pursuit of peace and democracy. Regrettably, however,
impunity continues to prevail. Ireland notes with
concern the most recent report of the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya (A/HRC/50/63), which
highlights examples of persistent impunity, including
for serious violations of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, and reports of
grave and endemic sexual and gender-based violence.
The report also finds that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that crimes against humanity are being
committed against migrants and those in detention
centres. That reinforces Ireland’s view that the Security
Council’s referral of the Libyan situation to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is critical not just
for accountability for international crimes, but for longterm peace and stability in the country.
We know that the operational, security and political
environment in which the Prosecutor’s Office is
operating in Libya is very challenging. We are therefore
pleased with the progress that the Prosecutor has made
in implementing his renewed investigative strategy
over the past six months and the transparency with
which he has documented those steps. We welcome the
Office of the Prosecutor’s maintenance of a constant
presence in the region during the reporting period and
the provision of additional resources for its investigative
efforts, including experts on sexual and genderbased violence. Those actions have enabled the team
to increase their contact with victims, survivors and
witnesses and accelerate evidence-collection efforts.
We also commend the Office’s efforts to coordinate its

22-680309/17

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

investigative activity with third States and international
agencies. Cooperation with the joint team investigating
crimes against migrants has already yielded tangible
results, with the Office of the Prosecutor assisting in
investigations that have seen two suspects extradited
from Ethiopia to Italy and the Netherlands.
We would also like to acknowledge the continued
assistance provided by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to the Office, particularly with respect
to the missions of both the Prosecutor and Deputy
Prosecutor. However, more progress is necessary. We
urge Libya to comply with its obligation to cooperate
with the Court, including in relation to the execution
of the outstanding arrest warrant against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi.
The fact that Prosecutor Khan is joining us today
from Libya is a welcome sign of positive cooperation
with the Libyan authorities. We acknowledge the
willingness of senior political and prosecutorial figures
to engage with his Office, while remaining cognizant
of the need for sensitivity to victims’ concerns, but
we need to see more concrete action. We therefore
call on the Libyan authorities to provide access to
documentation relevant to the Office of the Prosecutor’s
investigations and ensure prompt responses to all
requests for assistance submitted by the Office. We also
support the Prosecutor’s call for prompt responses to
all visa applications submitted by the Office and for
engagement with the relevant technical authorities in
Libya, including those involved in forensics and crime
scene analysis.
Before concluding, I want to recall that earlier
this year, Ireland, together with 11 co-sponsors,
hosted an Arria Formula meeting on strengthening
the relationship between the Court and the Security
Council. In September we published the Chair’s
summary of that meeting, proposing a range of possible
ways to enhance cooperation between those two
bodies. If the Council is serious about maintaining
international peace and security, it needs to foster
an effective working relationship with the Court. We
therefore urge everyone here today to consider ways
of acting on the recommendations in that document.
Victims and survivors everywhere, including in Libya,
deserve nothing less.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is a good thing that Prosecutor Khan is
in Libya now and is able to see with his own eyes the
blood, pain and tears of the Libyan people.
10/17

09/11/2022

Our position on the biased and politicized activities
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) has not
changed. For 11 years now, the Security Council
has heard biannual reports on the progress of the
investigation in Libya. There has been no progress in
the area during that entire time, as our delegation has
spoken about frankly and openly. The most recent report
of the Court’s Prosecutor is no revelation either. The
Council is being asked to see the International Criminal
Court’s increased financial appetite as progress. We
can hardly agree with that logic. Meanwhile, the report
itself was circulated to the Council literally on the eve
of today’s meeting, precluding any possible analysis or
preparation for a substantive discussion. You also spoke
about it, Madam President — in fact, that was what you
opened this meeting with. Lateness and postponements
seem to have become a habit for the ICC. Perhaps the
Court is no longer ashamed to show that the obligation
to report to the Council is just an annoying formality.
This raises the question as to whether it is worth it
for the Security Council to continue to waste its precious
time on reports that show nothing but a lack of results. It
also leads to the fair conclusion, even if not an easy one
for delegations that believe in the Court, that the 2011
referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC was a mistake.
So far, it is clear that in the Libyan context the ICC has
achieved only one objective, and it is certainly not the
provision of justice. Council members may remember
that the speedy fabrication — it took just three days — of
false accusations against Muammar Al-Qadhafi served
as a way to justify to the international community
NATO’s illegal bombing of Libya, which resulted in
numerous civilian casualties and destroyed the economy,
industry and statehood of a once prosperous country.
Who knows — had it not been for the utterly wild fake
facts and tall tales invented by the then Prosecutor,
perhaps the bloody vigilante killing of the Libyan leader
might not have happened. Incidentally, that brutal crime
against a Head of State was never given any consideration
by the Court. Apparently the ICC has no issues with
the elimination of objectionable leaders of developing
countries. For entirely understandable reasons, the Court
was not interested in the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by the NATO coalition.
After Libya fell in 2011, the ICC abruptly lost interest
in the country, even though the long chaotic years of
civil war that followed the illegal NATO aggression
not only led to many thousands of civilian casualties,
including women and children, but also provided a
wealth of evidence for the Court’s investigations under
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

its Rome Statute. However, the Court’s former zeal
has not been in evidence. To date, the ICC in fact halfheartedly pretends to work on the Libya file, creating
the mere appearance of progress in its reports, which
are as empty as they are numerous.
It is time for the Security Council to seriously
consider correcting the mistakes of the past and
possibly withdrawing the Libyan file from the ICC. It
is already clear that the Court has nothing to offer the
country. It has little in common with high standards
of justice. It long ago became an instrument for
the West to put political pressure on objectionable
States. Such a decision would be more honest than
the Council’s consideration of endless empty reports
about investigations in which the main criminals and
perpetrators of the disaster in Libya have been carefully
erased from the picture since the beginning. And we
would not have to listen to the Court’s complaints
about its lack of funds. In the current context — I mean
complaints about the lack of funding — they seem
particularly strange given the enormous influx of
financing that the ICC has received in the guise of
voluntary donations from Western States, thereby
successfully protecting their war criminals from the
Court’s investigations in Iraq and Afghanistan as well
as in Libya. Now those hypocritical champions of justice
are shamelessly paying for a made-to-order process in
Ukraine. As we understand it, the case is not limited
to tens of millions of dollars of supposedly voluntary
donations — literally all of the ICC’s resources, human
and financial, are being dedicated to Ukraine. The
situation has led some developing countries that are
parties to the Rome Statute to protest ever more loudly
about the Court’s unhealthy obsession with Ukraine.
That is understandable, as surely too much attention is
being given to a State that never actually bothered to
become a party to the Rome Statute. Instead, Ukraine
has limited itself to scandalous statements recognizing
the jurisdiction of the ICC, in which a group of guilty
parties has been identified in advance, in an attempt
to shield itself. We regret that the ICC has gotten so
carried away with the Ukrainian issue that even reports
on areas that the Prosecutor has designated priorities
are submitted to the members of the Council mere days
before a meeting.
It has taken 11 years since the tragic events
originally occurred in Libya for some progress to
emerge on the political track. We urge all parties to
show restraint and refrain from imposing their own
rules on the Libyans. We believe that the approval of

S/PV.9187

the draft future Constitution and the holding of national
elections on an inclusive basis should take place without
any external interference.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for Ghana’s initiative in
convening today’s meeting. I also thank Prosecutor
Khan for presenting his report, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), and I welcome the presence of
the representative of Libya.
Gabon is pleased to see the Prosecutor giving his
briefing from Tripoli, enabling us to fully appreciate
the context and the complexity of this very sensitive
case. His presence on the ground will undoubtedly
strengthen the strategy and course of the investigation,
with a positive impact on the establishment of the facts
and on efforts to build confidence with the national
authorities and bring about justice. We are pleased to
see the considerable progress that has been made under
the renewed investigation strategy regarding alleged
serious crimes committed in Libya in 2011 and crimes
related to military operations between 2014 and 2020,
as well as crimes committed against migrants. Those
notable advances include the consistent and strategic
presence of the Office of the Prosecutor in the region,
as well as the allocation of adequate resources to
maximize the results of the investigations.
To that end, the capacity-building of investigators
and the inclusion of Arabic-speaking experts, experts
in military logistics and experts in sexual and genderbased crimes in those teams is an important asset,
ensuring the principle of legality through regular
judicial proceedings instituted against those suspected
of serious crimes. In that context, we welcome the
investigative work carried out in June by the Deputy
Prosecutor, Ms. Nazhat Shameem Khan, in line
with article 42.6 of the Rome Statute. Furthermore,
we welcome the enhanced cooperation between the
Office of the Prosecutor and the national authorities in
accordance with the principle of complementarity. We
encourage the Prosecutor to continue to work closely
with the Libyan authorities, with the participation of
international and regional actors. The emphasis on
dialogue with victims, victims’ associations, local
communities and civil society is a positive aspect
that can contribute to the success of that vast and
delicate undertaking.
The fight against impunity must remain an
imperative for all. It requires the continued support
of the international community in order to fully

22-6803011/17

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

equip the Prosecutor and his Office for their delicate
mission. We are aware of the volatile security context
in which the Prosecutor’s new investigative strategy
is unfolding and appreciate his efforts in that regard.
The military-political crisis that has affected Libya for
over a decade is still deep, and the armed violence is
far from being contained. It goes without saying that in
such a climate of terror and fear, victims and witnesses
can feel threatened, which makes the exercise of justice
complex and perilous. We therefore want to take
this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
important work of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, whose presence on the ground is helping to
facilitate the Prosecutor’s mission, in addition to his
main task of creating the conditions for a political
settlement of the crisis in the country. In that regard, we
encourage the newly appointed Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, to
continue his efforts, and assure him of our full support.
We reiterate our call for the Office of the Prosecutor’s
close cooperation with the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, as a key partner.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the crucial
importance of creating the conditions for restorative
justice for the benefit of the Libyan people through
a successful completion of the political process, a
cessation of hostilities and a peaceful and sustainable
resolution of the prevailing crisis. We align ourselves
with the press statement delivered by the Ambassador
of Mexico on behalf of the members of the Security
Council that are parties to the Rome Statute.
Mr. Fox Drummond Cançado Trindade (Brazil):
I would like to start by thanking the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Karim Khan, for his
valuable briefing on the twenty-fourth report on the
situation in Libya. I would also like to welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
Brazil was presiding over the Council when
resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the Libyan
situation to the Court, was unanimously adopted. We
would therefore like to reaffirm our strong commitment
to Libya’s peace and stability.
It is encouraging to see that the Prosecutor is
personally on the ground and providing today’s
briefing from Libya. It is also encouraging to note that
his Office has been making tangible progress in the
implementation of the road map that was presented to
the Council in April (see S/PV.9024). In that regard,
Brazil welcomes the increased field presence of the
12/17

09/11/2022

Office of the Prosecutor in the region — a measure that
improves its ability not only to investigate but to further
engage constructively with the national authorities.
That enhanced field presence could strengthen
communication lines and cooperation with the national
authorities, as well as providing a safe, secure and
stable environment to witnesses who wish to engage
directly with investigators. Furthermore, cooperation
efforts can provide opportunities to strengthen local
institutions so that States can fulfil their primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes
committed in their territories. The increased field
presence of the Office of the Prosecutor should therefore
be seen as a step towards implementing the principle
of complementarity, with a view to supporting and
strengthening national investigations and prosecutions.
We encourage the Prosecutor to continue engaging
with the Libyan authorities on a regular basis, as
complementarity is one of the cornerstones of the
Rome Statute system. International criminal justice is
a temporary solution when States with jurisdiction are
unwilling or unable to investigate and prosecute the
most serious crimes.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) can also make important contributions
to national authorities in the fight against impunity,
employing a collaborative approach in areas of
investigation. Those are important steps for holding
perpetrators accountable for their crimes. Brazil
welcomes the fact that UNSMIL has provided
assistance to the Office of the Prosecutor with
respect to the missions of both the Prosecutor and the
Deputy Prosecutor to Libya. We also want to welcome
the cooperation with third countries and regional
organizations to support ongoing efforts to investigate
and prosecute crimes committed against migrants.
Brazil would like to reiterate its support for the
ongoing efforts to withdraw foreign forces from Libyan
territory. The presence of foreign fighters, including
mercenaries, poses an additional threat to Libya’s
stability and the rule of law.
We commend the Prosecutor for having allocated
additional resources to the Libya investigation team.
We also note that the United Nations should provide
appropriate resources to the Court in relation to
situations referred by the Security Council. It cannot
be overemphasized that the current situation, where
only States parties cover the cost of Security Council
referrals, is neither fair nor sustainable.
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

In conclusion, Brazil would like to renew its
support for the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor in
ensuring justice and accountability, in accordance with
the principle of complementarity. We hope that a fruitful
relationship between the Office of the Prosecutor and
Libyan authorities will continue to foster a culture of
justice and accountability. We look forward to the full
implementation of the Prosecutor’s strategy in relation
to the situation in Libya.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Prosecutor Khan for his report and briefing.
We are pleased that this briefing can be made by the
Prosecutor from Tripoli, reflecting the commitment
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to increase
its presence on the ground. We also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya at
this meeting.
At the outset, I note that a permanent, universal
criminal court is more necessary than ever to bring
to justice the perpetrators of the most serious crimes
and to break the cycles of violence at work in too
many crisis situations. The International Criminal
Court is the pillar of the fight against impunity at the
international level. It plays an essential role within the
multilateral system.
France reaffirms its full support for the Court,
which must be able to act independently and impartially
within the framework defined by the Rome Statute.
The Office of the Prosecutor must be able to exercise
its prerogatives without hindrance or obstruction. We
welcome the fact that a large number of States parties
to the Rome Statute have very recently voiced that
position in the General Assembly.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
1970 (2011), France reiterates that the fight against
impunity is one of the key elements to resolving the
conflict and achieving reconciliation between the
Libyan parties. The prosecution and conviction of
criminals are essential to the process of national
reconciliation and to the success of the political
transition, which requires the restoration of trust
between individuals and in institutions. To that end, the
full cooperation of all stakeholders is crucial. The death
of the alleged perpetrators of the most serious crimes
cannot be considered justice for the victims.
France welcomes the implementation by the Office
in recent months of the renewed investigative strategy
presented in April 2022 (see S/PV.9024). In particular,

S/PV.9187

France welcomes the increase and effective distribution
of resources, as well as the efforts to involve victims,
witnesses and affected communities. We note in
particular the increase in specialized staff allocated
to the investigation in Libya and the increase in field
visits, as illustrated by the visit to Tripoli of ICC Deputy
Prosecutor Nazhat Shameem Khan in June 2022.
France also notes the efforts undertaken by the
Office to strengthen and improve cooperation with the
Libyan authorities. As the report indicates, cooperation
remains challenging. We strongly encourage the
Libyan authorities to cooperate fully with the Office,
in particular with regard to access to the documentation
necessary for investigations or the issuance of visas
requested by the Office.
The most serious crimes committed in Libya since
2011 must all be investigated and prosecuted, including
crimes committed by Da’esh, crimes committed in
Tarhouna and crimes against migrants and refugees.
The assistance provided to the Office of the Prosecutor
by international and regional organizations, as well
as by civil society representatives present in Libya, is
valuable. In that regard, we welcome the cooperation
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation (Europol).
We remain deeply concerned about arbitrary
detentions and inhumane detention conditions.
The authorities in charge of the detention centres
concerned must open them up to international
observers and investigators without delay. The
enforced disappearances and sexual violence reported
by the Office are equally unacceptable. Migrants and
refugees are particularly vulnerable to human rights
abuses perpetrated by militias and traffickers. Anyone
inciting or committing such crimes today is liable
to prosecution. The fight against human trafficking
remains a priority for France.
France is also concerned about the increased
repression of civil society and human rights defenders,
as well as the pressure on judges and lawyers, which
runs counter to respect for the rule of law and hamper
the consolidation of a democratic system in Libya.
In conclusion, France will remain mobilized
towards a stable, secure, independent, sovereign and
united Libya. The full implementation of the 2020
ceasefire agreement is essential for the respect of human
rights and the sustainable stabilization of the country.

22-6803013/17

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

The continued presence of foreign troops, mercenaries
and illegal militias fuels violence and impunity.
In that context, we fully support the mediation led
by the United Nations, under the auspices of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abdoulaye
Bathily, to reach a viable solution to the Libyan conflict,
which requires the formation of a unified executive
branch that is able to govern the entire territory and
all Libyans. The promise made to the Libyan people
of transparent, credible and inclusive nationwide
presidential and parliamentary elections must finally
be fulfilled. Elections are the only way to re-establish
lasting and indisputable political legitimacy.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we welcome the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Karim
Khan, and take note of his briefing. We also welcome
Ambassador Taher Elsonni to today’s meeting.
We would like to note that in the future, it is
important to make the report of the Prosecutor available
to the members of the Council in a timely manner,
preferably four working days before convening the
meeting. That is the criterion adopted with regard to the
reports of the Secretary-General, pursuant to paragraph
64 of the note by the President of the Security Council,
contained in document S/2017/507, regarding the
working methods of the Security Council.
Nearly two weeks ago (see S/PV.9173), the Council
adopted a substantive and integrated resolution,
resolution 2656 (2022), to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
in response to the reality and course of events in the
country. We believe that the resolution, together with
the tireless efforts made by the Special Representative,
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, are extremely important in
order to restore momentum to the political process
in Libya, in particular by facilitating consultations
among Libyans so as to create conditions suitable for
holding elections and reaching a peaceful and real
settlement in Libya, one that is led and owned by the
brotherly Libyans.
In the context of today’s discussion, I would like to
focus on three issues.
First, achieving accountability and transitional
justice is the national sovereign prerogative of States.
Accordingly, Libyan concerns must be taken into
consideration as the Office of the Prosecutor develops
strategies to that end. Cooperation with the relevant
14/17

09/11/2022

national authorities in Libya must continue and be
strengthened through meetings and contacts, the most
recent of which is the current visit of the ICC Prosecutor
to Libya. That cooperation will enable the relevant
actors to take concrete steps at the national level and
will contribute to the existing efforts made in line with
the memorandum of understanding signed between the
Office of the Libyan Public Prosecutor and the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC, in accordance with the
Court’s jurisdiction.
Secondly, with regard to the investigation of
crimes committed against migrants, which is one of
the urgent priorities of the ICC, we stress the need
for investigations to be carried out proactively in
cooperation with the national Libyan authorities, while
supporting their local efforts in that regard. We take
note of the arrest of two suspects involved in smuggling
individuals from Africa to Europe via Libya as a positive
step towards holding perpetrators accountable for their
crimes against migrants. We stress the importance of
continuing international cooperation in dismantling the
networks of transnational organized crime, including in
countries of origin, destination and transit.
Thirdly, according to international law, States
have the primary responsibility to address and
ensure accountability for crimes committed on their
territories, according to their jurisdiction, including
atrocity and grave crimes. States are also responsible
for fighting impunity and seeking justice for victims.
We would like to emphasize that compliance with the
principle of complementarity under the Rome Statute of
the ICC requires respect for the views and positions of
the State concerned. We also emphasize once again that
achieving accountability and transitional justice is the
sovereign prerogative of States.
In conclusion, we affirm the support of the
United Arab Emirates for the efforts made by the
United Nations in support of Libya, and we hope that
concerted efforts are made to realize the aspirations of
the brotherly people of Libya.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I would like to join previous speakers in thanking
Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for presenting his twenty-fourth report
on the Libyan file to the Security Council. I welcome
the participation of Ambassador Elsonni of Libya in
today’s meeting. The in situ briefing by the Prosecutor,
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

Mr. Khan, from Tripoli, following the one from
Khartoum (see S/PV.9113), demonstrates the Office of
the Prosecutor’s dedication and commitment to duty
towards ending impunity. We express our support for
his efforts. On the substantive issues in the report,
Ghana wishes to highlight the following four points.
First, we note the efforts and steps taken by the
Office of the Prosecutor to establish enhanced dialogue
with the Libyan authorities in the implementation of
the principle of complementarity, which is one of the
cardinal principles of the Rome Statute. Ghana sees the
emphasis on identifying opportunities for the provision
of support to the relevant actors in Libya towards
accountability as a step in the right direction. We
take this opportunity to call on the competent Libyan
authorities to cooperate with the Office in that regard.
We also note in particular the meetings held from 20 to
23 June between the Deputy Prosecutor and the Libyan
Attorney General, the military prosecutor, the Acting
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and forensic experts from the judicial forensic expertise
office in Tripoli and the General Authority for the
Search for and Identification of Missing Persons, as
well as representatives of civil society organizations
and members of the diplomatic corps in Tripoli and
Tunisia, as positive developments.
We join the Prosecutor’s call on the Libyan
authorities to provide access to documentation relevant
to the investigations of the Office, support engagement
with the relevant technical authorities in Libya,
including those involved in forensics and crime scene
analysis, ensure prompt responses to all requests for
assistance submitted by the Office and, finally ensure
prompt responses to all visa applications submitted by
the Office to the relevant Libyan authorities in order to
enable the Office to carry out its mandate expeditiously.
Secondly, while calling on the Court to carry out
its mandate enshrined in the Security Council referral,
Ghana is not oblivious to the challenges facing the Court
in the light of the current complex political and security
situation in Libya. However, Ghana is hopeful that,
with the appointment of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bathily, the Special Representative’s
current efforts will yield the necessary results to enable
the political and security situation to improve.
Thirdly, during the most recent briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.9024), Ghana highlighted the
importance of witness protection before, during
and after the trial process. We are happy to note that

S/PV.9187

the Office of the Prosecutor has taken measures to
empower victims, witnesses and affected communities
through an enhanced presence in the region and the
use of remote screenings and interviews, as well as by
strengthening its ability to interact with victim groups
and civil society organizations, while ensuring that the
security and safety of witnesses are at the heart of that
approach. Furthermore, it is gratifying to note that the
Office provides psychosocial and protection support
through the Victims and Witnesses Section to ensure
that victims are fully supported in order to enable
them to exercise their right to contribute to the process
of accountability.
Finally, on the trafficking of persons, illegal
detention and the maltreatment of migrants, Ghana
notes with appreciation that the ongoing close
cooperation with other countries and agencies led to
the recent arrest and extradition of two key suspects of
crimes against migrants and refugees from Ethiopia to
the Netherlands and Italy. We take this opportunity to
thank the Governments of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol)
and INTERPOL, among others, for their support. We
call on the competent Libyan authorities to respect
the human rights of migrants and to protect them
in accordance with international law. We therefore
encourage the Office to continue the proactive
cooperation measures with the national authorities and
regional organizations, such as Europol, to support
domestic efforts to investigate and prosecute crimes
allegedly committed against migrants, as highlighted
in paragraph 69 of the report.
In conclusion, we encourage the Office of the
Prosecutor to carry out its mandate by bringing
perpetrators of atrocity crimes in Libya to face justice
so as to bring succour to the families of victims.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I congratulate Ghana on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
wish you luck, Madam President. We also welcome
Mr. Karim Khan, and we thank him for his briefing,
delivered from Tripoli. We also believe that his visit to
Libya, even if delayed, is very important and comes at a
critical moment in the Libyan crisis. It is fortunate that

22-6803015/17

S/PV.9187

The situation in Libya

he has carried out his visit now. We also commend this
step which will undoubtedly strengthen cooperation
between the Office of the Libyan Public Prosecutor
and the International Criminal Court (ICC), especially
as fact-finding and listening to the testimonies of the
families of the victims will contribute to uncovering
the long-awaited truth. I recall a previous statement by
Mr. Khan that the situation in Libya cannot become a
never-ending story (see S/PV.9024).
I reiterate that Libya is committed to ultimately
holding accountable and punishing the perpetrators of
crimes and violations under its national law despite the
challenges. Achieving justice in the territory of Libya
is a matter of sovereignty and national jurisdiction, and
the Libyan judiciary is committed to ensuring a just and
fair trial for all suspects, no matter how long that takes.
We once again reiterate that our cooperation with
the ICC, in accordance with its mandate, is based on
a memorandum of understanding signed between the
Office of the Libyan Public Prosecutor and the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC, which supports and
complements the Libyan judiciary, and does not replace
it in any way.
The horror of the mass graves in Tarhouna is
ongoing. The General Authority for the Search for
and Identification of Missing Persons continues to
discover more graves, most recently last week, when
new unidentified corpses were exhumed. The search
operation is ongoing, and I believe that Mr. Khan and
his team saw first-hand the heinous nature of those
crimes, which took place for years. We reaffirm that
the Office of the Libyan Public Prosecutor issued arrest
warrants against many of those accused and involved
in those heinous crimes. We even managed to arrest a
number of them. However, the main challenge remains,
that is, arresting those who are in hiding and those who
fled the country. We therefore request that Mr. Khan,
in cooperation with the Office of the Public Prosecutor,
issue arrest warrants against those individuals and
anyone who supports them, provides them with shelter
or refuses to surrender them to justice. We recall that
the missing persons file has existed since 2011, not just
in the past few years.
The Libyan State is eager to protect illegal
migrants against any violations that they might be
subjected to because of the current crisis. Despite all
the challenges and difficult circumstances that my
country is facing, we are doing what we can to protect,
save and deport them — voluntarily whenever possible.
16/17

09/11/2022

We condemn any criminal acts against migrants or
others and consider them as individual acts. The Office
of the Libyan Public Prosecutor is following up on all
those cases, including the recent incident in Sabratha
and, regrettably, the deliberate killing of a number of
migrants by some human traffickers and smugglers.
The Office of the Public Prosecutor and the Ministry of
the Interior were able to arrest the perpetrators within
48 hours of that incident, and the investigations are
now ongoing.
However, we are surprised by the negative position
of the international community towards those human
traffickers as it focuses only on those involved within
Libya, although we all know that human traffickers and
their international partners are involved with crossborder networks. Confronting that phenomenon must
therefore begin with completely eliminating those
networks and their leaders and imposing sanctions
on them, whether in countries of origin and transit in
Africa or countries of destination in Europe, without
exception. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
exerted by Mr. Khan and his team in the pursuit of
perpetrators in cooperation with some States. However,
those efforts are not enough and must be intensified in
cooperation with the Council.
The Libyan people are eager to build a modern
civic State, establish the principle of accountability and
fight impunity. That will be achieved only by activating
the path of a comprehensive national reconciliation that
begins with applying transitional justice, revealing the
truth and paying reparations, while acknowledging the
suffering of the families of the victims, uncovering the
fate of all missing persons since 2011 and restoring
trust in State institutions to achieve a permanent peace
that ends the suffering of the past years.
We reaffirm once again our trust in our judicial
institutions. We stress that those judicial institutions
are able to achieve justice and establish the rule of
law, no matter how great the challenges and how much
time it takes. War crimes and crimes against humanity
have no statute of limitations. We therefore call on the
ICC to accelerate the disclosure of the results of its
investigations in all cases under consideration in Libya
and identify those involved, be it individuals, entities
or even States. If the Prosecutor has the names of those
involved in crimes noted in his reports, we hope that he
will identify them immediately.
We call on countries that are politicizing this file
to stop doing so, tell the truth and support the Libyan
22-68030

09/11/2022

The situation in Libya

judiciary. If that were truly the objective of us all of, we
would not be selective in considering cases. We recall
that supporting stability in Libya to end the current
crisis is the optimal and sole way of supporting justice,
accountability and the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to Prosecutor
Khan to respond to comments.
Mr. Khan: I would indeed like to say a few words.
In relation to the comment from the representative
of Mexico, I would like to thank him for the support
he expressed for the International Criminal Court, and
we wish him well, as he referenced that this is the last
Security Council briefing in relation to the Court at
which Mexico will be present as a Council member.
At least a couple of representatives mentioned
the current situation, and I am the first to accept that
resolution 1970 (2011) did not have a transformative
effect. I wish it were so easy that all it took was a
Security Council resolution to usher in peace and
security. Of course, we will never know how much
worse things could have been, but for the Council’s
response and the referral. But we simply see in so
many theatres — including in Libya — that sometimes
political or diplomatic initiatives or even military
or economic interventions do not usher in a new
dawn of tranquility. But we do not give up. We do
not get disheartened. We keep on showing focus and
determination to bend the arc of human progress
towards legality, justice and progress. And I think that
is something to bear in mind when assessing the role of
the International Criminal Court.
I apologize in relation to two or three comments
regarding the report. In fact, it was transmitted by my
Office to Headquarters on 1 November, that is, within
the stipulated time frame. Of course, there appeared to
be some difficulties in circulating the report from New
York, and we will look into that. I apologize, and we will
look into what happened to make sure that members of
the Council are not inconvenienced in future.
In relation to resources, there was mention of
the Trust Fund established by the Office, which has
received €15 million for all situations. Some of the
secondees have been deployed to the Libya situation,
which is to say we do not have an obsession with any
particular situation. I think what we are committed to
is trying to discharge our responsibilities in so many

S/PV.9187

parts of the world where politics seems to get in the
way of peoples’ rights to live in peace and security and
without terror, and to ensure justice for the lady whom I
mentioned who wants to know where her son is, and for
the father who wants to be at home without continuous
trauma triggering responses.
There were a couple of comments that are important
in terms of slavery crimes. Human trafficking is very
often a slavery crime, and I have appointed a special
adviser on slavery, and in that regard, there is a
convergence. Of course, as the representative of Libya
said, this is not just happening in Libya. It is a global
phenomenon. We have seen that Libya is being used
as a transit point, but many Africans and people from
other parts of the world are, it appears, subjected to
torture, rape, sexual slavery and slavery elsewhere. We
do need to consider more holistic ways to look into this
crime because it is pernicious. Slavery, of course, is an
erga omnes crime, and we have to make every effort to
prioritize its investigation.
I think the simple message is that the law can
help ensure compliance with the law. There is no
binary choice between resolving constitutional issues
and legality; in fact, legal measures may help that
discussion, which is something for which we have to
strive. I therefore simply call for a renewed partnership
and the realization that politics is everywhere. We
need to find the humanity in each of us — in States,
civil society, in victims. Let us not be so collectively
self-indulgent as to engage in the blame game. Let us
look positively towards what we can do for the men
and women of Libya who have suffered for far too
long from things that they should not have suffered
from at all. If we have that humility and that approach,
hopefully we can make a difference in a way that is
more positive and in line with the unanimous decision
taken in resolution 1970 (2011) to refer the situation of
Libya to the International Criminal Court.
I remain open to building very strong partnerships
with Libya, while respecting complementarity and
actually showing that justice is not a talk shop, but that
it can be felt by the people who need it the most.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Khan for the
clarifications he has provided.
There are no more inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-6803017/17
