S/PV.6818

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6818th meeting

Thursday, 26 July 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Huseynli
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Berger
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Ms. Hendrie
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2012/554)

12-43996 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1243996*

S/PV.6818

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (S/2012/554)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire,
Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ambassador Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of
Brazil, in her capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/554, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: I am pleased to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/554) on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). My briefing will focus on
major developments in the country since the report was
issued and on key challenges related to the restoration
of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
As members of the Council are aware, national
and international opinion is divided over the current
transitional arrangements in Guinea-Bissau. The

2

country is politically split between those supporting the
Transitional Government, notably the Party for Social
Renewal (PRS), the military, the five candidates who
contested the first round of the 18 March presidential
elections, and the forum of opposition political parties,
on the one hand, and those who do not recognize the
transitional authorities, especially the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
and the anti-coup front, on the other. This split is also
visible within Guinea-Bissau’s civil society and could
worsen even more if the parties do not engage in
dialogue to find a way out of the political impasse.
Furthermore, the National Assembly has been
paralysed since the fourth parliamentary session
started on 29 June, due to disagreements among
parliamentarians over the session’s agenda. The
Interim Speaker, Ibraima Sori Djaló, and his PRS party
have objected to the motion tabled by the PAIGC for
the inclusion of the election of a new Speaker and a
new First Deputy Speaker on the agenda, in line with
the recommendation issued on 3 May by the heads of
State of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). This has created an impasse that
has resulted in the closure of the session. In a public
memorandum issued on 20 July, the Permanent
Commission of the PAIGC Political Bureau stated that
the Interim Speaker should allow parliamentarians to
vote for the agenda of the parliamentary session, in
accordance with the National Assembly’s rules and
procedures, in order to end the deadlock in Parliament.
In an attempt to reach out to the international
community represented in Guinea-Bissau, on 12 July the
Transitional Government launched a bi-weekly forum
of the Government and international partners to discuss
issues related to the transitional process. Transitional
Prime Minister Rui Duarte de Barros, who opened
the meeting, highlighted the need for international
partners to support the Transitional Government’s
efforts to implement its mandate, including the conduct
of a biometric voter registration process scheduled for
15 August to 15 September, the prosecution of those
responsible for the 2009 political assassinations, and the
convening of the long-overdue national conference. On
19 July, Transitional President Nhamadjo announced in
an interview that general elections would take place in
April 2013.
On the international scene, Guinea-Bissau’s
partners remain deeply divided over the current
transitional process. From 28 to 29 June, Transitional

12-43996

S/PV.6818

President
Nhamadjo
attended
the
forty-first
ordinary session of the ECOWAS heads of State and
Government in Yamoussoukro, Côte d’Ivoire. In their
final communiqué following the meeting, ECOWAS
leaders endorsed the transitional organs established
in Guinea-Bissau and called on the international
community to recognize and support the Transitional
Government. They also decided to suspend the general
sanctions imposed on Guinea-Bissau, and urged all
political actors and civil society organizations to work
together to achieve a truly inclusive Government in
order to ensure a consensual transition. Furthermore,
ECOWAS leaders encouraged the Transitional President
and Prime Minister to intensify their efforts aimed at
conducting a presidential election in the course of the
transitional period. Finally, they directed the ECOWAS
Commission to take all necessary measures to intensify
consultations with Guinea-Bissau’s partners in order to
forge an international consensus on the transition.
Shortly thereafter, following the meeting of its
Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa on 14 July,
the African Union released a communiqué in which
it encouraged ECOWAS to pursue its efforts, in close
coordination with the other relevant international
actors — notably the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), the African Union, the United
Nations and the European Union (EU) — towards the
implementation of the decisions relating to the return to
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. It also welcomed
the ongoing consultations towards the early convening
of a meeting of the International Contact Group on
Guinea-Bissau.
On its part, on 19 July the CPLP issued a statement
following the meeting of its Council of Ministers
in Maputo, Mozambique, in which it reaffirmed its
recognition of the deposed elected authorities of
Guinea-Bissau. It also reiterated its call for the full
restoration of constitutional order and the completion
of the presidential electoral process in Guinea-Bissau.
The CPLP further called for close coordination between
the African Union, ECOWAS, the EU and the CPLP,
under the aegis of the United Nations, in establishing
a partnership for the stabilization of the country, and
pledged to work towards the holding of a high-level
meeting to develop a comprehensive and integrated
strategy aimed at the restoration of constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau.
Pursuant to an invitation from the CPLP, deposed
Interim President Raimundo Pereira represented

Guinea-Bissau at the CPLP summit of heads of State
and Government on 20 July in Maputo. The President
of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso,
who also attended the summit, stated that the European
Union would not tolerate more coups in Guinea-Bissau
and that constitutional order must be respected.
Meanwhile, elements of the ECOWAS Mission in
Bissau Force have been deployed to the port and airport
and all ministries in Bissau, with the exception of the
Ministries of Defence and the Interior, as part of their
mandate to secure State institutions. The deployment of
other elements of the Force to the National Assembly,
on 5 July, was suspended after members of the PAIGC
objected, arguing that the presence of armed individuals
in Parliament was in contravention of parliamentary
rules.
The humanitarian, social and economic situation
in the country remains fragile. While most economic
activities have returned to normalcy, economic
performance has reportedly slowed down, and
indicators are being revised downwards. The lack of
support from Guinea-Bissau’s traditional partners,
such as the African Development Bank, the European
Union, the World Bank, the CPLP and the International
Monetary Fund has also affected the country’s
socio-economic conditions. According to the President
of Guinea-Bissau’s farmers’ association, the cashew
production will drop from 200,000 tons in 2011 to
approximately 100,000 this year, as a result of the
12 April coup d’état. That is particularly disturbing
when one considers that cashew production accounts
for 90 per cent of the country’s income and that the
sector employs almost 80 per cent of the labour force,
according to official sources.
The transitional authorities have reported a wave
of criminal activities in Bissau and have blamed the
lack of policing resources for the situation. There have
also been reliable reports that since, 12 April, drug
trafficking activities have increased in the country.
In accordance with resolution 2048 (2012), the
Secretary-General has continued to engage actively
with ECOWAS and other international organizations
in support of efforts to ensure the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. In Bissau,
UNIOGBIS has held regular meetings with international
partners to discuss the challenges facing Guinea-Bissau
and to determine the way forward in arriving at a
common approach to the transition. However, all efforts

12-439963

S/PV.6818

aimed at harmonizing the positions of international
partners have yet to produce the desired results.
I have personally conducted consultations with
a wide range of stakeholders, including political
parties, civil society organizations, religious leaders,
trade unions, youth and women groups, as well as
business associations, on the need to engage in an
inclusive dialogue aimed at creating the conditions
for a successful transition. All the groups consulted
stressed the need for the people of Guinea-Bissau and
the country’s leadership to engage in an inclusive and
frank dialogue aimed at agreeing on the key challenges
facing the country, as well as on the short-, mediumand long-term solutions. My meetings with national
stakeholders have also addressed the need for the
people of Guinea-Bissau to tackle the root causes of the
recurring problems in the country.
In the coming weeks, UNIOGBIS will continue
to create the space for key political actors to come
together to agree on the conditions required to move the
transition forward. It is, however, critical that ECOWAS
and the CPLP, in collaboration with the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations,
overcome their prevailing differences and agree on a
common position. That will help to lay the foundations
for a more meaningful and inclusive dialogue among
national stakeholders, who are watching us. There is
room for everyone to be useful in Guinea-Bissau, and
the population needs us all now more than ever before.
Going forward, it will be important to ensure that
all political actors and civil society in Guinea-Bissau
work together to achieve a truly inclusive Government
in order to ensure a consensual transition as called
for by ECOWAS in its communiqué of 29 June, as a
step towards the restoration of constitutional order. In
addition, national political actors must work towards
ending the deadlock in Parliament if that institution is
to function during the transition.
The implementation of reforms in the defence,
security and justice sectors and the fight against
impunity and drug trafficking are key challenges facing
Guinea-Bissau at this critical juncture. Concrete actions
must be taken to fight impunity and ensure that those
responsible for politically motivated assassinations
and other serious crimes, such as increasing illicit
drug trafficking-related activities and breaches of
constitutional order, are at last brought to justice, which
is overdue.

4

As stated by the Secretary-General in the report
before the Council, the United Nations stands ready
to explore possible options to facilitate and support
the investigations and prosecution of those responsible
for the 2009 assassinations, the 1 April 2010 military
events, the incident of 26 December 2011, the killings of
27 December 2011 and 18 March 2012, as well as drug
trafficking activities and breaches of constitutional
order.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal to
the Security Council to send the right message to
Guinea-Bissau’s leaders that they must place above
all their country and the interests of its people, whose
living conditions have continued to worsen since the
coup. Indeed, the people of Guinea-Bissau alone have
responsibility to shape the future of their country, but
equally, regional, continental and international partners
must arrive at a common position on how best to assist
the country in moving towards the full restoration of
constitutional order. Time is of the essence and we must
take further concrete steps if we want to achieve that
goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mutaboba for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ribeiro Viotti.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for inviting me to
brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
I welcome the Permanent Representative
of Mozambique, as Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP), Ambassador
António Gumende; the Permanent Representative of
Côte d’Ivoire, on behalf of the President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Commission, Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba; and
the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau,
Ambassador João Soares Da Gama. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his
valuable work as head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
Since the coup d’état of 12 April, the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
has been striving to facilitate dialogue among the
main stakeholders and international partners of

12-43996

S/PV.6818

Guinea-Bissau, in particular ECOWAS and the
CPLP, to enable concerted action by the international
community in addressing the situation in the country.
A number of coordination meetings have taken place.
Although the international community has shown unity
of purpose — the restoration of constitutional order
and the return of stability to Guinea-Bissau — we still
lack a common strategy to achieve those goals. Such
objectives can only be reached if the international
partners of Guinea-Bissau speak with one voice,
underscoring that the international community will
work in a coherent and coordinated manner towards an
inclusive and sustainable solution to the current crisis.
Almost four months after the military coup,
constitutional order is still to be restored and
the humanitarian and economic situation keeps
deteriorating on the ground, as we just heard from
Mr. Mutaboba’s briefing. The derailment of the
electoral process has reduced international confidence
and donor support for the country, thus threatening the
hard-won socio-economic gains that stability brought to
Guinea-Bissau in the recent past, especially as regards
institution-building, economic recovery, financial
management and the fight against drug trafficking.
The current arrangement for the transition in
Guinea-Bissau has not been accepted by key national
stakeholders, and still does not meet the requirements
of legitimacy according to many of the country’s
international partners. It is not conducive to stability
or a sustainable political solution, as it excludes the
main political force in Guinea-Bissau. The current
transitional arrangement also calls into question the
country’s capacity to pursue efforts related to its most
pressing peacebuilding priorities, such as security sector
reform and the fight against impunity and transnational
organized crime, in particular drug trafficking.
The restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau should be brought about through
dialogue and negotiations, with the participation of all
political forces in the country. The United Nations, the
African Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP and the European
Union should seek convergence of views and mutually
reinforce each other’s actions in order to support such
a process.
To that end, we should consider the holding of a
high-level meeting on Guinea-Bissau, to be convened
by the Secretary-General, with the aim of articulating a
common strategy to bring a lasting and stable solution

to the current crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Such a meeting
would require adequate preparation in order to achieve
meaningful results. The configuration is ready to
contribute to such an initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mrs. Ribero Viotti for here briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bamba.
Mr. Bamba: I am delivering this statement on
behalf of the Chairman of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).
I would like at the outset to welcome Ambassador
Joseph Mutaboba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), and to congratulate him on his
comprehensive presentation. I would also like to
welcome Ambassador António Gumende and to
congratulate him on assuming the chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP).
I would like to thank my dear friend and colleague
Ambassador Viotti for her endeavours to bring about
a lasting solution in Guinea-Bissau. Last but not
least, I welcome my friend Ambassador Da Gama of
Guinea-Bissau, who is joining forces with us to bring
about a solution to the ongoing crisis there.
The transitional process in Guinea-Bissau is being
hindered by the pro-Carlos Gomes Júnior faction of the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape
Verde (PAIGC), with the active support and assistance
of its external supporters. Notwithstanding several
diplomatic initiatives taken to undermine the process
by supporters of the faction at international forums,
the Transitional Government, which includes other
PAIGC members, has maintained its focus on reaching
out to that very faction within the party to achieve the
inclusiveness and consensus called for in resolution
2048 (2012), the final communiqués of the ECOWAS
summits of Dakar and Yamoussoukro, as well as the
African Union Peace and Security Council resolution
of 14 July 2012.
The population in Guinea-Bissau is witnessing
a new environment of political peace, security and
stability prevailing in the country, instead of the recent
chaos and anarchy and despite misinformation being
served up in some media. The dialogue between the
Carlos Gomes Júnior faction of the PAIGC and the

12-439965

S/PV.6818

Transitional Government is ongoing. Efforts are also
under way to ensure the normal functioning of the
National Assembly, which is expected to become a
reality shortly.

between the willing partners and the leadership of the
Transitional Government to help to keep it focused on
the implementation of the priority programmes for the
transition.

Those developments have occurred as a result of
the unrelenting efforts made by the ECOWAS office in
encouraging dialogue among the principal protagonists.
Members of the Transitional Government, in particular
the Transitional President himself, the Prime Minister
and the Minister of Defence — all PAIGC members, it
is worth noting — have been very active in promoting
dialogue among the different parties in the country.
In that respect, it is necessary for the international
community not to rush decisions but to allow the
internal stakeholders the space to dialogue among
themselves, within the framework of resolution 2048
(2012) and the Dakar and Yamoussoukro ECOWAS
final communiqués, to resolve whatever difficulties
they face in advancing the transitional process.

The urgent priority tasks currently are the following:
the maintenance of peace, security and stability in the
country, biometric registration of eligible voters and
other requisite activities in preparation for presidential
and legislative elections at the end of the transition,
social and economic development activities, and the
defence and security sector reform programme. Right
now, elements of the formed police units (FPUs) of
the ECOWAS Mission Force in Guinea-Bissau mount
regular joint patrols at night in Bissau with their Guinean
counterparts to secure the peace. Military personnel
have remained confined to the barracks and do not
participate in those night patrols. The FPUs have also
been deployed together with their local counterparts
to protect selected Government ministries, public
institutions and establishments.

The ECOWAS office in Bissau, in compliance with
resolution 2048 (2012), has facilitated the holding of
fortnightly meetings with the country’s development
partners at the premises of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau. It is regrettable,
however, that some countries persist in their refusal to
recognize and deal with the Transitional Government as
a matter of national policy. It is also regrettable that the
hard-line faction of the PAIGC and other international
figures continue to support the Carlos Gomes Júnior
faction against the Transitional Government at such
meetings, and insist on the impossible demand of
reinstating the overthrown Government.
In that regard, ECOWAS regrets that the CPLP
invited Mr. Raimundo Pereira and Carlos Gomes
Júnior to its Maputo summit of 20 July as official
representatives of the Guinea-Bissau Government. That
group, in furtherance of its objective, has also declined
to participate in a forum that the international partners
themselves mandated the Special Representative of the
ECOWAS Commission President to arrange between
them and the Government to serve as the platform for
engaging the latter in frank and purposeful discussions
on issues of concern to all partners. The inaugural
meeting, held on 12 July and declared open by the
Prime Minister, was attended by only the ambassadors
of ECOWAS member States, the representative of
the African Union and a handful of other partners,
including the World Bank representative. The Forum
will continue nonetheless to be held fortnightly

6

Regarding the elections, the legal bases for the
biometric registration and demarcation of electoral
constituencies already exist. Therefore, the need for
new legislation for carrying on with the process to cover
the remaining three regions — the Autonomous Region
of Bissau, Cacheu and Biombo — will not arise. It is
to be noted that the demarcation of six of the country’s
nine regions was completed by the National Electoral
Commission for the March 2012 presidential elections.
ECOWAS is working hard to ensure the holding of the
presidential election, and possibly legislative elections
as well, within the transitional period.
On the defence and security sector reform
programme, ECOWAS will shortly reactivate
discussions with the Government of Guinea-Bissau
in Abuja on the memorandum of understanding on
the implementation of that programme. It is also the
intention of ECOWAS to review the road map document
to give priority to new developments and needs,
including quick-impact projects.
The greater the cohesion within the international
community regarding structural matters, the quicker
and more effectively urgent initiatives can be carried
out, including the security sector reform programme,
the fight against drug trafficking and the investigations
into past acts of impunity, all of which should be
undertaken. In line with resolution 2048 (2012) and
the decisions of the African Union Peace and Security

12-43996

S/PV.6818

Council, ECOWAS is working hard to agree a new date
with all concerned partners, particularly the CPLP, for
holding the next meeting of the International Contact
Group on Guinea-Bissau, possibly in September in the
margins of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly.
In any case, ECOWAS stands ready to make a trip to
Lisbon, Portugal, at any time the CPLP is available, to
meet with CPLP with a view to holding open and frank
discussions and making it possible for the international
community to speak with one voice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mozambique, who will
speak in his capacity as Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): I am honoured
to have been invited to participate, as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
in this meeting devoted to the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
I would also like to thank Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau; Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba,
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for their briefings today.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
has been following with deep concern the internal
situation in Guinea-Bissau since the coup d’état on
12 April that interrupted the country’s progress towards
consolidating democracy and political and institutional
normalization. The internal political atmosphere is
still very fragile, with serious implications for peace,
stability, economic development and the humanitarian
situation. In order to reverse this scenario, the CPLP
advocates the full implementation of resolution 2048
(2012), adopted on 18 May, aimed at achieving a
restoration of constitutional order and the resumption
of the democratic process interrupted by the coup.
I would like to draw the attention of the members
of the Security Council to the fact that the prevailing
situation in Guinea-Bissau was thoroughly discussed
at the CPLP’s ninth summit of heads of State and
Government, held in Maputo, Mozambique, on 20 July.
The summit culminated in the adoption of a declaration
on Guinea-Bissau by which the heads of State and

Government of the CPLP reiterate their call for the full
re-establishment of the constitutional order, restoring
the functioning and authority of the legitimate bodies
of governance, including the Interim President of the
Republic and the Prime Minister.
As the declaration highlights, the CPLP considers
it essential to promote, under the aegis of the United
Nations, close coordination with other regional and
international partners, notably the African Union,
ECOWAS and the European Union, with a view to
establishing a partnership that can contribute effectively
to stabilizing Guinea-Bissau.
In that process, the CPLP encourages the pursuit
of reform of the defence and security sectors and the
strengthening of the fight against drug trafficking as
fundamental elements of an effective and sustainable
stabilization strategy for Guinea-Bissau. In line with
those efforts, we appeal to the international community
to convene a high-level meeting under United Nations
sponsorship, with a view to developing a comprehensive
and integrated strategy aimed at restoring constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau.
Let me conclude my remarks by stressing our
solidarity with the people of Guinea-Bissau and
reaffirming the full commitment and openness of the
Mozambican chairmanship of the CPLP to working
closely with all relevant partners to find a lasting
solution to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I had not intended
to speak at this meeting and, as usual, will keep my
comments for our consultations later. But I must say
that I should dispel the erroneous impression that the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape
Verde (PAIGC), which we all know is the majority party
in Guinea-Bissau, is part of the Government. It is not
part of the Transitional Government. The gentlemen
who were mentioned have not had any connection
with the PAIGC for a long time now, as has been made
clear by successive communiqués of the legitimate
authorities of the Party.
My second comment, related to the first, is that what
has been called this afternoon the Carlos Gomes Júnior
faction of the PAIGC does in fact translate to two-thirds
of the members of the Parliament in Guinea-Bissau. I
think to call them a faction lacks elegance, if nothing
else.

12-439967

S/PV.6818

My third comment, and I will finish here, is that
international partners have indeed refrained from
collaborating with the illegitimate authorities. But
let me assure the Council that those international
institutions that have refrained from collaborating with
those behind the coup d’état will continue to do so.
That means not collaborating until a credible political
transition is put in place.
Finally, concerning what was described as
the normalcy of life in Guinea-Bissau, I will only

8

refer to what Mr. Mutaboba said about the rise in
criminal activity and drug trafficking. I apologize for
intervening.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more speakers inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

12-43996
