NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l752)

Page
1
...,. .. , .... . . . .. .. .., .. . .. ...

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . _ , . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
f’a) Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 110 10);
fb) Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 340 (1973) (S/l 1052/Rev.l) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlFV.1752

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDFIFTY-SECONDMEETING
Weld in New York
fiesident:

on Saturday,

Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia).

Presen t: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l752)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(cr) Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 1lOlO),
@J Report of the Secretary-General on the Implementation
of
Security
Council
resolution
340 (1973) (S/11052/Rev.l).
The meeting was called to order at 7.45 pm.
Adoption of the agenda
l%e agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(u) Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010);
(r?) Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 340 (1973) (S/11052/
Rev. 1)
I, The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent
of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. E. Abdel
Meg&I
(Egypt), Mr. Y Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. H Kelani
(Syrian Arab Republic) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with further decisions
taken at previous meetings, I propose also, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representatives of Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia and Zambia to participate in the discussion
without
the right to vote. I shall ask them to take the places

2’7 October

1973, at 10.30 a.m.

reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the understanding that they will be called upon to be seated
at the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. D. Blankson
(Nigeria), Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr, f! J. R
Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda, which,
it will be noted, includes as sub-item (b) the report of the
Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 340 (1973)[S/11052/Kev.I].
4. I wish on behalf of the Council to express our warm
appreciation to the Secretary-General and to his staff for
their prompt and valuable response to paragraph 3 of
resolution 340 (1973).
5. Since our last meeting, yesterday evening, members of
the Security Council have held informal consultations to
consider the report, which is now before the Council for
consideration.
6. The Council
has before it a draft resolution
[S/110.54] submitted by Australia, approving the report. It
reads as follows:
[The President read out the text of the draft resolution.]
7. It is the wish of the Council that I should begin the
voting procedure immediately and I now propose to do so.
8. Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I call on
the representative of China, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote before the vote,
9. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (translation porn Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has carefully studied the report of
the Secretary-General.
10. In our statement at the Security Council meeting of
25 October [I 748th meeting], the Chinese delegation
already made it clear that we oppose the dispatch of the
so-called United Nations Emergency Force to the Middle
East. We are also opposed to the sending of troops by the
five permanent member States, because the aforesaid
practice wilI only pave the way for further international
intervention and control with the super-Powers as the
behind-the-scenes bosses, thus leaving behind infinite evil

Council the name of a commander
directives.

consequences in its wake. As we are not in favour of the
dispatch of the United Nations Force to the Middle East
we, of course, cannot pay the expenses for that United
Nations Emergency Force.

and draft basic

17. My second point refers to the Force’s mandate. lt
should, in our view, have as its terms of reference the
supervision of the implementation of the cease fire during
the so-called preliminary stage of the cease fire. The Force
would be stationed on both sides of the cease-fire lines
corresponding to the positions occupied by the belligerents
at 1650 hours on 22 October, after having obtained the
formal assent of the countries concerned. It should be
perfectly clear that the Force in question is not to be
confused with the Peace-keeping Force, the buffer force, and,
possibly, the new groups of observers that would have to be
set up by the Council for the later phases of the
implementation of resolutions 338 (1973) and 242 (1967).

11 With regard to the Secretary-General’s report on the
qua jtion, the Chinese delegation will not participate in the
voting on it.
12. The PRESIDENT: I shall now proceed to put the draft
resolution in document S/l 1054 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none. ’
One member (Ckina) did not participate in the voting.

18. My third point refers to the composition of the Force,
For the Emergency Force to be able to play its proper role
in accordance with the directives of the Security Council,
without giving rise to constant controversy which would
impair its effectiveness, it is essential that its composition
should be such as to give the best possible assurance of its
objectivity towards the parties to the conflict. To this end
the Security Council should without
doubt take into
account, at least so far as possible, the principle of
equitable geographical representation and the wishes of the
parties on whose territory the cease-fire lines are established.

13. The PRESIDENT: I shall now invite those members of
the Council who wish to do so to speak in explanation of
their vote after the vote. I appeal to them to do so as
briefly as possible, and until they have finished I shall not
entertain requests to be allowed to speak from representatives who are not members of the Council.
14. Mr. LECOMPT (France) (interpretation from French):
The report submitted by the Secretary-General to the
Council with regard to the implementation of resolution
340 (1973) [S/11052/Rev. I] meets with the approval of
my delegation, which has just voted accordingly. It seems
to us to be specific and objective, and we are very grateful
to the Secretary-General.

19. My fourth and last point refers to financing. We have
no objection to the financing of this Emergency Force in
accordance with the normal scale of assessments of the
Organization and to having the expenses attributed as part
of the regular United Nations budget. However, since the
countries of the third world have often expressed their
desire to limit their contributions to the financing of
peace-keeping operations in general, we would be prepared
to accept the principle of complete exemption of the least
advanced developing countries, their share being taken up
by the other countries.

15. However, I should like to make some brief remarks
with regard to four points which, in the opinion of my
delegation, are essential.
16. First of all, concerning the competence of the Council,
I should like to emphasize the position of my Government
with regard to the exclusive competence of the Security
Council in the matter of peace keeping and the maintenance of international security in accordance with Article
24 of the Charter. We have always, in this respect,
considered that the competence of the Council should not
be limited simply to the establishment of an international
Force, but that the Council should also have control over
all operations that might be ordered by it. It is for the
Council, in particular, to define the Force’s terms of
reference, its duration, its size and its composition. The
Security Council must also appoint the commander, decide
on the basic directives to be given to that commander,
propose the method of financing, and, finally, ensure
constant control over the application of its directives.
Doubtless, the Security Council is not in a position to
direct such a Force on a continuing basis. Hence it is
possible to envisage, in application of Article 29 of the
Charter, the establishment of a subsidiary body of the
Council whose purpose would be to lessen the Council’s
work without prejudice, of course, to the primary responsibilities conferred upon the Council by the Charter. This
committee would be in constant contact with the
Secretary-General. It could, for example, propose to the

20. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
from French): My delegation, which has carefully studied
the report in document S/llOS2/Rev.l,
wishes first of all
to address to the Secretary”Genera1 and his assistants our
warm gratitude for the promptness with which the Secretary
General has responded to the Security Council’s request
addressed to him in paragraph 3 of resolution 340 (1973).
21. Objective provisions taking duly into account the
heavy responsibility incumbent on the Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, are clearly
defined therein. On their execution will depend in large
measure whether there will be peace in the Middle East.
22. In the implementation of Security Council resolution
340 (1973), the terms of reference [see S/lZ052/Rev.l,
paru. 21 of the Emergency Force provide, in subparagraph (a), that
“The Force will supervise the implementation of
paragraph 1 of resolution 340 (1973), which reads as
follows:

1 Seeresolution 341 (1973).
2

“1. Demands that immediate and complete cease-fire
be observed and that the parties return to the positions
occupied by them at 1650 hours GMT on 22 October
1973”.
23. At this stage of the terrible conflict which continues
to plunge the Middle East into mourning, my delegation
regrets that, taking advantage of the cease-fire called for by
resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) Israel has continued to take over still further territories of Egypt by
force. Those new escalations have met with the disapproval
of the entire international community.
24. The addition made to subparagraph(b) of the terms of
reference sets my delegation’s mind at rest, although we
remain deeply concerned about the fate of the Egyptian
troops that are isolated on the East Bank of the Suez Canal.
We hope that Israel will not create any obstacles in the path
of the International Red Cross in carrying out its humanitarian task.
25. In the report it is emphasized that “The contingents
will be selected in consultation with the Security Council
and with the parties concerned, bearing in mind the
accepted principle of equitable geographic representation”
[ibid., para. 41. I would like to point out that the reference
to “consultation
with . . . the parties concerned” will not
create any difficulties for the Force, which will be called
upon to operate on Egyptian territory, and that, consequently, this provision will not give rise to any opposition
on the part of Israel.
26. My delegation is concerned also about paragraph 4 (e)
of the report, which reads, inter alia:
“In performing its functions, the Force will act with
complete impartiality and will avoid actions which could
prejudice the rights, claims or positions of the parties
concerned _ . .” [ibid.]
27. Every member of the Council is aware of the
expansionist intentions of Israel, which persists in grabbing
Arab territories
by force. It is therefore clear to my
delegation that the acceptable interpretation remains the
strict safeguarding of the territorial sovereignty of Egypt.
The Security Council must be very specific about the
interpretation
of texts, so as to avoid relapsing into the
disputes
which made the implementation of resolution
242 (1967) difficult, if not impossible.
28. In voting in favour of the draft resolution in document
S/l 1054 and in accepting the Secretary-General’s report,
my delegation remains convinced that the strict implementation of the provisions of the report can give rise to no
ambiguity, given the urgency of the situation.
29. We note with satisfaction the proposal just made by
the representative of France; I am sure that the members of
the Council, particularly the permanent members, will take
due account of his observations.
30. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): In expressing our satisfaction at the Council’s action today in approving, in a spirit
of co-operation,
the Secretary-General’s report on the

implementation of Security Council resolution 340 (1973),
my delegation is guided by the following overriding
considerations.
31. First, the United Nations Emergency Force is what its
name says it is, an emergency force. This is an emergency
operation, because of the most urgent need to ensure the
cease-fire and the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973), namely, the return
of the forces of the parties to the positions they held 12
hours after the adoption of resolution 338 (1973). And
here, in commending the attitude of co-operation of Egypt
and in drawing the Council’s attention to an important
matter of principle, I should like to quote Mr. Abdel
Meguid, who said on 25 October:
“At this stage I should like to state on behalf of the
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt that we
accept this resolution in the hope that it will be able to
make an effective contribution to bringing into force the
decisions already taken by the Security Council. I should
also like to inform you of the decision taken by Egypt, in
the context of its territorial sovereignty, to grant the
Emergency Force set up in this resolution [340 (197311
all the assistance and co-operation necessary in order to
enable it to discharge the tasks flowing from its responsibility to put into effect the two resolutions previously
adopted by the Council.” [I 750th meeting, para. 122.1
32. Second, 14 members of this Council having unanimously voted for resolution 340 (1973)-one member did
not participate in the vote-setting up, under the Council’s
authority,
the United Nations Emergency Force, the
Council and its members, individually and collectively and
representing the United Nations as a whole, not only agreed
to the United Nations Emergency Force but also clearly
assumed the responsibility for its setting up, its operation
and its maintenance.
33. Third, the adoption of resolution 340 (1973) and the
establishment under that resolution of the United Nations
Emergency Force mean looking forward and not looking
backward. Whatever reservations and positions individual
members may have had of some past peace-keeping
operations and the obligations arising therefrom, what we
have done in resolution 340 (1973) is take a new, individual, separate action and undertaking by this Organization.
We have not created an eternal United Nations force for all
seasons, for all situations, for all continents. This is a
specific operation, and how and when and whether the
Members of our Organization are going to agree on the
general principles of peace keeping and so remove a burden
that has been hanging for so long over the United Nations
should be considered to be a separate matter. Should the
successful, collectively approved and maintained operation
of the United Nations Emergency Force established under
resolution 340 (1973) set a good example grid, by inspiring
confidence, facilitate this new experience in building, no
one would be happier than we.
34. Having said all that, I should like at the outset of my
comments on some of the contents of the report to state
that we have no basic problem with the report. It seems to
us practical, constructive and balanced and we commend

confrontations, as an instrument of peace keeping and, let
us hope, of peace making. This was done just in time, when
many doubts had been raised, here and elsewhere, about
the role and functioning of the United Nations.

the Secretary-General and his staff on such a good,
constructive and balanced report.
35. Without going into too many details-for this is now
neither the time nor is there a pressing need for that-1
should like to make the following observations of a more
general nature.

41. We are now proving again that the United Nations is
alive, that the United Nations is indispensable, that there is
no room for a sceptical approach to the United Nations slld
that there is no time for despair. What we need to do is to
strengthen still further the role of the United Nations and
our collective political will and readiness to use the United
Nations as the best instrument for solving all burning
international problems and crises.

36. First, we find the definition of UNEF’s terms of
reference-which
is really its task, its mandate-in paragraph 2 of the report clear and ample. By quoting paragraph 1 of resolution 340 (1973), the report very properly
reflects the Council’s decision as being of absolutely central
importance. That means that the cease-fire in place does
not mean in the present place, but in place as at “1650
hours GMT on 22 October 1973”. It means, therefore, that
UNEF is to secure Israel’s return to those positionsand now.

42. Mr. SEN (India): A few minutes ago we adopted the
resolution on the report which was so promptly, competely
and admirably presented by the Secretary-General. In doing
so, we had the benefit of a very long discussion amongst
ourselves in an informal, closed meeting of the Council, it
that meeting many questions were asked, many clarifica.
tions sought and many explanations requested, The
Secretary-General, wi.th his usual courtesy, fulfilled all our
requests and made a very interesting and thorough statement.

37. Secondly, in the section entitled “General considerations” a very important matter is dealt with in paragraph 4 {al. While we all may have our particular ideas and
preferences about the exact distribution of the authority in
the chain of command, about the formulation of decisions
and broad, detailed policies, they all derive from the source
and keeper of the authority of UNEF, the Security Council.
My delegation considers that what is set forth in that
subparagraph is a reasonable arrangement, combining the
unmistakable meaning of resolution 340 (1973) in establishing the Council’s authority with the practical necessities
of the Secretary-General’s role at the executive end of the
operation.

43. During those discussionswe were highly appreciative
of the co-operation extended to us not only by you, Sir,as
President,but also by the delegationsof the United States,
the Soviet Union and, particularly, Kenya, in arriving atan
agreedsolution. We are grateful to all of them. I shalltlot
take up the5Council’stime in discussingthe questionsand
answersbecausesome of them related to my own delega.
tion. I only hope that should any question arise in the
future about what the Secretary-Generalsaidor did not say
we would have the benefit of that declaration-and perhaps
it hasalsobeenrecorded on tape.

38. Thirdly, with reference to the very important and
complex matter of the composition of the Force, while
waiting for the Secretary-General’s report on that-which
he has promised to give us as soon as possible-we would
merely like to recall that we, as well as many others, have
stressed the absolute importance of equitable geographical-which
is, of course, always politicalrepresentation of countries in the Force. There must not be
any bias or any a priori discriminatory selectivity on any
grounds whatsoever; no other conditions should be introduced except those stipulated in resolution 340 (1973).

44. Now, the fundamentalquestion before usis that thisis
a job that we have, with the Council’s approval and full
confidence,entrusted to the Secretary-General.We trusthis
judgement and we should like to leave it to him to decide
how best he can carry it out. We are therefore not too
worried about various political, polemical and theoretics\
ideas on the specific problem before us. The problemis
grave and our need is urgent; therefore, we shouldbe quite
happy to leave this decisionto the Secretary-General.If he
cannot perform his task ashe seesbest, we are there to help
him-not to frustrate him, not to divert him, but to help
him--and it is in this spirit that we have acceptedhis report
and supportedthe resolution.

39. Fourthly, with regard to the financing of UNEF, we
agree with the Secretary-General’s report that it should be
based on Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter. In this
regard, I support the proposal just made by the representative of France,
40. I shall not conclude my statement on this occasionwhich is truIy historic-without
making a final point. By
virtue of resolution 340 (1973) we have created a new
United Nations Emergency Force, which should not only
keep the guns silent in the Middle East but should also
make a sizable contribution towards achieving a just and
long-awaited peace. With the adoption of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, this United Nations Emergency Force now
clearly has its mandate and its means of functioning. By
these two actions of the Security Council we have, I am
sure, again vindicated the United Nations in the eyes of the
peoples and the Governments of the whole world as an
indispensable and effective instrument for avoiding mdjor

45. I should, however, like to make two or three conb
mentson the substanceof the report itself. Much of whatI
wasgoingto say hasalreadybeen covered by my friend and
colleaguefrom Yugoslavia, AmbassadorMojsov, so thereis
no point in repeating them at this time; but two specific
points needto be emphasized.
46. First, the Force which we are sendingto the areaof
conflict will be operating mainly on Egyptian territory.
Therefore, whatever might be the practical inconvenience
or difficulties or cohsiderations,the question of Egyptian
sovereigntyin this respectmust not be overlooked. Wefull!
realize that in the actual, practical, day-to-day application
4

L

of this theory of sovereignty, it may have to be applied in a
variety of ways. But we should like to emphasize not only
this aspect of Eg)lpt’s legal sovereignty over its territory but
alsO what the Ambassador of Egypt stated in his letter to
the Secretary-General of 26 October (see s/llos5]. What I
llave said about Egypt applies mutatis mutandis to Syria as

tions. However, the delegation of the USSR did not oppose
the
CCWil’s
approVal
Of the report submitted by the
Secretary-General on the question of measures for the
implementation of resolution 340 (1973).
54- At the same time the Soviet delegation considers it
necessaryto state in this connexion that the position of
Principle of the Soviet Union on the question of United
Nations peace-keeping operations, including the financing
of such operations, has been repeatedly set forth and is well
known. In connexion with the Council’s approval of the
Secretary-General’s report we now reaffirm this position of
the Soviet Union.

WA1 I

47. The second point I should like to emphasize is that the
whole Purpose of our endeavour for the last six or seven
days has been: first, that there should be brought about a
condition of cease-fire, which we hope will be maintained
fully and effectively; secondly, that the parties must return
to the positions which they occupied at 1650 hours GMT
Ofi 22 October; and thirdly-a point which is no less
important than these preliminaries-that negotiations must
start aS soon as possible. Without that third aspect of our
problem we shall be going round and round aswe have been
doing for the last seven years. So I cannot on behalf of my
delegation emphasize too strongly the urgent need to open
the negotiations as soon as possible.

55. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): The time we have already
taken in our informal discussion of the report of the
Secretary-General indicates how extensively we have examined it. My delegation accepts the report in document
S/11052/Rev.l of .27 Octob& 1973, In so doing my
delegation wishesto make the following remarks,
56. It is the understanding of my delegation that the term
“with the full co-operation of the parties concerned” in
paragraph 3 and the phrase “of the parties concerned” in
paragraph 4 (e) do not in any way compromise the unquestionable sovereignty of the Arab Republic of Egypt over its
territory. We interpret these paragraphswithin the context
of the letter of the representative bf the Arab Republic of
Egypt to the Secretary-General dated 26 October 1973, as
well as on the basis of his statement in the Council at its
1750th meeting.

48. My third point, after those two points-highly political, if you like-may appear to be a little trite but it is
important:
it is finances. We in this Council do not deal
with finances. That is a matter which will be taken up in
the Fifth Committee and I hope that my delegation will not
llesitate to give our views in that Committee at that time.
i-19. Mr.

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
First of all the So&t delegation
would like to note the important decision adopted unanimously by the Security Council at today’s informal
consultative meeting. I emphasize that it was a unanimous
decision, since no member of the Council objected to this
unanimous view of the Council concerning such an importan t and urgent question.
~trarrsiution

MALIK

(Union

from Russian):

57. To leave no doubt as to our understanding of the
aforementioned phrasesin paragraphs 3 and 4 (e), I beg to
read out the contents of the letter of the representative of
the Arab Republic of Egypt to the Secretary-Generaldated
26 October 1973.
[The speaker read out the text of the letter contained in
document S/l 1055.1

50. I i4JJl referring to the fact that on the initiative of the
Soviet delegation the Council considered, as a matter of
urgency, the important proposal that in accordance with
rcscriution
340 (1973) the Secretary-General should urgently and immediately instruct the Commander of the
LIlliteci Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East to
propose to Israel that it return its troops to the positions
occlrpied by them at 1650 hours GMT on 22 October 1973.

58. The same applies to the paragraph which wasread out
by Ambassador Mojsov of Yugoslavia from the verbatim
recordsof this Council.
59. I think the key point in this report is the implementation of paragraph 1 of Security Council resolution
340 (1973)-but surely as a short prelude to the implementation of resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973).

51. L)uring the ensuing discussion the Council noted that
the authority for this action already existed, having been
cstabljshed
in Security Council resolutions 338 (1973),
339 ( 1973) and 340 (1973).

60. I should like now to touch on a small point raised by
the French delegation as regards contributions. I wish to
thank the representative of France for his Suggestion for
exempting the least developed countries from contributions
to the budget of UNEF. My delegation appreciates the
noble motives of the French delegation, but I beg to submit
that contribution to peaceis too noble for the willing, least
developed countries to be excluded from contributing to
such a noble end. I therefore appeal to the delegation of
France not to press its aforementioned suggestion, and for
bat reason we fully agree to and support the contents of
paragraph 7 of the report of the Secretary-General. That is
just a provisional comment, but surely, as suggested bY
Ambassador Sen of India, the subject Will come UP in the

~2.

The Soviet delegation wishes to make the following
on the question of the report of the Secretary
%neral.

StatCJllCJlt

53. The delegation gf the USSR has carefully studied the
Secretary-General’s
report on the establishment of the
CJrlited Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East
[$/I 1[)52/&?v. 11. As a result of our careful study of this
doeurIterlt we have certain misgivings concerning some of its
prcy,risions, since they do not conform fully with the Soviet
appruach to the question of the establishment of the Force
and tile conduct of United Nations peace-keeping opera5

68. My last remark refers to paragraph 7. It is the
understanding of my delegation that paragraph 7 should
not be so read as to exclude voluntary contributions, In
fact, my delegation looks especially to the affluent Mem.
bers of the United Nations which are in a position to do se
to make voluntary contributions to the costs of the Force.
In this connexion my delegation would like to look
especially to the two super-Powers, which have taken tht
most praiseworthy initiative for resolutions 338 (1973) and
339 (1973) and therefore have certain responsibilities for
the efficient performance of the Emergency Force,

Fifth Committee and most probably we shall make the
same comment on it.
61. Last but not least, my delegation expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and his aides for the
speedy and precise manner in which they produced this
report in the short time available. We are fully confident
that within his mandate the Secretary-General will fulfil his
duty with the same spirit of devotion and urgency with
which he submitted his report.
62. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): I shall be brief. Some
of the points I had in mind to mention have been expressed
in a most eloquent manner by my colleagues from
Yugoslavia and India.

69. Mr, SCALI (United States of America): The United
States welcomes with great satisfaction the action of the
Council in approving the Secretary-General’s report, \ve
have demonstrated that indeed this organ can act effertively to fulfil its responsibilities For the maintenance ef
international peace.

63. My delegation voted for the resolution approving the
revised report of the Secretary-General as we are generally
in agreement with the provisions contained in the report.
My delegation would like to express its highest appreciation
to the Secretary-General and his staff, who have provided
us with a valuable report in the shortest possible time.

70. But even as we rejoice in our agreement it is importaut
to recognize the difficult task confronting the Emergency
Force. Supervising cease-fire lines in an area in the wake ef
war will not be easy. The Force, from its inception, will
require the full co-operation of the parties concerned, as
the Secretary-General’s report states. In addition, it nrust
operate as an integrated military unit with efficiency and
with special privilege for none.

64. My delegation would like, however, to clarify its
position on certain paragraphs of the report. First, concerning paragraph 4 (c), where it is stated:
“The contingents will be selected in consultation with
the Security Council and with the parties concerned,
bearing in mind the accepted principle of equitable
geographic representation.”

71. We consider the language of the report carefully
drawn, For instance, the statement in paragraph 4 (a] that
“All matters which may affect the nature or the continued
effective functioning of the Force will be referred to the
Council for its decision” assures an orderly agreed withdrawal of the Force but only when the Council so decides.

Consultations “with the parties concerned” should, in our
view, be interpreted as making serious efforts to persuade
the parties at least not to object to the contingents selected
by the Secretary-General. This is purely a question of
practicality and does not of course in any way affect the
question of territorial sovereignty. As far as Indonesia is
concerned, the sovereignty of Egypt, Syria and Jordan over
their territories occupied by Israel since the June 1967 war
is beyond question. However, for the contingents to
perform their task as effectively as possible it is a practical
necessity that their presence should at least not be objected
to by the parties.

72. We are also satisfied that the phrase “bearing in mind
the accepted principle of equitable geographic representa.
tion” is consistent with Article 101 of the Charter aad
assures that all the obvious and necessary criteria will be
given appropriate consideration in the composition of the
Force.
73. Looking to the future, we hope that the Secretav.
General can move as swiftly as possible to implement the
resolution we have just adopted. The United States, as 1
have said in a previous statement, is prepared to consider
requests for assistance to this end.

65. That also concurs with one of the essential conditions
mentioned in paragraph 3 which requires that the Force
“must operate with the full co-operation of the parties
concerned”. Full co-operation can be achieved only if the
presence of the contingents is not objected to by the parties
from whom full co-operation is requested.

74. Finally, I should like to express my personal satiskction that my Government has helped to arrange for a
meeting, on the ground, of Egyptian and Israeli military
representatives under United Nations auspices, to disctrsj
the practical application of the cease-fire. This is a signi&
cant practical result of the thorough deliberations in this
chamber.,1 regard it as especially noteworthy that arrange
ments are now being made to provide non-military supplies
for the Third Army area. For us, the humanitarian aspect oi
the United Nations effort is a critically important elernenl
in this peace-keeping mission.

66. In the implementation of paragraph 4 (c) we have of
course to take fully into account the statement of the
representative of Egypt as quoted by our colleague from
the Sudan.
67. My delegation is happy with the revised text of
paragraph 4 (e) because, as it emphasizes that the performing of the functions of the United Nations Emergency
Force is based upon paragraph 1 of resolution 339 (1973)
as well as paragraph 1 of resolution 340 (1973), it makes
quite clear which lines are meant as the cease-fire lines in
the terms of both resolutions.

75. May I again express my delegation’s firm support fer
this
constructive action by the Council. The future n1I
record this as an historic moment in the annals of tl~
United Nations if we can maintain the momenturn gen.
erated here and move on to a peaceful, durable settlement
6

76. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution [S/110.54/, in order to help
pave the way for the implementation of urgent and
necessary steps to bring peace and normalcy to the Middle
East. These urgent measures are contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report [S/110.52/Rev.l],
to which the resolution
we have just adopted gives effect.
77.

these peaceful ends, far more than their gifts in the form of
weapons.

83. By the way in which it has set up this peace Force, the
Security Council has set in motion a new experiment
which, we hope, will give fruitful results for the benefit of
all mankind and the glory of the United Nations.

We hope that the United Nations Emergency Force

84. Sir Donald MAITLAND (United Kingdom): My delegation commends the Secretary-General and his staff for
this report. It deals comprehensively and effectively with
the immediate issues. It reflects accurately the letter and
spirit of our resolutions. For these reasons my delegation
voted for the resolution approving the Secretary-General’s
report.

will effectively prevent the recurrence of fighting in the
area. We hope that the presence of the Force will make it
possible for humanitarian and reconstruction activities to
be launched immediately in the affected area. Furthermore,
we hope that the Force will ensure the return to positions
occupied by the parties as at 16.50 hours GMT on 22
October
1973. Finally, we hope that, as envisaged in
resolution
338 (1973), the parties concerned will start
immediately
after the cease-fire the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967), in all its parts, and further, that
immediately and concurrently with the ceasefire, negotiations will start between the parties concerned under the
auspices of the United Nations, aimed at establishing a just
and durable peace in the Middle East.

8.5. As regards certain issues of principle raised in the
discussion on this report, my delegation’s views are already
on record.
86. The PRESIDENT: All members of the Council wishing
to explain their vote have now done so, and I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
87. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): I should like to declare, on behalf of the Government of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, that upon receipt of the Secretary-General’s cable
on 25 October 1973, communicating to us the text of
resolution 340 (1973), I sent the following reply to the
Secretary-Generai on 26 October 1973:

78. My delegation would like to express its very sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General and his staff for the great
and dedicated effort which they put into the preparation of
this very practical and useful report which we have just
approved. We thank them and would like to inform them
that my delegation, like others, appreciates their dedication
atrd the hard work they are doing in the Council’s service.

[The speaker read out the text of the letter contained in
document S/llO.Xj

79. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
The delegation of Panama congratulates the SecretaT
General and his assistants for their tireless endeavours in
setting up this important undertaking on a sound basis.

88. I wish also to refer to my statement before the
Council on 25 October 1973 /.Z 750th meetingJ. In giving
its consent to the entry and presence of the United Nations
Emergency Force on Egyptian territory, the Government of
Egypt is exercising its sovereign rights to enable the United
Nations to proceed with this first step and temporary
measure towards putting an end to the aggression committed against Egypt since 1967. The Force is not there to
infringe Egyptian sovereignty to any extent or in any form.
On the contrary, it is on Egyptian territory with Egypt’s
consent to enable Egypt to safeguard its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to give expression to the United
Nations determination to uphold the Charter and implement its resolutions.

80. The revised report which the Secretary-General has
submitted [S/lIOSZ/Rev. I], earned the affirmative vote of
the delegation of Panama, because it seemed to us that this
was the best way in which to implement resolution
340 (1973) which established the United Nations Emergency Force for the Middle East. The equitable way in
which the foundations were laid for the establishment of
this peace machinery warrants our having faith and hope
that soon this embattled region will, through just and
equitable agreements, achieve the lasting peace which we all
wish for them.

89. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

81, In expressing the satisfaction of the delegation of
Panama at the progress we have achieved today, through
the action which has just been taken, we renew our offer to
be as useful as we possibly can in the effort to achieve the
noble goal of peace which we desire for that important
sector of the international community.

I now call on the representative of

90. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have already stated in the
Security Council that Israel’s policy has been and continues
to be guided by three principles: cease-fire, negotiation,
peace, The cease-fire has become effective. Tranquillity
prevails in all sectors of the front. United Nations military
observers have taken up their positions. The first units of
the United Nations Emergency Force have arrived in the
area. Today a meeting is being held between representatives
of the Israeli and Egyptian military forces. Direct contact
between the parties has always proved to be the most
constructive method for resolving differences and arriving
at mutual understandings. Arrangements have been made

82. The spirit of understanding that has been shown by
members of the Security Council and in particular by the
permanent members deserves acknowledgement. We trust
that a similar attitude will be taken when the time comes to
finance the Emergency Force. The peoples of the third
world,
who are anxiously following these developments,
will appreciate the contributions of the great Powers to

7

$1 billion. Do you hear, Mr. Secretary-General? There is a
billion dollars involved here. Because you and your aides
prepared the report, I shall repeat what I have said. To
avoid such contingencies-meaning repeated conflicts-it is
most likely that the United Nations Emergency Force may
have to be extended for many years, which may bring its
total expenditure to over $1 billion for a period of six or
seven years, taking into account the rampant inflation for
which the Western world has still to find a remedy.

today for a convoy of non-military supplies to be sent to
the beleaguered Egyptian Third Army. Tomorrow, 28
October, 30 wounded Egyptian prisoners of war will be
repatriated to Egypt via Cyprus through the good offices of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.
91. It was on Yom Kippur, precisely three weeks ago, that
the armies of Egypt and Syria descended on Israel in flame
and death. They were soon joined by the forces of eight
other Arab States. The people of Israel, small and bled by
25 years of Arab warfare, Israel’s citizen army, have proved
again that those who fight for their lives, those who defend
the existence of their motherland, those who bear no
malice towards their neighbours, those whose cause is just,
have within them the strength to withstand and repel the
onslaught of hatred and destruction.

99. Members of the Council, please remember the stn.
pendous expenses, which shot up to astronomical figures, ln
the Korean and Viet-Namese conflicts. Because of the
exigencies of ideological differences between the people ef
the northern and southern regions of that unhappy land,
which ethnologically speaking had a homogeneous popula.
tion, the negotiations in Korea took more than a decade te
come to an end, and the problems existing between North
and South have not yet been solved. The unjust de facto
partition has not been resolved since 1950 in the case ef
Korea, and a few years later in the case of Viet-Nam-aad
both Korea and Viet-Nam, I must repeat, have a home.
geneous ethnological population.

92. This is the time to change course and to work for
peace, for understanding and for friendship. This is the time
to abandon policies that have brought devastation to the
attackers and suffering to alI the peoples of the area. This is
the time to join together in building a new, a different
future for all the nations of the Middle East, a future of
co-operation, creativity, peace and prosperity.

100. Members of the Council, do you mean to teIl me that
a miraculous just solution can be found in six months or a
year between the Arabs and Israel-Israel, which the Arabs
consider a foreign element in their midst? Therefore no
one should be so optimistic as not to take into account that
the negotiations might be protracted for a very, very long
time.

93. May this day, may this meeting of the Security
Council, mark the end of one sad chapter and the beginning
of another and brighter era.
94. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

101. On the other hand, suppose the countries whose
territory has been occupied are persuaded, if not coerced,
to accept an imposed solution. I must warn you that
imposed solutions have a way of backfiring, and the whole
question would revert to where it started: resumed conflict
or, at best, a “no war, no peace” state of affairs, and all of a
sudden war would break out anew.

95. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I shall confine my
intervention as strictly as is humanly possible to the
financial implications referred to in the last two paragraphs
of the report of the Secretary-General, under the heading
“Estimated cost and method of financing”. We note that
the estimated cost for a force of 7,000, all ranks, for a
period of six months is approximately $30 million. We have
no quarrel with this figure, namely, $30 million for six
months, or $60 million a year.

102. Hence the better part of wisdom would be not to
bank on the assumption that we can divorce the cease.
fire-which,
although its primary objective is to stop the
fighting, cannot solve this problem-from
the ultimate aitn
of finding a just solution.

96. The two super-Powers must be quite optimistic to set
a renewable target-date of six months for working out a
lasting and just peace in a most complicated conflict which
began in 1947 with the partition of Palestine, which by
arbitrary action introduced an alien people into the region.

103. Judging by negotiations relative to the Viet-Nam war,
I must repeat that the expenses of the United Natioas
Emergency Force in Sinai and elsewhere may run into
$1 billion, if not very much more, within a period of a few
years.

97. Even before 1947-indeed 25 years before then; since
the early 1920s-the Arab world reacted vehemently when
it knew that the mandatory Power was in the beginning
encouraging Jewish immigrants to go to Palestine. The Arab
world as a whole, and especially its youth, which constitutes the majority of the Arab world, will not accept what
they may consider to be an imposed solution. There would
be no peace, and periodically other conflicts would flare
up. Hence expedient, makeshift solutions may trigger a
series of conflicts.

104. Now I come to paragraph 7 of the report of the
Secretary-General, which reads as follows:
“The costs of the Force shall be considered as expenses
of the Organization”-meaning
the United Nations-“to
be borne by the Members in accordance with Article I7,
paragraph 2, of the Charter.”

98. It is therefore to be noted that to avoid such
contingencies it is most likely that the United Nations
Emergency Force may have to be extended for many years,
which may bring the total expenditure to more than

The report should not have bypassed paragraph 1 of Article
17, which states: “The General Assembly shall consider and
approve the budget of the Organization”. It is the preroga.
tive of the General Assembly and not the Security Cou~lcil
8

to approve the budget of the United Nations. Did you take
that into account, Mr. Waldheim? It is the prerogative of
the General Assembly and not the Security Council to
approve the budget of the United Nations. Approval or
disapproval of expenditures has to be decided by a majority
vote bf all the members of the Assembly participating,

you were doing, and I have to sendmessengers
through the
backdoor, asif you had learnednothing from the past.

109. Returning to the nineteenthsession-inthe meantime
the late Ambassador Budo of Albania thought it appropriate to expose what he consideredto be connivanceby
certain Powers striking secretdealswithout previous widespread private consultations. I sent a messageto the
105. What if the GeneralAssemblydoesnot approvethe
expenditures estimated by the Secretary-Generaland his Presidentof the Council early this afternoon through both
aides in the report before us? May I go a little further.
the Secretary-General and Mr. Herndl that no hasty deciWhat if a good number of members of the ’ General sionshould be taken about financing before someonewho
Assembly opposethese expenditures? If a goodnumberof
had scrutinized the financial situation wasallowedto speak.
States does not constitute a majority, then they are bound But no, it seemsthat you gentlemenborrowed a pressure
to contribute their share, and no financial problem arises. cooker from the United Statesinstead of letting us all put
But what if a permanent memberof the Security Council charcoal under the pot and help in cooking somesolution.
categorically refuses to pay its share, regardlessof the With all due respect to your efforts, you put the whole
outcome of the vote in the General Assembly? Would thing in an American pressurecooker and we are askedto
Article
19 of the Charter apply to that permanent eat what you have cooked.
member?
110. Again I refer to the nineteenth session.
Incidentally,
106. In order to refresh the memory of the Secretary when I was privately asked by the late Adlai Stevenson
General and his aidesaswell asthe memory of the Council about my attitude, I made it clear to him that I had not
regarding Article 19, I shallread it out:
been a party to the consultationsthat went on between
certain Powers and which evinced the objection of the late
“A Member of the United Nations which is in arrearsin
AmbassadorBudo of Albania. Dealswerestruck in private.
the payment of its financial contributions to the Organi- And then I reminded Adlai Stevensonhow the United
zation shall have no vote in the GeneralAssemblyif the
States failed to achieve any constructive results in 1950
amount of its arrearsequalsor exceedsthe amount of the
when after AmbassadorMalik walked out of the Security
contributions due from it for the preceding two full
Council chamber, the United States decided to transfer
years. The General Assembly may, nevertheless,permit discussion of the question of Korea to the General
such a Member to vote if it is satisfiedthat the failure to
Assembly. The Soviet Union boycotted the General
pay is due to conditions beyond the control of the
Assembly when it dealt with the question of Korea, and
that General Assembly came to be known as the “Little
Member”.
Assembly” consistingof 46 Members, It wasat the “Little
Assembly” that the United States beganto enlist help in
But what if that permanent member of the Security
the war it was waging againstNorth Korea. Fifteen States
Council is able to pay? Thereis nothing beyond its control
were draggedinto that war, and I rememberhow I sawto it
there. What would happen? Have you, in your haste,forgotten the Charter, my dearfriend, Mr. Secretary-General? that the country I representedwould not be draggedinto
siding with a State that was instrumental in partitioning
Have the others, in their haste,forgotten Article 19?
Korea de @to, on ideologicalgrounds.
107. The nineteenth sessionof the General Assemblyis
111. Have you taken ,a11
thosefacts into consideration,my
still vivid in my memory and in the memory of thosewho
witnessed what happened. The Soviet Union had con- good friends, membersof the Council?
sistently refused-and rightly so-to pay its share in
connexion with the United Nations operations in the
112. Why am I mentioning all this? It is becauseit hasa
Middle East. On the other hand, France did not consider bearing on the imbroglio with which we are at present
itself bound to pay its shareof the costsentailedby the
confronted, the imbroglio which arosefrom the involvement and commitment of the late PresidentHarry Truman
United Nations operationsin the Congo.
to the Zionists. He cast asidethe right of self-determination
108. The United States insisted, during the nineteenth of the Palestinian people in order to win Jewishvotes for
session, that unlessthe Soviet Union footed its shareof the his re-election to the Presidency.All that was done in the
bill for what might be called extra-curricular budgetary name of sham humanismand perverted democracy,about
which I spoke in the GeneralAssemblyin 1947, after the
expenses of the United Nations it would lose its right to
vote. When the late Adlai Stevenson, the then repre- partition of Palestine. What a perpetration of injusticeby
sentative of the United States,realized that nothing would the leader of a great Power. I repeat, andlet it appearin the
budge the Soviet Union from its position after It had record, what a perpetration of injustice by the leaderof a
insisted that it would not pay, he resortedto third parties great Power.
in order to save face and conspired with Alex Quaison113. Again we come to the crux of the question: what if
Sackey-who
was President during that sessionof the
General Assembly-and other representativeson whose China, for example, and other States refuse to pay the
countries the United States wielded influence. A secret expensesof the United Nations EmergencyForce? Will we
formula was improvised to solve the problem.That secret be pushed into another United Nations crisissimilarto the
formula reminded me of how you membersof the Council one we had during the nineteenth sessionof the General
had shut and locked the door sothat no one could seewhat
Assembly? Will the United Nations survive sucha crisis?I
9

Beersand the Oppenheimersin South Africa? They nrtlst
be friends of Mr. Abba Eban; he probably can play on tlieir
sentimentsto get them to foot the bill. Why doesnot Israel
ask the Rotbschilds and other Zionist millionaires and
billionaires scattered all over the world, including the Be
Beersand the Oppenheimersin South Africa, to underwrite
the cost of the Emergency Force which is to be sentto the
Middle East?

noted what Mr. Malik said a few days ago, namely that the
aggressor should bear the expenses of the United Nations
Emergency Force. Has he received fresh instructions from
his Government that, due to the detente between the Soviet
Union and the United States of America, the Soviet Union
may accommodate the United States and accept paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General’s report? Mr. Malik said
the other day that the aggressor should foot the bill. What
if the aggressor claims that it cannot afford to do so? What
about the United States, by virtue of whose bounty Israel
has survived all these years? What about the United
States?

119. Incidentally, why do not those millionairesdeclaring themselvesfor Israel as they have consistently
done-emigrate to Israel and become Israeli citizens? Are
they not Jews of the Diaspora? And should they not be
good Zionists and conform to the Zionist ideology, whose
aim is to ingather all the Jewsof the world in Palestine?Or
is it more profitable for those millionaires and billionaires,
at this stage,to keep exploiting the gentile world?

114. The United States, whilst trying to reduce its
domestic expenditures, has recently sent an initial $2,000
million worth of lethal weapons to Israel, and more military
aid is on the way. Why should not the United States pay
every cent of the cost of the United Nations Emergency
Force? What is $30 million every six months? To the
United States, $30 million is a bagatelle. The United States
spent $300,000 million in the Viet-Nam war for a travesty
of a solution. The war in Viet-Nam has not been resolved.
Mr. Kissinger tried to save the face of his adopted country.
He did not find a solution. He gave the false impression to
the American peoples that he had solved the problem. The
United States had no choice but to withdraw from an
unjust war, and rightly so. The United States withdrew, but
it did not repair the damage of its intervention in the Far
East, 10,000 or 15,000 miles away from its shcres.

120. Who should foot the bill-rather than who will foot
it-is the burning question.
121. The massmedia of information-most of whiclrare
controlled and manipulated by the Zionists or Zionist
sympathizers:will they continue to brainwashthe America
people into accepting that Israel, the so-calledoutpostef
democracy in the Middle East, should, by direct contribe.
tions and increasedtaxes imposedon the American people,
continue to be financed by them?
122. Does the United States Government really believe
that without Israel in the Middle East-at a distanceof
6,000 miles-United Statessecurity may be threatened?If
Israelasa State vanishes,will the mighty United Statestotter
and fall down?

115. Who do you think you are fooling, Mr. Ambassador
Bennett? You were in Portugal then as ambassador, but
who do you think your Government has been fooling,
throughout the years, about aggression in Viet-Nam? I do
not want to wear the gloves of diplomatic decorumbecause such a policy has failed so miserably-and not call a
spade a spade. That is why when Baroody asks for the floor
they say, “He is not a conformist”. The conformists do not
want me to speak and tell the truth as I see it.

123. The Zionist media of information-whether visualor
auditory-such as the ABC, CBS and NBC networks have
been referred to by none other than President Nixon as
“outrageous”, “vicious” and, when the occasion callsfor it,
“malicious”, “hypocritical” and “hysterical, to say the
least”-and I am using his words. Will the pro-Zionist press
continue to brainwashandmisleadthe people of the United
States and other Western countries into believing that
without the State of Israel the world will come to anend?

116. Some $300,000 million were spent by the United
States in the Far East. In Korea it dragged 14 States, or 15,
I do not know, into the war. The United States tried to
drag us in, but we would not be duped that the United
States was fighting in Korea for justice and for its brand of
democracy. The North Koreans were “ogres’‘-the
same
people, north and south. And the United States made its
“clients”, those 1.5 States in Korea, share those astronomical figures incurred in that war.

124. I have spoken about those massmedia many, nlany
times; the last time was about three days before your
illustrious President, Mr. Nixon--my good friend Anibs+
sador Bennett-referred to the massmedia of information.
Do not think that he consultedwith me privately and1gabe
him thoseadjectives-

117. Why does not the United States Government pay,
foot the bill, for what the United Nations Emergency Force
would cost? It would be much cheaper than the $250,000
million it spent on Viet-Nam, and the I don’t know how
much it spent in Korea. I shall have to get it from some
friend in the United States Mission. The figures must be in
some book. Why should not the United States pay every
cent of the cost of the United Nations Emergency Force
that is to be sent to the Middle East?

125. The PRESIDENT: I think that I must, with grtat
reluctance126. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): You always deit
with greatreluctance, Sir; go on.
127. The PRESIDENT: ~-remind my friend the reprem
sentativeof Saudi Arabia that the membersof this Council
have beensitting in thesesamechairsalmost continuously,
for, I think, 11hours; and I do appealto him to shortenhis
speechand bring it to a close assoon as possible.Wehave

118. There is another alternative. Why doesnot Israelask
the Rothschilds-and they are billionaires;we arenot talking
about millionairesnow-and other Zionist millionairesand
billionaires scattered all over the world, including the De
10

listened with interest to his earlier comments on the
financial aspects of the report that the Security Council has
approved. But, I would appeal to him once again and urge
him to bring his remarks to a close so that I can adjourn
this meeting.

indoctrinated, for it is you and only you who may be able
to drive some sense into the heads of misguided Zionists
and thereby save all the Jews from, God forbid, becoming
scapegoats whence the innocent will suffer. With nuclear
weapons in abundance lying around, who can guarantee-

128. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The bulk of my
speech was over, I know that you are under great strain, Sir;
I sympathize with you. I know; I also have been under great
strain. Incidentally, I am older than you, I too have been
working on my speech and other things for 15 hours, and I
still have some stamina. I think that there is still some
strength in the old horses that you and I are. It will not
take me long to finish. If you had exercised a little patience
you would not have had to make an appeal.

13.5. Mr. Tekoah is up to his old tricks. He is talking
behind me and saying “Madness, Saudi Arabian madness”.
For heaven’s sake. I do not want to tell you to shut up
again. Shut up. This is too much. I stand on my right not to
be interrupted again. Who is prolonging this meeting, Sir?

129, The PRESIDENT: We have great stamina in this
Council, but there are limits.
130. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): You should have
more stamina than 1. But I am going to finish-not just to
please you, because I would be a hypocrite to say that I am
doing it just to please you, but because I have only three or
four more pages of longhand notes. Because of my poor
eyesight I have to use large letters. This interruption is
uncalled for. If you had not interrupted me, I would have
been finished by now. Appeal, appeal. Appeal to somebody
else for a change. Good heavens, you are getting to be
incorrigible, Sir Laurence McIntyre, my good friend.
13 1. Don’t laugh. It is sad. The man is under pressure: YOU
should sympathize with him. I stand up for his human
rights.
132. I will not speak extemporaneously after I have
finished these pages of my notes. I was going to speak
extemporaneously,
which I think would have been more
effective than my dry financial speech.
133. Where was I now? Let me see. Good God, I am all
mixed up. I said, “Good God, have mercy upon me.” For
heaven’s sake, don’t do it any more, Sir. 1 am glad you have
only three or four more days as President of the Councilfor your sake and mine.
134. When the Zionist leaders free themselves from the
illusion that God gave them Palestine and when they cease
claiming that they are the chosen people of God, and once
the Zionists come to their senses and realize that the Arab
youth will see to it that there will be no lasting peace
without
the restitution of the right of self-determination to
the Palestinians in the land of Palestine where they had
lived for thousands of years, then, and only then, can peace
be established between Arab and Jew; then, and only then,
can Arab and Jew live as brothers under a common
flag-after
the Israeli flag is hauled down. If, on the other
hand, the political Zionists persist in their present policy,
not all the money in all the United States and Western
Europe
would be sufficient to maintain Israel in the
precarious
position in which she will always find herself.
Wake up you Jews of the world that have not yet been

136. I say again, wake up you Jews of the world that have
not yet been indoctrinated, for it is you and only you who
may be able to drive some sense into the heads of
misguided Zionists and thereby save all the Jews from, God
forbid, becoming scapegoats when the innocent will suffer.
official”-not
Baroody-“fears
a backlash.
137, “Jewish
Gold says war may cause rise in anti-Semitism”. It should
not anti-Semitism because I am a
say “anti-Jewishness”
Semite. This is a headline in The New York Times of today,
Saturday, 27 October.
138. With nuclear weapons in abundance lying around,
who can guarantee that, with the stubbornness of the
Zionists, and possible miscalculations on the part of the
United States Government, these Zionists may not push the
whole world into the abyss of destruction. Arise ye Jews,
before it is too late, to prevail on the Zionists to see the
writing on the wall and to remember Jeremiah who in vain
tried to make the ancients amongst you see the light. If you
and your supporter, the United States, do not relent and
heed the warning there may be no one left like Jeremiah to
lament the fate of mankind.
139. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation from Russian): I shall be brief. I have just
received from Moscow the text of a statement issued by
TASS today, 27 October 1973. I should like to read it to
the Council:
“In connexion with the events in the Middle East, it has
been reported in Washington that United States armed
forces have been placed on alert in certain parts of the
world, including Europe.
“In attempting to justify this step officials have referred
to actions by the Soviet Union allegedly giving grounds
for concern.
“TASS L authorized to state that such reports are
absurd, since the actions of the Soviet Union are designed
exclusively to promote the implementation of Security
Council decisions concerning the cease-fire and the
restoration of peace in the Middle East.
“The United States took this action, which makes not
the slightest contribution to the easing of international
tension, in an obvious attempt to intimidate the Soviet

141. In closing I think I may say one word of gratitude on
behalf of the Council as a whole for the efforts of all those
members of the Secretariat who helped us through oa tl~~
week-end day, and not least of all the interpreters.

Union. However, we can tell the instigators of the action
that they are knocking at the wrong door”.
140. The PRESIDENT: I have no more names on my list
of speakers, SO I propose now to adjourn this meeting. The
Council will continue to be vitally concerned with the
situation, and wiIl remain on instant call to meet as
required.

The meeting rose at 9.45 pm.

12

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite4
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les pubhcations
dcs Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agenres
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
au adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las puhlicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section
de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijnse

New

in other

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

73-82001-May

1979-2,200
