32

General Assembly -

report to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session,
and finds that the Government of the Union of South
Africa has failed and refused to carry out its obligations
under the Mandate for the Territory of South West
Africa;
2. Concludes that the dispute which has arisen between Ethiopia, Liberia and other Member States on
the one hand, and the Union of South Africa on the
other, relating to the interpretation and application of
the Mandate has not been and cannot be settled by
negotiation ;
3. 11/otes that Ethiopia and Liberia, on 4 November
1960, filed concurrent -applications in the lnternational
Court of Justice instituting contentious proceedings
against the Union of South Africa;
4. Commends the Governments of Ethiopia and
Liberia upon their initiative in submitting such dispute
to the International Court of Justice for adjudication
and declaration in a contentious proceeding in accordance
with article 7 of the Mandate.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.

1566 (XV). Assistance of the specialized agencies and of the United Nations Children's
Fund in the economic, social and educational
development of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes of Article 55 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the international status of the Mandated Territory of South \Vest Africa, the General
Assembly's own obligations and the concern of the
community of nations to promote the well-being and
interest of the inhabitants of that Territory,
Having perused the observations and recommendations contained in part II, sections IV, V and VI, of
the report of the Committee on South West Africa to
the General Assembly, 21
1. Considers that the economic, social, educational
and health conditions prevailing in the Mandated Territory of South West Africa, especially as they concern
the indigenous inhabitants, are unsatisfactory, and that
the need for urgent co-operative action for the improvement of present conditions in these fields is imperative ;
2. Endorses the considered view of the Committee
on South West Africa that assistance should be sought,
and that it should be provided by the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and the United Nations Children's Fund ;
3. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund
to undertake urgent programmes to assist the indigenous
population of the Territory of South West Africa in
their respective fields;
4. Requests the Government of the Union of South
Africa to seek such assistance and to extend its cooperation to the above-mentioned specialized agencies
and the United Nations Children's Fund in implementing such urgent programmes to improve the economic,
social, educational and health conditions of the indigenous.
population in South West Africa, and to facilitate their
work in the Territory in every possible way;
21 Jbid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/4464).

Fifteenth Session

5. Requests the above-mentioned specialized agencies
and the United Nations Children's Fund to report to
the Committee on South vV est Africa and to the
General Assembly at their respective sessions during
1961 on the action taken in implementing the presr11t
resolution.
954th plenary mfftinr1,
18 December 1960.

1567 (XV). The Windhoek Location
Thf General Assembly,
H m1ing r!'aivcd a report from the Committee on
South \Vest Africa with respect to disturbances in the
\Vinclhoek ~ative Location relating to the removal of
the Location residents to a new site called Katutura, 22
Noting with regret that the construction of the new
I .ocatinn at Katutura is part of the plan laid down by
the present Prime Minister in his former capacity as
Minister of Native A ff airs to the effect that Native
I .ocations in urban areas, based on the policy of
apartheid, must be situated in such a manr,er that a
permanent "buffer strip of at least 500 yards" on which
''no development at all is allowed" is maintaine(\ "between the Native residential area and that of anv other
racial group", 23
•
Obsnving with deep concern that on the night of
JO to 11 December 1959, after repeated expressions of
opposition by Location residents to their removal had
failed to obtain the sympathetic consideration of officials
of the Mandatory Power, police and soldiers opene(I
fire on a crowd of Location residents, killing eleven
Africans and injuring at least forty-four others,
l'v' oting the report transmitted to the. United Nations
bv the Government of the Union of South Africa 24 conc;rning an inquiry into the events in Windhoek Location
on 10 to 11 December 1959, and the direct causes
which gave rise thereto,
Tal,iny into account the additional information contained in the report of the Committee on South West
Africa and in oral and written petitions from inhabitants
of the Territory,
1\loting also the many protests received by the Committee during 1959 in petitions and communications
against the impending removal to the new Location site
on the grounds, inter alia, that the removal was part of
the intensified application of the apartheid policy,
Considering that the apartheid policy applied in South
vV est Africa is contrary to the terms of the Mandate,
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
C onsidcring further that the application of the
apartheid policy, of which the occurrences in Windhoek
have been an unfortunate consequence, is prejudicial to
the maintenance of ·a peaceful and orderly administration
in the Mandated Territory,
1. Expresses deep regret at the action taken by the
police and soldiers in the Windhoek Native Location
on the night of 10 to 11 December 1959 against residents
of the Location, resulting in the death of eleven Africans
and many other casualties;
2 2 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement Na. 12 (A/4464),
paras. 138-229.
23 Union of South Africa, Seoote Debates, 1956, No. 15, cols.
3884 and 3885.
2 4 For the text of the report, see Official Records of t/ir
Genera[ Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Supplement Na. 12 (A/
4464), annex V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Deplores the fact reported by petitioners that the
Mandatory Power has employed such means as deportations, dismissals from employment, threats of such
action and other methods of intimidation to secure the
removal of residents of the Windhoek Location to
Katutura despite the continued opposition of the residents to their removal ;
3. N ates with deep concern that the situation remains
critical;
4. Urges the Mandatory Power to refrain from the
use of direct or indirect force to secure the removal of
Location residents;
5. Requests the Mandatory Power to take steps to
prosecute and punish the civilian and military officers
responsible for the death of eleven Africans and many
other casualties in the Windhoek Native Location on
the night of 10 to 11 December 1959, and to provide
adequate compensation to the families of the victims ;
6. Draws the attention of the Mandatory Power to
the recommendations of the Committee on South \Vest
Africa concerning the measures which should be taken
to alleviate the tension and unrest in the Windhoek area,
and in particular to the recommendation that housing
developments in urban areas of the Territory should be
carried out in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the peoples concerned.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.

1568 (XV).

Question of South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having recommended, in previous resolutions, that the
Territory of South West Africa should be placed under
the International Trusteeship System, and having repeatedly invited the Government of the Union of South
Africa to propose, for the consideration of the General
Assembly, a trusteeship agreement for South West
Africa,
Having accepted, in resolution 449 A (V) of
13 December 1950, the advisory opinion of 11 July
l 950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa, 13
Taking note with deep regret of the refusal of the
Government of the Union of South Africa to modify
its administration of the Territory in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to enter into negotiations with the United
Nations, through the Committee on South West Africa,
with a view to placing the Mandated Territory under
the International Trusteeship System,
Noting with grave concern that the administration of
the Territory, particularly in recent years, has been conducted in a manner increasingly contrary to the Mandate,
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice and the resolutions of
the General Assembly,
Considering that all the efforts of the United Nations
to induce the Government of the Union of South Africa
to modify the present principles and practices of that
administration and to ensure the well-being and security
of the indigenous inhabitants of the Territory have been
of no avail,
Considering with concern that the present situation
in South West Africa constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security,

83

Considering that most of the Mandated Territories
which were placed under the International Trusteeship
System have acceded or will soon accede to nationai
independence,
Recognizing that the Territory of South West Africa
has an inalienable right to independence and tu till'
exercise of its full national sovereignty,
1. Regrets that the Government of the Uni011 of
South Africa has so far failed to respoml to the repeated
appeals of the Generai Assembly asking it to n•-;ise a
policy which infringes the fundamental rights and freedoms of the indigenous inhabitants of South West
Africa and imposes upon them disabilities of Yariou.,
kinds. hindering their political, economic anrl soci:!1
advancement ;
2. Deplorrs and disapproves the policy practised hy
the Government of the Union of South Africa contran
to its obligations under the international Manchte ~f
17 December 1920 for South \Vest Africa;
3. Deprecates the application, in the Territory of
South West Africa, of the policy of apartheid, and calls
upon the Government of the Union of South Africa to
revoke or rescind immediately all laws and regulations
based on that policy ;
,
4. Invites the Committee on South West Africa, in
addition to il.~ normal tasks, to go to South West Africa
immediately to investigate the situation prevailing in
the Territory and to ascertain and make proposals to
the General Assembly on :
(a) The conditions for restoring a climate of pear.e
and security;
( b) The steps which would enable the indigenous
inhabitants of South West Africa to achieve a wide
measure of internal self-government designed to lead
them to complete independence as soon as possible ;
5. Urges the Government of the Union of South
Africa to facilitate the mission of the Committee on
South West Africa ;
6. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to make a preliminary report on the implementation of
the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
resumed fifteenth session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide facilities
for the execution of the present resolution.
954th plenary mrrtina.
18 Decembrr 1960.

1569 (XV). Question of the future of Western
Samoa
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council on the Trust Territory of Western Samoa under
New Zealand administration, 26 as well as the report
of the United Nations Visiting Mission to the Trust
Territory of Western Samoa, 1959, 26
Having taken note of the Constitution adopted by
the Constitutional Convention of Western Samoa on
28 October 1960 and the resolutions adopted by that
Convention, 27
25 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Sr.csion, Supplement No. 4 (A/4404), part II, chapter V.
26 Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twentvfourth Session, Supplement No. 2 (T /1483), document T /1449.
2 7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 44, documents NC.4/454 and Add.I.
