S/PV.8198

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8198th meeting

Wednesday, 7 March 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana Torrelio
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Ms. French

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on progress in the implementation of the
31 December 2016 political agreement (S/2018/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2018/174)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-06260 (E)
*1806260*

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, Permanent
Representative of Kuwait, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of February. We were
impressed by the great quality of his work. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Alotaibi and his team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on progress
in the implementation of the 31 December 2016
political agreement (S/2018/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2018/174)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/128, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on progress in the implementation
of the 31 December 2016 political agreement, and
2/21

07/03/2018

document S/2018/174, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, members and non-members of the
Council alike, to deliver their statements in five minutes
or less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct
and to focus on key issues. Briefers are encouraged to
limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I should like
to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to outline the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
members know, this is my first briefing to the Council
since I assumed my functions as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.
I should like at the outset to underscore the
outstanding progress made in recent weeks in the
preparations for the presidential and legislative
elections, including the end of the voter registration
process across the country, the enactment of the revised
electoral law and the adoption of the electoral budget.
I note that at this stage, more than 46 million potential
voters, 47 per cent of whom are women, have registered,
thereby indicating their intention to participate in the
elections on 23 December.
Despite the many challenges they face, these
millions of Congolese men and women have signified
their commitment to ensuring the first peaceful transfer
of power in the history of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I wish to pay tribute today to the determination
of the Congolese people to participate in the political
process and to shape the future of their country,
because it is that determination and commitment that
will help achieve the goals set by the 31 December 2016
Political Agreement. On the eve of the commemoration
of International Women’s Day, I wish to pay special
tribute to all Congolese women for their courage and
determination to bring about peace, stability and the
consolidation of the democratic process in their country.
They have played a critical role in ensuring a peaceful
process, and I am sure that they will continue to do so.
However, despite the progress made in the electoral
process, major challenges remain. In this respect, it is
important to restore the faith of the signatories of the
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

New Year Agreement, both in the political process as a
whole and in the organization of the elections. As such,
the effective implementation of conciliatory measures
and the respect of electoral deadlines are essential.
Regarding the implementation of the conciliatory
measures, although the Government has released
numerous political prisoners since the signing of the
31 December Agreement, many others are still being
detained. In that regard, more effort must be made to
examine the remaining typical cases and those involving
other prisoners, and to pursue political openness.
The disproportionate use of force by the security
services during the peaceful demonstrations of
31 December and 21 January is another major concern.
This disproportionate use resulted in 16 deaths,
more than 100 wounded and 100 arrests. During the
25 February protests, at least 2 more people were
killed, 47 were tried and 102 arrested by security forces
across the country. Ensuring respect for the freedoms
and fundamental rights enshrined in the Congolese
Constitution is also crucial. I call on the Government to
conduct credible investigations into these incidents and
to take appropriate sanctions.
With regard to the electoral process, several key
issues on the agenda of the Independent National
Electoral Commission (CENI) have yet to be resolved.
First, the electoral legislation must be finalized, in
particular with the adoption by Parliament of the
provisions on the distribution of seats. Secondly, the
financial resources needed to organize the elections
on time must be regularly disbursed and allocated to
CENI by the authorities. Moreover, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo electoral support project must
be adopted. Finally, differences with respect to some
of the election modalities, including the possible use of
voting machines, should be ironed out.
(spoke in English)
While national political attention remains centred
on confidence-building measures and progress in
the electoral process, the security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has continued to
deteriorate. That brings increased risk for renewed
instability in many parts of the country, and poses a
serious threat to the civilian population, particularly in
the East. The activities of the Allied Democratic Forces
in the Beni area, and of Mayi-Mayi groups in North
and South Kivu continue to pose significant threats to
the civilian population, and those groups can still carry

S/PV. 8198

out attacks against the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO.) In the Kasai
region, the security situation remains fragile, with
reports of increased destabilizing activities of Kamuina
Nsapu and other militia groups.
The rapidly deteriorating situation in Ituri
province, centred around events in Djugu territory, is
of grave concern. The outbreak of violence starting
early this year, which has led to the deaths of more
than 60 civilians and the displacement of more than
200,000 people, poses a significant risk of escalation
and requires our full attention. The attack on Maze less
than a week ago, which left at least 33 people dead,
most of them women and children, was a callous act.
I condemn the persistent attacks by the various
armed groups and militia across the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the recruitment of children,
the rape of women and young girls, the burning of
houses and schools, and the desecration of places of
worship. It is the responsibility of those who direct and
those who perpetrate such attacks to ensure that this
unacceptable violence comes to an end. And it is our
collective responsibility to ensure that those who direct
and perpetrate such crimes be held fully responsible for
their actions.
In the context of the political tension and the
deteriorating security situation, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to face one of the
world’s most serious humanitarian crises. The number
of internally displaced persons in need of humanitarian
assistance has reached 4.5 million, the highest number
in Africa. Hundreds of thousands have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries. More than 7.7 million people
face severe food insecurity throughout the country.
More than 2 million children are severely malnourished
and require urgent assistance. Relief efforts are
hampered by critically low funding. There is no other
way of saying it — the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is shocking.
I would encourage the Council in its deliberations
on the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate to maintain
its focus on how the political and electoral processes
can best be supported, in line with the 31 December
Agreement, the electoral calendar and the Congolese
Constitution; and on how the security situation can be

18-062603/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

stabilized and protection for the Congolese civilian
population can best be assured.
A failure to generate confidence in the full and
faithful implementation of the 31 December Agreement
will serve only to heighten political tensions and to
fuel the risks of inciting violence for political ends,
particularly within a context of renewed and increased
armed group activities. It is essential that all stakeholders
find ways to ensure that the elections scheduled for the
end of this year are peaceful and credible, and thus
serve as a factor that contributes to the stability and
security of the country and of the region as a whole.
During these times of heightened tensions,
MONUSCO remains steadfast in its commitment to
supporting the Congolese authorities and protecting
the most vulnerable and most affected by acts of
violence — Congolese women and men, girls and boys,
who hold the aspirations of their country firmly in their
grasp.
We must also not forget those who have lost their
lives in the name of peace. That includes Congolese
from all walks of life, such as the 27 staff members
of the Independent National Electoral Commission
who lost their lives during the voter registration
process — three were beheaded — while working to
ensure that elections can take place on time. That also
includes those who have come to serve in the name
of peace, such as the 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers who
recently laid down their lives at the Semuliki bridge,
and the Pakistani peacekeeper who fell in South Kivu.
Our thoughts are also with our missing Tanzanian
peacekeeper, whom we are sparing no effort to find.
If we are to truly honour the memories of all those
who have paid the ultimate price for peace, then we must
complete the task at hand and ensure that elections that
contribute to the peace and security of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are held, and that the spirit
that led to the signing of the 31 December Agreement
prevail. That is a task to which MONUSCO remains
firmly committed, and I look forward to the continued
support of the Council in that regard.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by acknowledging the presence of the
4/21

07/03/2018

Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Léonard She Okitundu. I thank him for
being with us here today. I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her very
enlightening briefing, which underscores succinctly
the critical historical moment at which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo finds itself. The electoral cycle,
which is beginning, will indeed be crucial for the
future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region as a whole. The challenge is enormous, while
the situation is fragile. The serious deterioration of
the humanitarian situation and the recent increase in
intercommunal violence and conflict must move the
Council to act.
The current instability is largely the result of
delays and uncertainties related to the electoral
process, which means that the holding of credible and
transparent elections on schedule, while at the same
time facilitating a peaceful and democratic transition
of power, is crucial to the return to stability in the
country. That is our shared priority. Accordingly,
France stands ready to support the electoral process so
that elections can take place in optimal circumstances
and in close consultation with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s international partners, in particular the
African Union and other countries of the region whose
role is essential. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) has a crucial role to play in
that context. I would like to highlight three key factors
that will contribute to the smooth holding of elections
before returning to MONUSCO’s role.
The first key factor concerns the trust of the
entire Congolese people in the sound preparation of
the technical aspects of the holding of elections and
that the electoral timetable will be respected. Many
uncertainties remain with regard to the holding of
elections, including, for example, finalizing electoral
lists after checking for duplications, while adhering
to the prescribed deadlines; the registration process
and timetable for Congolese citizens living abroad;
the potential use of voting machines and ensuring
that the process is transparent through appropriate
measures; and the circumstances deemed appropriate
for distributing electoral literature throughout the
country. All those issues must be open to discussion by
all stakeholders, including political parties, potential
candidates and civil society.
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The Independent National Electoral Commission
has a crucial role to play in that regard, and we encourage
it to work in a spirit acrof transparency and openness
so as to build consensus on the technical aspects of
the holding of elections. In that regard, we support
the effective establishment of a team of international
experts to support the electoral process, which the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the European Union, the United Nations
and the International Organization of La Francophonie
have agreed to dispatch. Trust, based primarily on
transparency in the holding of elections, will therefore
be the first key factor leading to success.
The second key factor concerns the electoral
environment and the return to a spirit of consensus
within the framework of the full implementation of
the 31 December Political Agreement. If the outcome
of the elections is to be accepted by everyone, it is
essential that they be held in an open and peaceful
environment in which every candidate can announce
his or her candidature and campaign freely without fear
of reprisal. In that regard, I call once again for respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including,
above all, the right to demonstrate, as well as the need
for the proportional use of force in the context of law
enforcement. It is crucial that the violations observed
during the most recent demonstrations not be allowed to
reoccur and that those responsible for them be brought
to justice. I also take this opportunity to recall the need
to fully implement the Agreement of 31 December 2016,
particularly with regard to measures aimed at defusing
the political situation, such as the release of political
prisoners and ending the prosecution of members of the
opposition so as to allow them to campaign unhindered.
Those measures are needed to provide the conditions
for the holding of credible and peaceful elections.
In that context — and this is my third and
last point — MONUSCO has a key role to play in
supporting the electoral process, contributing to the
smooth holding of elections in a free, open and peaceful
environment, and protecting civilians. Last year, the
Council conferred upon MONUSCO an appropriate
mandate to pursue those two strategic goals. For its
part, the Mission, through its strategic review, has made
the necessary adjustments to better respond to current
issues, be more flexible and responsive and better protect
civilians. This year, we believe that MONUSCO’s
priorities must be reaffirmed and maintained. Through
its good offices and its technical and logistical support,

S/PV. 8198

MONUSCO must help ensure that the right conditions
be set in motion for the sound holding of elections. By
acting with resolve, completing ongoing reforms and
adopting a comprehensive approach that integrates all
its components, the Mission must be able to protect
civilians in the country more effectively.
The Security Council must lend its full support to
MONUSCO in realizing those two strategic priorities.
The Council must also provide MONUSCO with the
means needed to accomplish those tasks, including by
maintaining its troop ceiling and supporting it through
solid cooperation with the region so as to ensure the
full implementation of the 31 December Agreement and
enable all Congolese citizens to trust once more in the
process.
In our opinion, those are the conditions needed for
the success of the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accordance with the
established timetable. Council members may rest
assured of France’s absolute commitment to achieving
that goal.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me express our
appreciation to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougui for her maiden briefing on the
current situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo
and the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). We take this opportunity to
extend our congratulations to her on her appointment
and wish her all the best in the discharge of her heavy
responsibilities at this very critical juncture in the
political developments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The
deteriorating
political,
security
and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is indeed a matter of serious concern. The
continued instability in the country has displaced many
and caused a major humanitarian crisis that requires
attention. We look forward to the discussion on this
particular issue to be held next week. We welcome
progress made in preparations for the holding of
elections, including the completion of voter registration
across 26 provinces, including the troubled Kasai
region.

18-062605/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Initiatives such as the release of the former Chief
of Staff of the opposition leader Moïse Katumbi and the
granting of amnesty to several individuals sentenced
for various offenses are steps in the right direction, but
more needs to be done in terms of confidence-building
measures, which we believe is vital to creating the
atmosphere needed for the successful holding of
elections this year.
It is absolutely necessary that all Congolese parties
exercise maximum restraint, refrain from making
inflammatory statements and defuse the political
tensions prevailing in the country. They should also
fully commit to implementing the 31 December Political
Agreement, which remains the only viable framework
for resolving the current political impasse in the
country. It is also incumbent upon all Congolese parties
to provide all necessary support and cooperation for the
timely and peaceful conduct of the elections.
The support of the international community will be
vital to ensuring the successful holding of the elections.
In that regard, enhancing the coordination of the United
Nations, the African Union (AU), the Southern African
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and other international
partners is necessary to facilitate coherent and effective
support for the electoral process, which is critical to the
peace and security of not only the Democratic Republic
of the Congo but also the wider Great Lakes region.
In that regard, we welcome the various discussions
held recently by regional leaders with President
Kabila. The idea of a possible joint visit by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Chairperson of the AU
Commission Moussa Faki Mahamat that has been
mentioned is also very welcome.
The implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region remains very important.
We appreciate the outcome of the meeting held in
Addis Ababa last month, which brought together
representatives of the signatories and the guarantors to
review the status of the implementation. In the light of
the regional dynamics and the continuing multifaceted
challenges, the need to redouble efforts towards the full
implementation of the framework agreement cannot be
overemphasized.
The role of MONUSCO continues to be very
important in supporting the implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement and the electoral process
6/21

07/03/2018

and in protecting civilians, in line with its mandate as
set out in resolution 2348 (2017). We therefore support
the extension of the mandate of MONUSCO for another
year based on the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral.
We appreciate the protection through projection
concept that MONUSCO is implementing by introducing
the review of the locations of the operational bases
and rapidly deployable battalions to ensure better
protection of the civilian population. The engagement of
MONUSCO and the strengthening of local community
protection mechanisms in areas affected by the closure
of forward bases are also a creative initiative to better
mitigate conflicts and violence. We also take note of
the measures undertaken by the Mission to enhance
the security of its bases and peacekeepers following
the tragic Semuliki incident, as well as to review its
footprint, in order to adopt a more agile and robust
posture in its operations on remote and difficult terrain.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
Mission needs to be sufficiently resourced and
equipped. That is also reinforced by the findings of
the special investigation into the Semuliki incident.
Finally, we are ready to discuss those and other issues
in the upcoming negotiation on the draft resolution.
Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Bolivia) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we welcome the presence of
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and and Regional Integration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Léonard She Okitundu. We
also appreciate the briefing by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). We wish her success in her post.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/174) notes that the political situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
tense, particularly with regard to the elections and
confidence-building measures. In that regard, Bolivia
reiterates that, in order to ease such tensions, the
parties must implement the 31 December 2016 Political
Agreement for the effective holding of peaceful,
credible, inclusive and timely elections that lead to a
peaceful transfer of power and ease political tensions.
We urge the signatories to the Agreement to
implement it, including the confidence-building
measures contained therein. That is why we support
the initiatives and the good offices of the Special
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Representative in that regard. However, we reiterate
and call on the parties not to overlook the principles
of preventive diplomacy and good offices aimed at a
negotiated political solution. In that connection, we
welcome the progress made towards the implementation
of the electoral calendar made by the Independent
National Electoral Commission and the conclusion by
that body of the registration of 46 million potential
voters, of whom 47 per cent are women.
We commend the work of the regional organizations,
such as the Southern African Development Community
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, for their support to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the holding of presidential and legislative
elections on 23 December. In that context, we welcome
the meeting held on 14 February, which was attended by
the Presidents of the Republic of the Congo, Angola and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and at which a
communiqué was issued calling for the implementation
of the Nairobi declarations of 12 December 2013 and
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We would like to emphasize the joint work of the
Head of MONUSCO and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region on the
preparation of the elections. We highlight their work on
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as the repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
of the members of the various insurgent groups, both
Congolese and foreign, operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We encourage the Mission to
continue to expand the community violence reduction
programme and to promote peaceful coexistence among
communities, in coordination with the Government and
armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in accordance with its mandate.
We believe that the implementation of such
measures would be better complemented by the
deployment of the Intervention Brigade, which is
essential both to supporting the electoral process and
to protecting civilians, so that, in coordination with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the political and security challenges facing the
country can be overcome. The most recent report paints
a sombre picture of the security situation and gives a
comprehensive account of the continuing violence,
which includes disputes over natural resources,
conflicts between armed groups and intercommunal
and ethnic violence. That is why it is estimated that this

S/PV. 8198

year, more than 13 million people will need protection
and humanitarian assistance. That is an increase of
50 per cent as compared to 2017.
MONUSCO has been present in the country for 20
years. In the light of the renewal of its mandate, we
believe that it is imperative to re-evaluate its priorities.
We believe that it is important to reflect on the current
needs of the Congolese, whether there is a joint
strategy with the Government or if the root causes of
the conflict, such as the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, have really been addressed. It is important
to support the decisions of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the context of respect for its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity in order to
achieve long-term peace and stability.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by welcoming the presence today of Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Okitundu. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui for updating the
Security Council on the intensifying instability and
dire humanitarian consequences in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the
proliferation of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in North and South Kivu,
Tanganyika, Ituri and Kasai, and the significant
increase in human rights abuses, with 744 violations
in January, 60 per cent of which were perpetrated
by State agents. As is too often the case, and as the
civilian population of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo knows all too well, the result of that instability
has been devastating. Some 4.5 million Congolese have
now fled their homes and communities. There are more
internally displaced people in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo than anywhere else in Africa. This year
alone, 40,000 people have fled from Ituri to Uganda,
bringing the refugee population to 670,000 people. That
has caused a devastating humanitarian crisis. More
than 13.1 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance and protection. That number has doubled
since 2017.
There is clearly a link between the ongoing
political uncertainty and the increasing insecurity.
The Congolese people cannot express their legitimate
concerns with the political situation without risking
their lives. On 21 January and 25 February, security

18-062607/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

forces once again violently repressed demonstrations,
leaving at least nine people dead, dozens wounded and
hundreds arrested. This must stop.
The holding of credible and constitutional elections
by 23 December this year leading to a democratic and
peaceful transition of power is essential to ending
the political crisis. Without this, there is a significant
risk of further violence destabilizing not just the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but the wider region
also. We welcome the progress made towards elections
so far, including the completion of voter registration,
the passing of election laws and the announcement
of an electoral budget. However, this is no time for
complacency. There is much more to do. It is essential
that the election calendar be honoured and that key
dates set out in the electoral timetable are met, including
the completion of the voter register list by 5 April, the
audit of the electoral list by 25 May, convocation of
the electoral process in June and the registration of
presidential candidates in July.
But holding credible elections is about more than
complying with timelines. It is also about creating the
conditions that enable free and fair elections to take
place. In order to do this, we call on the Government to
implement the 31 December agreement in full, including
the full implementation of the confidence-building
measures set out in the agreement. The Government
must also respect the fundamental rights and freedoms
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, opening political space and allowing peaceful
demonstrations and freedom of expression.
The United Kingdom is extremely concerned
at the high number of violations of political rights
and fundamental freedoms in January, and we were
appalled by the disproportionate use of force against
churchgoers and peaceful protesters on 31 December
2017 and 21 January and 25 February 2018, and the
subsequent loss of life.
We recognize that the onus is not only on the
Government to deliver credible elections, and in
this context we call on the opposition to engage
constructively in the process on the basis of the
31 December agreement, which will demonstrate their
credibility and potential to govern.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has a crucial role to play in this crucial
year in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
8/21

07/03/2018

protecting civilians and supporting the implementation
of the 31 December agreement. We welcome the efforts
to improve MONUSCO’s ability to carry out these tasks
more efficiently and more effectively. In particular,
we welcome efforts to enhance the flexibility and
mobility of MONUSCO’s forces and to improve their
performance. It is important that these reforms be
implemented swiftly.
In conclusion, let me be clear. The violence and
resulting dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are the result of the continual
disappointment of the people in the political process
and the political leaders responsible for this process.
The only way to avert further violence is for free
and fair elections to take place in December and for
the 31 December agreement to be fully implemented.
Further excuses and delays will only lead to more
violence and despair. The Security Council cannot
allow this to happen. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo cannot afford to wait any longer.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
also welcoming Leila Zerrougui to our meeting in her
new role as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). We look forward to working
with her, and she can count on our strong support. Let
me also express my appreciation for the presence of
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Okitundu and thank him very much for being with us
today.
Since we last met in this Chamber to discuss
MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
yet another peacekeeper has died in that country. I would
like to express my condolences to his family and to his
country, Pakistan. Deliberate attacks on those working
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and elsewhere are completely unacceptable. The
worsening security situation is also taking a tragic toll
on the Congolese population. It includes new ethnic and
intra-communal conflicts, continued attacks against
civilians and renewed sexual violence and brings with
it an acute humanitarian crisis. Human rights abuses
and violations are also increasing, especially in the
context of the electoral process. In this regard, violence
by State security forces against peaceful protesters is of
particular concern.
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

An important step on the path to lasting peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would clearly be the holding of credible, transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections on 23 December,
with the ensuing democratic transfer of power as per
the Constitution and the 31 December agreement.
This is something that requires the support of all,
including regional actors, with which coordination
continues to be essential. We welcome the progress
made on technical electoral preparations, including, as
noted by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the voter rolls, the budget and the electoral
laws, but credible elections also depend on the overall
electoral environment. For the elections to be credible,
it is vital that human rights be respected, promoted and
protected. Confidence-building measures, as per the
31 December agreement, including to ensure women’s
full and effective participation, are also essential. We
encourage steps to increase the number of women
candidates, in accordance with the Constitution as well
as the electoral law.
The year 2018 is indeed crucial for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and MONUSCO has a crucial role
to play. The focus of the Mission must continue to be on
protecting civilians and supporting the implementation
of the 31 December agreement, including the elections.
In so doing, it needs to be effective. To protect civilians,
the further strengthening of early-warning mechanisms
and, most importantly, early proactive action is needed,
including through conflict resolution and good offices.
This is in addition to improvements in its military
response, which should include enhanced so-called
enablers and allow for the Force Intervention Brigade
to regain its capability. The Mission’s support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to conduct a credible
electoral process and enable the holding of free and fair
elections is also critical. In supporting this, we would
encourage renewed efforts on the part of the Mission in
its technical assistance and its good offices. Support for
an opening of the political space, confidence-building
measures as per the New Year’s agreement, women’s
political participation and efforts to build trust among
the stakeholders will be an important form of support
by the Mission for the holding of free and fair elections.
In all of this, the Mission, of course, needs to be
adequately resourced.
Soon a year will have passed since our — the
Council’s — experts Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp
were brutally killed while investigating violations of

S/PV. 8198

Security Council sanctions in the Kasai region. Sweden
appreciates the Secretary-General’s commitment
to establishing the truth. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice. Meanwhile, the ability of the Group
of Experts to safely carry out the mandate that has
been given to it by the Council must be supported by
MONUSCO.
In the long run, the recurrent violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can be resolved only
by addressing its root causes, including not only further
democratization, human rights, good governance and the
rule of law, but also economic development and poverty
alleviation. The Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region outlines measures in this regard and
must be implemented. There must also be an integrated
plan for an overall whole-of-United Nations approach in
support of sustainable peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is the responsibility of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — but with the assistance of the
whole of the United Nations, the region and other parts
of the international community, including financial
institutions — to enhance efforts towards sustainable
and lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
we would like to welcome the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Léonard
She Okitundu, and to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Peru is especially concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular in the eastern part of the
country, and the presence of armed groups in the Kasai
region. We are concerned about the vulnerability of
civilians and the increase in displaced persons and
refugees. We are compelled to condemn the ongoing
human rights violations, including numerous cases of
sexual violence. We are also compelled to condemn
the attacks suffered by peacekeepers, and offer our
condolences and solidarity over the deaths of Tanzanian
and Pakistani peacekeepers.
We are concerned about the Mission’s security
failures and vulnerabilities, which have been revealed

18-062609/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

by the special investigation team led by Mr. Dimitry
Titov, Assistant Secretary-General for the Rule of
Law and Security Institutions. We believe it important
to follow his recommendations to strengthen staff
security.
We reject acts of intimidation against MONUSCO
personnel attributed to the security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The latter must
cooperate with the Mission in its functions of monitoring
and protecting civilians, mandated by the Council. That
includes civilian access to detention centres, hospitals
and other public spaces.
We stress the importance of successfully holding
the postponed presidential, legislative and provincial
elections. We believe that MONUSCO should continue
to provide the logistical support required to that end.
However, the Government has the responsibility to lead
the process and guarantee free and fair elections. In that
regard, we welcome the Government’s announcement
that President is not eligible for re-election under the
country’s Constitution. That should promote a better
climate for the due development of the electoral process,
which should inspire confidence and mass participation
of citizens and political groups in the country.
To that end, we must protect and promote
human rights, including the rights of expression and
association. We consider it important to promote in
particular the participation of women and young people
in the process. It is also necessary to investigate and
prosecute those responsible for the numerous and
systematic violations that have been recorded.
We must also address the alarming humanitarian
situation of thousands of citizens. Particularly worrisome
is the ongoing flow of refugees to neighbouring
countries that we have seen since the beginning of the
year, and the new outbreak of cholera caused by limited
access to potable water, which requires an urgent
response from the international community.
Given the situation and the problems observed, we
conclude by expressing our support for MONUSCO,
which we believe remains crucial for the protection
of civilians, the defence of human rights, stability, the
fight against impunity and the building of sustainable
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. French (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui. We are very pleased
to welcome her to the Council and to have her head the
10/21

07/03/2018

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We also welcome the participation of the Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. She Okitundu, in today’s meeting.
Before I start, I want to take a moment to remember
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán who were kidnapped
on 12 March 2017, nearly one year ago. We remember
Michael and Zaida and their dedication to improving the
lives of the Congolese. We continue to work to ensure
those responsible for their murders will be brought to
justice.
The Democratic Republic of Congo is a country at
a critical juncture today. For the first time in history,
the people of Democratic Republic of the Congo are
on the verge of a peaceful democratic transition of
power. They have waited too long for this moment, but
their enthusiasm is clear. Despite violence, threats and
broken promises, the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have eagerly lined up to register to vote.
They not only have a great desire to determine their
future, but they also have an undeniable right to do so.
For nearly 20 years, the international community
has invested in MONUSCO to protect the Congolese
people from violence and to bring them closer to an
enduring, inclusive peace. That Mission is the most
expensive in United Nations and history and the most
complex. It is fair to ask ourselves what we have gotten
in return for this investment. Although the progress has
been uneven, the greatest achievement of MONUSCO’s
precursor mission is clear. The July 2006 voting that
resulted in Joseph Kabila’s election as President marked
the first free elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in over 40 years. It is one of the most
complex elections the United Nations has ever helped
organize — a true achievement.
Today, the challenge is related, but different. The
need to protect the security and rights of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, however, is
the same. Free, fair, inclusive and credible elections
leading to a peaceful transfer of power are the next
indispensable step in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s development. Like elections elsewhere, the
promised elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will represent much more than the fulfilment
of the minimum right of participation in a democracy.
They will be sign of progress across the board for the
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congolese people. They will be a critical concession
on the part of the Government that it does not exist to
extract wealth and power for an unaccountable elite.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, like all Governments, exists to respond to the
needs of its citizens, but before that can happen there
is much more progress to make. President Kabila has
already stayed in office long past his constitutional
term limit. His commitment to elections in December
that results in his transfer power to a successor
remains unacceptably vague. In addition, political
prisoners who were guaranteed release under the
December 2016 Political Agreement remain unjust
unjustly detained. The Government continues to pursue
questionable charges against political opponents, and
peaceful protesters have been met with violence as the
Government cuts off communication and denies their
right of peaceful assembly.
However, they are also signs of hope amid the
violence and uncertainty. So far, the Government
is satisfying the technical requirements for holding
elections in December and, most importantly, the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
energized and ready to vote. Building on this energy
and delivering on the promise of democracy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is now the central
task of the Security Council. As we consider the
renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate, we must ensure that
it is doing all it can to ensure that elections are held on
23 December, as the Government has promised.
Our highest priority for the Mission will always
be to protect Congolese civilians from violence. Troop
and staff performance is bedrock. Accountability is
essential. Sexual exploitation and abuse cannot be
tolerated under any circumstances. However, our
focus on the performance of MONUSCO cannot be
allowed to crowd out our focus on its purpose. We are
not the devoting this much time and resources to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to reinforce
a stagnant status quo. Our objective must always be to
move forward to help the people achieve the future they
deserve.
We call on the Council to rise to that challenge as
we renew MONUSCO’s mandate. The Mission must
step up to the task of ensuring that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is ready for elections. We must
hold the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo accountable for adhering to clearly defined

S/PV. 8198

benchmarks as we progress towards elections. We must
ensure that Congolese in all areas of the country are
able to vote. We must ensure that the ability of citizens
and candidates to participate safely and securely in
the electoral process is respected. We must ensure the
integrity of their vote by using proven and appropriate
voting mechanisms.
Finally, and perhaps most important, we must know
when those things are not being done. MONUSCO
must report to the Council in a timely and transparent
manner when progress towards elections is not being
made and when peacekeepers fail to do their jobs. It is
for that reason that we support a trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure continued Security
Council focus on elections.
When Ambassador Haley met with President Kabila
last year, they talked about the historic opportunity he
has to be the first leader of his country to voluntarily
yield power to a democratically elected successor. That
would be a remarkable and enduring legacy, and there
is no more important work the Council can do but to
share in that legacy. We invested a great deal in the
future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Now
is the time to ensure that the investment pays off, not
just for the Council but for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As this is the first time you are presiding
over a meeting in the Chamber, Mr. President, allow
me to sincerely congratulate you. Equatorial Guinea
remains firmly committed to cooperating with you as
you conduct your challenging work.
I welcome Vice-Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu. His continued attendance
at Security Council briefings concerning his country
demonstrates his Government’s commitment to taking
part in the Council’s debates on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Equatorial Guinea also thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui
for her efforts at the helm of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We congratulate and thank her
for briefing to the Council on the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/174) so soon after her appointment. It has
helped to us to better understand the current situation
in the country.

18-0626011/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

07/03/2018

Equatorial Guinea continues to closely follow,
as it must, the developments in the sisterly country
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I reiterate
my country’s commitment to peace there. Stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is essential to
the political process. Equatorial Guinea welcomes the
initiatives adopted to improve the political environment
and approve the electoral calendar on 5 November 2017
and other measures to ensure the successful holding
of elections on 23 December. We urge the Congolese
Government, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, national and international partners and
all political actors to take all the measures necessary
to guarantee a clean, fair and transparent process that
respects the current Constitution and the comprehensive
and inclusive Political Agreement of 31 December
2016. Equatorial Guinea believes that the international
community and all main actors involved in the conflict
should provide all of the required logistical support
to the Independent National Electoral Commission to
ensure that elections are held as scheduled, with every
possible guarantee.

groups active in the country must participate in the
political dialogue with a positive attitude.

It is essential to highlight the fact that, in order
to resolve the problems in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the international community must fully
respect the Government’s leadership and authority. The
solutions developed by the international community
will be more effective if they are complemented by
Government action. In that regard, as Ms. Zerrougui
just highlighted in her briefing, the commitment of the
Government to take measures to ensure the holding
elections in December must be acknowledged.

Côte d’Ivoire emphatically condemns the terrorist
attacks on the headquarters Burkina Faso’s armed
forces and on the Embassy of France in Ouagadougou.
We express our solidarity with France and Burkina
Faso at this difficult time.

The security and humanitarian situation continues
to be of concern. Clashes persist in the east of the
country, thereby preventing the normalization of the
situation and, by extension, causing a humanitarian
crisis that, according to United Nations reports, has
reached alarming levels. The illegal exploitation
of natural resources on the part of militias and
other armed groups still active in the area must end
immediately. We reiterate our call upon all parties to
refrain from perpetrating acts that could worsen the
already dire situation. The international community
must redouble its efforts to provide an urgent response
to the humanitarian needs of the country.
Equatorial Guinea believes that a political solution
achieved through frank, direct and inclusive dialogue
among Congolese is the only way to achieve peace in
the largest country in Central and Southern Africa. All
12/21

Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates
its full support for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and for its tremendous humanitarian
efforts and willingness to promote peace, security and
stability in that country. Similarly, Equatorial Guinea
congratulates and thanks regional organizations,
such as the African Union, the European Union, the
Southern African Development Community and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
for their efforts to bring about peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire would like to congratulate your
country, Mr. President, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to assure you of its full support throughout
your term of office.

I welcome today’s presence in the Chamber of
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Côte d’Ivoire
also congratulates Ms. Zerrougui, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
and thanks her for her briefing on the situation in the
country.
On the situation in that brotherly country, I would
like to make two main points, namely, with regard to
the adoption of the Political Agreement on 31 December
2016 and the security and humanitarian situation.
With regard to the adoption of the Political
Agreement, the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the progress made by the Independent National
Electoral Commission (CENI), in particular on the
publication of the electoral calendar and the finalization
of electoral lists ahead of democratic, credible and
inclusive elections. We urge the Congolese political
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

class to continue their efforts to create an environment
conducive to the holding of peaceful elections.
Côte d’Ivoire acknowledges and welcomes the
commitment of the Congolese Government to organizing
elections within the time frame set. We call on the
opposition to commit resolutely to the political and
electoral process under way and to play a constructive
role in the implementation of the 31 December 2016
Political Agreement.
Despite the progress made in the implementation of
the electoral calendar, my delegation remains concerned
about the delay in the effective implementation of the
Political Agreement. We call on the Government to
create the necessary political and social conditions for
the enjoyment of individual and collective fundamental
freedoms. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the technical
and logistical support of the United Nations for the
electoral process under way and encourages greater
synergy among the efforts by CENI, MONUSCO and
the Congolese Government with a view to ensuring the
effective holding of the elections on 23 December.
With regard to the security situation, Côte d’Ivoire
is concerned about the ongoing activities of armed
groups in several provinces of the country, particularly
in North and South Kivu. Despite the efforts of the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo,
those armed groups remain active in the provinces of
Tanganyika, Haut-Katanga and North and South Kivu.
My delegation is also deeply concerned about the
persistence of activities that have led to a mass exodus
of people, such as serious human rights violations and
deadly attacks against the United Nations forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes MONUSCO’s commitment
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a particularly
difficult sociopolitical and security environment. In order
for MONUSCO to carry out its mandate — the renewal
of which we support — we encourage it to continue its
collaboration with the Congolese authorities. We hope
that an adjustment of its current configuration, as part
of its new protection-through-projection strategy, will
allow for a better assessment of its strategic priorities
in the areas of protecting civilians and supporting the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
The humanitarian situation also remains a matter
of great concern, with nearly 13.1 million people in
need of protection and humanitarian assistance across

S/PV. 8198

the country, including 4.5 million internally displaced
persons, and 670,000 refugees in neighbouring
countries.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to call
on regional organizations and the international
community — namely, the Southern African
Development Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the African Union, the
United Nations and the Security Council — to provide
all the necessary assistance to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with a view to the holding of elections on
23 December.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am also
very pleased to welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui and to
congratulate her for her appointmenet. She has our
full support. I am sure that her mission will be very
successful. Allow me to share our thoughts about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are worried about the divisions among political
and civil society actors in the country. The lack of
commitment and goodwill on the part of all the political
actors might undermine the holding of free, fair and
credible elections. We call upon all the political actors
to engage in the ongoing political process.
We note that President Kabila committed in January
to ensuring that elections would be held as planned and
that the Constitution would be respected. However, it
is critical that the Government take concrete steps to
speed up the implementation of confidence-building
measures, to release political prisoners, to allow the
return of political exiles to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to lift the ban on public demonstrations
and to bring to justice alleged perpetrators of human
rights violations. Only by doing so will the Congolese
Government show genuine will to normalize the
situation in the country. We are concerned about the
restrictions on the political space. The Congolese
authorities should protect the fundamental freedoms
enshrined in the Constitution and stop the harassment
of political and civil society actors. We also expect
that the security forces will bear accountability for
abuses and the use of excessive force against peaceful
demonstrations.

18-0626013/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The full implementation of the 31 December 2016
Political Agreement remains the only way out of the
current political situation. All political actors must
realize that there is no alternative to the election. A
lack of commitment to the process by the opposition
would be a great loss for Congolese society during
the transition period. Close cooperation with civil
society, particularly with women representatives,
including their involvement in the electoral process, is
also crucial, as it constitutes a foundation for widely
accepted elections.
We welcome the announcement of the Independent
National Electoral Commission on the conclusion of the
voter registration process. It is now necessary to ensure
the further timely implementation of the electoral
calendar, the establishment of the legal framework and
the provision of required funding. Those actions could
help reassure foreign donors of the credibility of the
process and encourage them in providing financial,
logistical and technical support for the election.
We are concerned about the dramatic deterioration
in the humanitarian and security situation and the
significant increase in violence, especially in the
Tanganyika and Ituri provinces, which has generated
significant population displacements. The political
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has strategic importance for the stability of Central
and sub-Saharan Africa. A peaceful and growing
Democratic Republic of the Congo could give a huge
boost to the whole continent. We also think that a
Security Council visit to the region could bring about
positive results. The coming months will be critical
in preserving all of the efforts made by international,
regional and national actors in order to stabilize the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, Poland commends the hard work,
courage and sacrifice of the members of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We once again offer
it our full support.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for your kind
words about Kuwait. Given your professionalism and
that of your staff, we are certain that the Kingdom of
the Netherlands will preside over the Security Council
in an outstanding manner during the month of March.
I would like to begin by thanking Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary14/21

07/03/2018

General and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), for her informative first
briefing since assuming the helm of MONUSCO. We
wish her every success in her duties, which she will
undoubtedly carry out very ably. We also welcome
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Where the political process is concerned, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is undergoing a
critical period with regard to the issues of adhering to
its electoral calendar and holding presidential elections
by the end of the year. We welcome the Government’s
efforts in that area and stress the importance of ensuring
that the presidential elections are held according to the
established timetable and without delay. They should
be free, fair and democratic and should include all
political parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The presence of the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
here today indicates how important the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo considers
the political process, which it should continue to focus
on until political and security stability is achieved and
the elections are held on schedule. That is the best
way to ensure that the Congolese people can enjoy the
decent life that they have waited for so long and that
they deserve.
We support the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for another year,
as it is providing the Government with important and
vital support in preparing for the next political stage.
It is the largest Mission of its kind within the United
Nations and is operating under many major challenges.
We firmly condemn the attacks on it by armed groups
and stress that those responsible should be held
accountable and brought to justice.
We deplore the dreadful humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The 13 million
people currently in urgent need of humanitarian
aid are double last year’s numbers, as the SecretaryGeneral says in his report (S/2018/174). The economic
situation is also seriously worrying, and the blatant
incidents of human rights violations are undoubtedly
linked to the deteriorating security situation in many
parts of the country. However, we are confident that
the implementation of the comprehensive Political
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Agreement, the confidence-building measures and
the holding of presidential elections as scheduled
will help to improve the economic, security and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also underscore the importance of
regional and international organizations — particularly
the European Union, the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the
International Organization of la Francophonie — in
support of political stability in the country, which is
crucial to making progress in the political process. The
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework agreement
embodies the hopes of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region as it helps to
achieve stability, address the root causes of the conflict
and promote confidence among neighbouring countries.
Lastly, we look forward to seeing the results of
the investigation into the killing of Michael Sharp
and Zaida Catalán. A year after their deaths, we still
do not know who was responsible. We hope that the
investigation will be completed and the perpetrators
held accountable as soon as possible. We also call on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to pursue those responsible for the incident in December
2017 that resulted in the deaths of one Pakistani and
15 Tanzanian peacekeepers and the disappearance of
another Tanzanian peacekeeper, as well as the incident
that resulted in the deaths of 27 Congolese. We continue
to be particularly concerned about the loss of life in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in her new role, and
are grateful for her comprehensive briefing. We hope
that as the new Head of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) she will be able to establish
a constructive dialogue with the country’s authorities
and enable the Mission to function more effectively.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the Council.
We hope that ensuring that the presidential
elections scheduled for 23 December are held on
time will help to reduce the tensions in society in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe that

S/PV. 8198

for their part, the opposition forces should cooperate
more actively with the Independent National Election
Commission, recognize the proposed election dates
and refrain from any violence. However, MONUSCO’s
role in organizing and conducting the elections should
not go beyond providing the national authorities with
technical and logistical assistance. In our view, the
Mission’s main job is to improve the security situation.
In that connection, we would like to draw attention
to the recent increase in the activity of illegal armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which have been conducting systematic
attacks on civilians, Government security forces and
peacekeepers. Changes in that negative trend should be
used as a chief indicator of the country’s stability.
We were alarmed to learn that after years of calm,
clashes between the Hema and Lendu ethnic groups in
Ituri province in the country’s north-east have broken
out again. We have taken note of MONUSCO’s decision
to establish temporary bases in the area, strengthen
patrols and continue consultations with the parties.
The series of rebel attacks on peacekeepers at the
end of last year and the overall security situation the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has led us
to question the conclusions and proposals in the report
on the Mission’s strategic review. Before extending the
Mission’s mandate, we would like to see more attention
paid to the following points.
The situation with the illegal armed groups
operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo is difficult and they are a very long way from
being fully neutralized. The Mission’s mandated task
of protecting civilians from the armed groups running
rampant in the east continues to be strategically
important, and we think it would be ill-advised to divert
its attention from dealing with that to other issues. We
are puzzled by the Secretariat’s rationale for its proposal
to end the Mission’s stabilization efforts and reduce its
cooperation with Kinshasa in supporting camps for
former combatants. It will be impossible to find a longterm solution to the problem of armed groups without
restoring the Government entities in the east and
settling the repatriation issue for former combatants.
Besides that, the proposal for redeploying units of the
Force Intervention Brigade is also unclear. According
to the Secretariat, they should be evenly distributed
among the four sectors of responsibility throughout the
country. The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2018/174) mentions the Brigade only once. And

18-0626015/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

yet in yesterday’s meeting with troop-contributing
countries (see S/PV.8196), we were surprised to learn
of the lack of joint operations with Kinshasa against the
illegal armed groups.
It is regrettable that some of the proposals of
the strategic review are already being implemented
without the authorization of the Security Council. In
that regard, we would like to mention the concept of
protecting civilians through the projection of force. We
do not rule out the fact that its implementation could
lead to complications in communication within the
Mission and therefore, unfortunately, to a recurrence of
the December incident in Semuliki. Achieving tangible
results from new concepts takes time, as was the case
with the so-called rapid deployment battalions. We
recall that they became operational only three years
after that concept was approved.
Finally, we draw attention to the need to adopt
additional measures to ensure the security of
peacekeepers. Like many of our colleagues, we are not
satisfied with the information provided in the report
of the Secretary-General regarding the pace of the
investigations into the Semuliki incident.
With regard to the mandate, it is necessary to discuss
an entire range of difficult issues. For us, it is already
clear that last year’s reconfiguration of the Mission’s
strategic tasks neither improved its effectiveness nor
helped the situation in the country.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We congratulate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui on her assumption of her post and we thank
her for her substantive briefing. We welcome the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, to the Chamber.
We are deeply concerned about the increasing
tensions and the rift between the ruling majority and
the opposition forces with regard to implementing
the 31 December 2016 Political Agreement.
Confidence-building measures will therefore be
essential throughout the electoral process to ensure free
and credible elections. We also note the considerable
divergence within the opposition, which impedes the
political negotiations. The closing of the political
space for opponents and other stakeholders is causing
greater unrest.
16/21

07/03/2018

In the light of the current situation, the role of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is critical to creating an environment conducive to fair
elections. The international team of electoral experts,
working together with the dedicated senior United
Nations adviser, should quickly be operationalized. It is
therefore necessary to support MONUSCO in providing
technical and logistical assistance for the electoral
process. Parliament should also promptly adopt the
electoral law and the legislation on the distribution
of seats.
We remain concerned about the deteriorating
security situation across the country. Despite the efforts
of the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) to combat foreign and Congolese
armed groups, the latter continue with their attacks and
to destabilize the situation, which is further aggravated
by intercommunity violence. At the same time,
FARDC military operations against the armed groups
are displacing hundreds of thousands of the local
population. It is also clear that the unstable situation
in the neighbouring countries of the Central African
Republic and South Sudan has had a negative impact
on the northern territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That has resulted in large refugee flows,
further escalating the humanitarian crisis, which must
be addressed with greater funding and support by the
international community. The Government must also
facilitate unhindered humanitarian access and protect
the human rights of the vulnerable populations, in
particular women and children.
Perhaps most alarming are the attacks on
peacekeepers, which have taken a tragic toll in human
lives. MONUSCO, together with troop-contributing
countries, should be assisted in enhancing its position
and in training its personnel for more offensive strategies
and responses appropriate to asymmetric conflicts. That
must be accompanied by a greater engagement with
regional political leaders and stakeholders to tackle the
threat posed by armed groups. We further encourage the
measures taken by the Mission to adapt to the current
security situation in the country by implementing the
protection-by-projection strategy, reorganizing its
military component, streamlining civilian tasks and
setting up early warning and response mechanisms.
We would also like to express our deep concern
about the lack progress in the investigation of the
murder of two members of the Group of Experts, Zaida
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Catalán and Michael Sharp. We need to further support
and encourage senior officials and technical experts
to pursue the exhaustive investigation to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

S/PV. 8198

so as to better respond to the difficult situation on
the ground.

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing and welcome
the presence Mr. Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Yesterday, at the meeting of the countries
contributing troops to MONUSCO (see S/PV.8196),
many representatives spoke of the difficulties in
equipping and training personnel, which merit the
attention of the international community. We hope
that the international community will provide the
necessary support.

The current situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo remains difficult. In particular, the security
situation in the central and eastern parts is still serious.
That is mainly owing to the foreign armed groups.
China would like to highlight the following points.

Thirdly, it is important to continue to scale
up humanitarian and economic assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to help the
country to advance the national reconstruction process
and to resolve the root causes of the conflict.

First, advancing the political process is an
important path towards resolving the tensions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The international
community should respect the leading role and
ownership of the Congolese Government and people in
the political process and provide the necessary funding
and resources to advance the political process. The
international community should continue to support
African regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, as the main channels for good
offices. They should also strengthen coordination, form
partnerships and foster cooperation.

The Chinese Government has consistently
supported the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, provided assistance to its
national reconstruction efforts to the extent possible,
and contributed peacekeepers to MONUSCO. China
stands ready to join the international community in
continuing to play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Secondly, security and stability represent an
importance basis for advancing the political process
and national reconstruction. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has the primary
responsibility for protecting the civilians. It is important
to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
enhancing its capacity to guarantee its own security
and achieve peace and stability through a process led
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has played an important role in
maintaining peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. China supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to continue
to extend the MONUSCO mandate. We hope that the
Secretariat and MONUSCO will continue to strengthen
communication and coordination with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, listen
carefully to its views and improve the rapid response
capability and operational effectiveness of MONUSCO

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
The year 2018 is a crucial year for the Democratic
Republic of Congo. As the Security Council prepares to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), I would like to make three
points: first, on the political process; secondly, on the
role of MONUSCO in the elections; and thirdly, on the
protection of civilians.
My first point, on the political process, the people
of Democratic Republic of the Congo look forward to
the country’s first peaceful transfer of power through
free, fair and credible elections at the end of this year.
Progress towards that historic day continues, while
progress in the implementation of the 31 December
Political Agreement has stalled. Fundamental freedoms
are threatened.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns the
violence used during the protests held on 25 February.
All harassment of civil society, journalists and human
rights defenders must end. We call on all parties to
recommit to the spirit of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement

18-0626017/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in order for the upcoming elections to gain the trust of
the Congolese people.
My second point concerns the role of MONUSCO
this year leading up to the elections. MONUSCO
has a vital role to play in that context, not only in
providing logistical support but also in supporting
the implementation of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement,
building trust among all actors and monitoring
progress towards the elections. Therefore, our univocal
support for MONUSCO, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Secretary-General to
effectuate good offices is indispensable. The Council
must therefore show the will to monitor progress and
equip MONUSCO in that regard.
My third point is on the protection of civilians,
which must remain a priority for MONUSCO. We
are very concerned about the upsurge in violence in
Ituri over the last weeks. Sadly, it is not the only area
where we see increased fighting and civilian casualties.
MONUSCO is adapting to the circumstances through
the “protection through projection” approach. It is the
shared responsibility of the Council, the Secretariat,
the troop-contributing countries as well as of the
Congolese authorities to ensure that the conditions are
met to make this a success. We have to keep that in
mind during the mandate-renewal discussions.
Let me conclude by reiterating our sincere gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for her and her team’s relentless efforts. Together, we
must work towards a better future for the Congolese
people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to encourage speakers under rule 37 to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour and a
great pleasure for me to participate in this Security
Council meeting on the situation in my country, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and on the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). I would like also to discharge my
18/21

07/03/2018

duty to congratulate the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
your country, Mr. President, on its accession to the
presidency of the Council for this month of March and
to convey to you our deep appreciation for the manner
in which you are presiding over our debates. I would
once again like to express to the Council the gratitude
of the Congolese people and its Government for the
efforts that the United Nations continues to deploy in
the quest for solutions to bring about a lasting peace in
my country.
I would also like to take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and to
express our appreciation to him for his commitment to
defending and promoting the purposes and principles of
the Charter and the cause of my country.
I must also thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of MONUSCO, for his presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General on MONUSCO (S/2018/174).
Although I rightly appreciate the content of the report,
nonetheless I would briefly like to state my Government’s
views on a number of the issues addressed therein.
The political aspect, as the Council is aware,
remains dominated by the electoral process. Following
the completion on 31 January of voter registration,
the Independent National Electoral Commission
will undertake in coming months, in keeping with
the electoral calendar, to identifying and registering
Congolese abroad. In the meantime, in order to
strengthen confidence, dispel doubts and maintain
contact with the various stakeholders in the process
of ensuring that credible and transparent elections are
held, the Commission has undertaken an awarenessraising and educational campaign on technical and
operational questions relating to the elections, in
particular relating to voting machines, with parties and
political groups in the opposition, the majority and civil
society. Since 1 February it has undertaken to clean up
the electoral register, which will enable the Parliament
to adopt a law on the distribution of seats during its
current session. This stage will be the last institutional
requirement for the holding of elections, in line with
the electoral calendar.
As I underscored on 12 February during a meeting
on the electoral process in my country, in order to ensure
that the elections are well organized and to create a
climate conducive to their success, the Government is
working to fulfil the tasks that have been conferred on
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

it. In that context, the Government and MONUSCO, in
the quest for a solution to the thorny issue of political
de-escalation, met on 25 and 31 January to address,
inter alia, issues relating to political demonstrations,
the media and the release of so-called political prisoners
and prisoners of conscience. The conclusions of the
meeting came out in the form of a report that is to be
signed by the stakeholders.
Furthermore, the Government is concerned at the
improper use of the concept of political de-escalation
in a charged context dominated by opposition-led
insurrectional politics aimed at upending the
established legal order, in violation of the Constitution
and the Agreement of 31 December 2016 to hold a
peaceful, credible and transparent elections. Political
de-escalation should not be considered as a unilateral
requirement that the Government alone should uphold.
Inflammatory rhetoric seeking to undermine the
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
calls for insurrection and popular revolt by using places
of worship and unjust targeted sanctions that violate
the norms of international law do not contribute to the
goal of easing the pre-electoral climate. De-escalation
must concern all stakeholders: those of the majority,
the opposition and civil society, including the Catholic
Church, as well as international partners, which must
act in the desired way, namely, to constructively and
peacefully support the political process leading to
elections.
On human rights, as I already told the Council,
the situation regarding fundamental freedoms in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not part of
a deliberate policy to violate human rights. When
such violations occur, they are solely the acts of the
individuals involved and must not go unpunished.
Regarding the events of 31 December 2017 and
21 January 2018, the Government on 1 February 2018 set
up a joint commission of inquiry with representatives
of the Government, the National Human Rights
Commission, non-governmental organizations that
champion human rights, the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office and the African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights. The Commission’s
mission is to consider the issue of loss of life and other
related issues. The Commission is also charged with
investigating the events of 25 February. Following the
investigations, its conclusions will be communicated to
the Ministry of Justice, which will transmit them to the
judiciary.

S/PV. 8198

Nonetheless, concerning the specific events of
25 February, it should be underscored that the two
presumed suspects in the murders of two compatriots,
in Mbandaka and Kinshasa, have been arrested.
On the justice system, it is important to recall
that the trial on the murder of the two United Nations
experts has been under way since 5 June 2017 at the
military tribunal of Kananga, Kasai Central, which
is holding its twenty-eighth public hearing. Twelve
suspects are appearing and 13 others have fled and
are being actively sought; they are being tried in
absentia. Tshidima Constantin Bula Bula, accused
of ordering the murders, was arrested at the end of
December and is currently being questioned by the
prosecutor general, who will then make him available
to the competent court. Contrary to what some people
are saying, it is precisely in order to cooperate fully
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo followup mechanism — negotiated between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, with the appointment of a special
prosecutor — that the trial has slowed down, because
we are awaiting new evidence, to be provided by the
investigating team of the special prosecutor.
Indeed, the prosecutor considered that he had
collected enough evidence to go to court, and it was
under these conditions that the hearings I spoke of took
place. They were moving towards an indictment by the
public prosecutor and arguments for the defence when
the military tribunal was asked to suspend the hearings
while it awaited, as I noted, new evidence from
international experts. Nonetheless, since it arrived in
Kananga, in Kasai Central province, the Robert Petit
team has been working in close cooperation with the
high-level military investigation. The investigators
returned to Kananga on 20 February, after having gone
home for the New Year’s holidays.
As for the four Congolese who accompanied
the two experts, an investigation is under way at the
military court in Kananga. It is also being conducted
jointly with the monitoring mechanism of the Special
Prosecutor of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On the security front, the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) are
continuing their operations to rid North and South Kivu
provinces of negative forces and reassert State authority
in the Kasai area to restore peace and security.

18-0626019/21

S/PV.8198

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), which
recently stepped up their attacks against the FARDC,
peacekeepers and civilians, is a source of great concern
that deserves the attention of the entire international
community. For our part, on 13 January, the FARDC
launched a vast military offensive, which unfortunately
is being carried out without MONUSCO, to neutralize
that negative force. The notable results of that operation
included the death of ADF senior commander Muhamad
Kayira, on 22 February during an operation to seize
the Mapobu Valley. He was on a list of 26 Rwandan,
Ugandan and Tanzanian nationals wanted by Congolese
courts for war crimes and crimes against humanity in
the region. As we have often pointed out, the ADF is
using asymmetrical methods in their attacks. Special
training and appropriate equipment are required to
combat it.
As to the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), although they are weakend, the
FARDC continues to carry out the operations it started
as part of its Operation Sukola II in order to completely
eradicate it. As part of those efforts, my country calls
once again for the involvement of the Security Council
and the international community, in accordance with the
recommendation of the eighth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which was held
in Brazzaville on 21 October 2017, for the unconditional
repatriation to their country of origin, no later than
20 October, of disarmed FDLR ex-combatants and their
dependents who are still in transit camps in Kisangani,
in Tshopo province, and Kanyabayonga and Walungu,
in North and South Kivu provinces. That unconditional
repatriation also concerns ex-combatants of the former
Mouvement du 23 Mars. In the same vein, all foreign
fighters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including combatants from the Sudanese People’s
Liberation Movement/Sudanese People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition, were asked to return to their
countries.
With regard to the humanitarian aspect, while
recognizing the prevailing situation in the conflictaffected parts of our country, on which the Government’s
attention is focused, we believe that there is a great
disparity between the statistics presented by some
foreign partners and those provided by the Congolese
public services in charge of humanitarian issues. In
that regard, my Government believes that there is a
20/21

07/03/2018

need to strengthen collaboration and partnership in our
humanitarian work in order to clarify the number of
people, Congolese and others, in need of assistance. It
should be noted that, in order to deal with the situation,
the Government has established the National Fund for
Humanitarian Solidarity. It goes without saying that
any external support in this area is always welcome.
Thanks to the systematic work in the fight against
impunity carried out by the judiciary in general, and
by the military judiciary in particular, my country
has made enormous progress in the fight against
sexual violence, which is recognized by the SecretaryGeneral in his letter of 27 April 2017 and in his
various reports. Taking into account that situation, the
Secretary-General has shown willingness to remove
the FARDC and the Congolese National Police from
the list of country security forces listed for rape. My
country therefore continues to wait for that willingness
to materialize and for the FARDC and the Congolese
National Police to be effectively delisted.
With regard to the case of sexual violence referred to
in paragraph 30 of the report under review (S/2018/174),
my Government regrets that the information provided
by MONUSCO did not respect the requirements of
the national strategy to combat sexual violence, which
calls for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
and the Congolese Ministry of Gender to be the only
institutions charged with producing data on cases of
gender-based violence in general, and sexual violence
in particular. In order to avoid contradictions in the
statistics published by various United Nations bodies,
United Nations agencies and MONUSCO must interact
and communicate with UNFPA prior to publishing any
reported case that falls under the category set out in the
joint communiqué signed on 30 March 2013 between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations to combat conflict-related sexual violence.
In March 2017, my Government asked that the
renewal of the mandate of MONUSCO take into
account the expectations of the Congolese people,
whose most ardent wish is to see the negative forces
and various armed groups that are attacking the eastern
part of the country totally eradicated. To that end, it
is crucial to strengthen the operational effectiveness
of United Nations forces, primarily those of the Force
Intervention Brigade, the only offensive force that can
counter those armed groups. In view of the situation on
the ground, that wish remains in effect.
18-06260

07/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8198

Considering that situation, my Government calls
for a qualitative resizing of the MONUSCO force with
fewer, but more specialized, troops who are able to
track down armed groups and capable of dealing with
asymmetrical threats. For the Mission’s new mandate,
those troops must work in close collaboration with
the FARDC, enjoy greater flexibility and mobility,
and be equipped with appropriate equipment for
greater efficiency. Priority should therefore be given
to the Force Intervention Brigade, the spearhead of
that MONUSCO-FARDC partnership. In that regard,
MONUSCO units that are not essential to military
operations against armed groups and that are present
in areas where a MONUSCO force is not justified, and
where the concentration of forces is greater than the
level of the threat, must be withdrawn to reduce the
number of troops and adapt the force to the tracking of
armed troops.

to remain ad infinitum in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. We must therefore hash out together a negotiated
withdrawal strategy within a reasonable time frame.
For the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Force Intervention Brigade should be the
last to leave the country, along with civil services and
various offices supporting democracy building, which
can continue to carry out their activities after the end of
the tracking operations against the armed groups.

Returning to the Force Intervention Brigade, which
operates in a partnership, my Government regrets
that it has not been consulted on important issues
affecting peace in the region, such as the withdrawal
of Tanzanian artillery and South African aviation unit,
as well as its relocation from the command centre
of the Rapid Intervention Brigade in the theatre of
operations to a fixed base in Goma, which undermined
its effectiveness. As we just mentioned, it is important
to equip it with appropriate equipment to make it more
effective.

The crucial mandate entrusted to MONUSCO
cannot be successful without eradicating armed groups,
whose activities constitute the main threat to civilians.
The terms of reference of the new MONUSCO mandate
must therefore absolutely include the imperative of
eradicating armed groups among the priorities of
the strategic partnership and under the leadership of
the FARDC. In order to be effective, the partnership
must have the appropriate resources to carry out
unconventional warfare and combat the asymmetrical
methods of armed groups.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation, I am sure the Council
will agree with me that this programme is of great
importance in terms of reintegrating ex-combatants
to prevent them from being recruited again by armed
groups. That programme should be one of the priorities
in MONUSCO’s new mandate.

In conclusion, I wish to express my Government’s
appreciation to Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
the work he carried out during his term in office at the
Head of MONUSCO to restore peace in my country.
My Government sincerely thanks him. In the same
vein, my Government welcomes the appointment of
Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. My Government assures her of the same
support given to her predecessor to enable her to carry
out her duties.

Discussions on the partnership between the
Democratic Republic of Congo and MONUSCO should
continue in the context of dialogue and the strategic
review, the objective of which is the reorganization
of human, financial, logistical and other resources, in
accordance with the new mandate that the Security
Council will entrust to MONUSCO. In those exchanges
between our country and the United Nations, the
review should focus on practical arrangements and
planning for the gradual and permanent withdrawal of
MONUSCO troops. Indeed, MONUSCO’s goal is not

We will have succeeded together in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo when the renewal of MONUSCO’s
mandate no longer needs to be discussed, which is the
wish of the Congolese people and of my Government.
We hope that this will be the penultimate renewal and
will definitively contribute to the return of peace for the
people of the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-0626021/21
