General Assemhly-:Fifth Session

14

2. Determines that for the realization of lasting
peace and security it is indispensable:
(I) That prompt united action be taken to meet
aggression wherever it arises;
(2) That every nation agree:
(a) To accept effective international control of
atomic energy, under the United Nations, on the basis
already approved 8 by the General Assembly in order to
make effective the prohibition of atomic weapons;
( b) To strive for the control and elimination, under
the United Nations, of all other weapons of mass
destruction ;
( c) To regulate all armaments and armed forces
under a United Nations system of control and inspection, with a view to their gradual reduction ;
(d) To reduce to a minimum the diversion for armaments of its human and economic resources and to strive
towards the development of such resources for the
general welfare, with due regard to the needs of the
under-developed areas of the world ;
3. Declares that these goals can be attained if all the
Members of the United Nations demonstrate by their
deeds their will to achieve peace.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.
381 (V).

Condemnation of propaganda against
peace

The General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 110 (II) and 290 (IV),
paragraph 8, which condemn all propaganda against
peace and recommend the free exchange of information
and ideas as one of the foundations of good-neighbourly
relations between the peoples ;
2. Declares that such propaganda includes:
( 1) h1citement to conflicts or acts of aggression;
( 2) Measures tending to isolate the peoples from
any contact with the outside world, by preventing the
Press, radio and other media of communication from
reporting international events, and thus hindering mutual comprehension and understanding between peoples;
( 3) Measures tending to silence or distort the
activities of the United Nations in favour of peace or to
prevent their peoples from knowing the views of other
State~ Members.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.

382 (V). Threats to the political independence
and territorial integrity of Greece

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the unanimous conclusions 8 of the
United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans con11 See resolutions 1 (I), 41 (I), 191 (III), 192 (III), 290
(IV) and 299 (IV).
'See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth SesJ'ion, Stt/>Plement No. 11.

cerning those members of the Greek armed forces who
were captured by the Greek guerrillas and taken into
countries north of Greece,

Having noted that, with the sole excepti~:m of \':u~oslavia the other States concerned are still detammg
these ~embers of the Greek armed forces without justification under commonly accepted international practice,

l. Recommends the repatriation of all those among
them who express the wish to be repatriated,
2. Calls upon the States concerned to take the necessary measures for the speedy implementation of the
present resolution,
3. Instructs the Secretary-General to request the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
League of Red Cross Societies to ensure liaison with
the national Red Cross organizations of the States concerned, with a view to implementing the present
resolution.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 10 of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans and having
noted that, although a certain improvement has taken
place in the situation on the northern frontiets of
Greece, there nevertheless remains a threat to the
political independence and territorial integrity of
Greece,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans;

2. Continues the Special Committee in being until
the sixth session of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of reference and administrative
arrangements contained in General Assembly resolutions 109 (II), 1.93 ((III) and 288 (IV), unless
meanwhile the Special Committee recommends to the
Interim Committee its own dissolution;
3. Authori::;es the Interim Committee to act on such
recommendation as it thinks proper.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
C

The General Assembly,
Noting with grave concern the reports11 of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League
of Red Cross Societies and of the Secretary-General,
and particularly the statement 12 that "not a single
Greek child has yet been returned to his native land
and, except for Yugoslavia, no country harbouring
Greek children has taken definite action to comply
with the resolutions unanimously adopted in two successive years by the General Assembly",
10 /bid.

11
12

See documents A/1480 and A/1480/Add.l.
See document A/1480, paragraph 17.
