observe and to inform the General Assembly and the
Commission on Human Rights of the extent to which the
contending parties are respecting those rules, particularly
as regards humanitarian treatment and respect for the civilian population, prisoners of war, those wounded in
combat, health personnel and military hospitals of either
party;
4. Reaffirms once again the right of the Salvadorian
people freely to determine their political, economic and
social future without interference from outside, through a
genuine democratic process, in which ali sectors of the
population participate freely and effectively;
5. Requests ali States to refrain from intervening in the
interna! situation in El Salvador and, instead of helping in
any way to prolong and intensify the war, to encourage the
continuation of the dialogue until a just and lasting peace
is achieved;
6. Deeply regrets the interruption ofthe dialogue initiated in October 1984 between the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberación
Nacional-Frente Democrático Revolucionario and therefore calls upon these parties to renew their talks so that by
means of sincere, generous and open dialogue they may
achieve a negotiated comprehensive political solution
which will put an end to the armed conflict and contribute
to the institutionalization and strengthening of the democratic system based on the ful! exercise by ali Salvadorians
oftheir civil and political rights and their economic, social
and cultural rights;
7. Ca/Is upon the Government and the opposition
forces, as agreed at the meeting held at La Palma on 15
October 1984, 186 to establish as soon as possible appropriate mechanisms to study the plans and proposals submitted by both parties and to include ali sectors of national
life in the search for peace;
8. Views with concern that, as a consequence of the
prolonged armed conflict, the number of refugees and
internally displaced persons, who already constitute a considerable part of the Salvadorian population, continues to
increase and requests ali States to collaborate in the reception ofthe refugees and to support the autonomous organizations responsible for looking after internally displaced
persons in El Salvador;
9. Again reiterates its appeal to the Govemment of El
Salvador and to the opposition forces to co-operate fully
with the humanitarian organizations dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the ci vilian population, wherever these
organizations operate in the country, and to permit the
lnternational Committee of the Red Cross to continue to
evacuate those wounded and maimed by war to where
they can receive the medica! attention they need;
10. Deeply deplores the fact that the capacity of the
judicial system in El Salvador to investigate, prosecute and
punish violations ofhuman rights continues to be patently
unsatisfactory and therefore urges the competent authorities to continue and strengthen the process ofreform ofthe
Salvadorian judicial system, in order to punish speedily
and effectively those responsible for the serious human
rights violations which have been committed and are still
being committed in that country;
l l. Recommends the continuation and broadening of
the reforms necessary in El Salvador, including effective
application of agrarian reform, for the solution of the economic and social problems which are the basic cause ofthe
interna! conflict in that country;
l 2. Ca/Is upon the competent authorities in El Salvador to introduce changes in the laws and other measures
186 See A/39/636, annex, sect. 11.

that are incompatible with the provisions contained in the
intemational instruments binding on the Govemment of
El Salvador in respect of human rights;
13. Renews its appeal to the Government of El Sal vador. as well as to other parties concemed, to continue to
co-operate with the Special Representa ti ve of the Com •
mission on Human Rights;
14. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
forty-first session, the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, in order to examine
this situation anew in the light of additional elements pro·
vided by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council, in the hope that there will he
improvement.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985
40/140.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala

The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the Governments of ali Member States
have an obligation to promete and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recal/ing its resolutions 371184 of 17 December 1982,
38/100 of 16 December 1983 and 39/120 of 14 December
1984.
Recalling a/so Commission on Human Rights resolution
1984/53 of 14 March 1984, 29 and taking note ofCommission resolution 1985/36 of 13 March 1985, 30 in which it
expressed its deep concern at the continuing serious and
systematic violations ofhuman rights in Guatemala and at
restrictive measures that limit the freedoms of the rural
and indigenous populations,
Mindful of resolution 1985/28 of 30 August 1985 of the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, 181
Welcoming the general elections held on 3 November
1985 for President, Vice-President and representatives to
the national Congress and ofmunicipalities, with the participation of various política! parties,
Noting with satisfaction the set of provisions to safeguard human rights and fundamental freedoms contained
in the new Constitution, which, when fully complied with
by the new Govemment and ali others concemed, could
lead to a significant improvement in the situation of
human rights in Guatemala,
Alarmed at the continuation of politically motivatrd
violence, particularly killings and kidnappings, as well as
enforced and involuntary disappearances and the lack of
effective measures by the authorities in investigating such
practices,
Recognizing that the internal armed conflict of a nonintemational character which continues to exist in Guatemala stems from economic, social and política! factors of a
structural nature,
Expressing its concern at the widespread suffering
caused by disregard for the principies of international
humanitarian law applicable to that conflict,
Welcoming the co-operation ofthe Government ofGuatemala with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights as well as the invitation by the Govemment to severa! international human rights organizations
to assess the situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.

250

General Assembly- f'ortieth Session

l. Welcomes the efforts of the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights to fulfil his mandate
and takes note of his interim report on the situation of
human rights in Guatemala, 187 submitted in accordance
with Commission rcsolution 1985/36;
2. Expresses the hope that the recent elections will be
the first step in a process lcading to complete and effective
enjoyment of human rights by the people of Guatemala;
3. Notes with satisfaction that a new Government and
Congress are to take oflk,e on 14 January l 986, following a
second round in the presidential elcctions on 8 December
1985, and that a new Constitution, which provides, ínter
alía, for the establishment of a national commission on
human rights as well as a commissioner for human rights,
is to take effect on the same date in January 1986;
4. Reiterares its deep concern at the continuing grave
and widespread violations of human rights in Guatemala,
particularly thc violence against non-combatants, the
widespread repression, killings, including extrajudicial
executions, the practice of torture, disappearances and
secret detention, as well as at practices such as the displacement of rural and indigenous populations, their confinement in development centres and their forced participation in civilian patrols organized and controlled by the
armed forces;
5. Strongly urges the Government of Guatemala to
take ali measures necessary to halt violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly enforced
and involuntary disappearances, as well as to take effective
measures, within the framework of the Constitution, to
ensure that all its authorities and agencies, civilian as well
as military, fully respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all Guatemalans, such as trade unionists,
catechists and the predominantly indigenous rural and
peasant population;
6. Again requests the Government of Guatemala to
investigate and clarify the fate of those who have disappeared and whose whereabouts continue to be unknown,
and to include within the framework of such an investigation the publication of the ful! details of the report of the
Tripartite Commission;
1. Further urges the Governmcnt of Guatemala to
establish the necessary conditions to ensure the independence of the judicial system and to enable the judiciary to
uphold the rule of law, including the right of habeas
corpus, and to prosecute and punish speedily and effectively those who are responsible for violations of human
rights, including members of the military and security
forces;
8. Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to allow
independent and impartial bodies to function in the country to monitor and investigate alleged human rights violations, as well as to respect and protect human rights
defenders such as the Mutual Support Group;
9. Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to guarantee to the rural and indigenous population the freedom
to choose their place of residence and freedom from forced
participation in civilian patrols;
10. Calls upon ali parties to the conflict to apply fully
the principies and rules of international humanitarian law
and reiterates its appeal to the Government of Guatemala
to admit the International Committee of the Red Cross to
the country, and subsequently to facilitate its operations
for the alleviation of the suffering of the Guatemalan
people;
l l. Calls upon ali Governments to refrain from intervening in any way in the interna! situation in Guatemala,
187 A/40/865, annex.

which could intensify the interna! am1ed conflict and
increase violations of human rights;
l 2. Deeply deplores the continuing gross violations of
human rights arising from that conflict, which are largely
duc to the failure ofthe military and security forces to conduct their activities with the necessary respect for protecting the human rights of ali Guatemalans;
13. Invites the Government of Guatemala and other
parties concerncd to continue co-operating with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights;
14. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to study
carefully the report of its Special Rapporteur, as well as
other information pertaining to the human rights situation
in Guatemala, and to consider further steps for securing
effective respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali in that country including, if so requested by
the Government of Guatemala, the provision of appropriate technical assistance under the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights;
15. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala at its forty-first session.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/141. Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran
The General Assembl.v,
Guided by the principies embodied in the Charter ofthe
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights6 and the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 24
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation
to promote and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms and to fulfil the obligations they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this
field,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolutions
1982/27 of 11 March 1982 27 and 1983/34 of 8 March
1983, 28
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/54 of 14 March 1984, 29 in which the Commission expressed deep concern at the continuing serious violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
Islamic Republic of Iran and requested its Chairman to
appoint a special representative to make a thorough study
of the situation of human rights in that country,
Taking note, in particular, of Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1985/39 of 13 March 1985, 30 by which
the Commission decided to extend the mandate of its Special Representative for one year and requested him to
present an interim report to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session on the situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, including the situation of minori ty groups such as the Baha'is, and a final report to the
Commission at its forty-second session,
Mindful of resolution 1985/ 17 of 29 August 1985 of the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection ofMinorities, 181 in which the Sub-Commission
expressed its alarm at the continuing reports of gross violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
lslamic Republic of Iran,
Regretting that the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran has still not extended its full co-operation to the
Commission on Human Rights and its Special Represen-
