A/63/PV.45

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

45

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 11 November 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mbuende
(Namibia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 65 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/63/81,
A/63/277 and A/63/348)
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/295)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.21)
(c) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/75)
Mr. Oosthuizen (South Africa): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation for the reports by
the Secretary-General provided under agenda item 65,
which provide a useful analysis of the specific
challenges that the international humanitarian
community faces today, as well as practical suggestions
for consideration as to further guide our deliberations
within the General Assembly.

Recognizing the challenges that we continue to
face to assist vulnerable communities around the
world, allow me to thank the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the work
done to further strengthen the coordination of
humanitarian assistance in the United Nations.
The United Nations humanitarian system, like
many other institutions, is faced with the reality of
increasing demands within the ambit of rising food
prices, increased input costs, challenges of climate
change and the well-known challenge of the current
financial crisis that is negatively affecting all Member
States. It is up to us as Member States to continue to
show our commitment to the United Nations
humanitarian community and to ensure its success
during these difficult times.
The recent High-Level Conference on World
Food Security, which was held in Rome during June
2008, highlighted the particular challenges that
developing countries are facing with regard to the high
cost of food and how this impacts on feeding their
vulnerable people. The negative impact that high food
prices have on the budgets of humanitarian
organizations, such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the
World Food Programme, has also been highlighted,
which in turn highlights the importance of donors
fulfilling their commitments to contribute in a timely
and adequate manner to the funding of these
organizations.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-59952 (E)

*0859952*

A/63/PV.45

Funding will always remain critical to ensure the
effective functioning of humanitarian organizations.
This reality was recognized by Member States when
they adopted resolution 60/124 of 15 December 2005,
giving birth to the new Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF), which has as one of its main objectives
the provision of funding in a more predictable and
timely manner to ensure that early action would be
possible in an effort to reduce loss of life. Although the
new Fund has only been in operation for the past few
years, the report of the Secretary-General (document
A/63/348) highlights the various successes it has
already achieved, one of which was to achieve its
aforementioned goal of providing assistance in a timely
manner in order to reduce loss of life, a critical element
in the provision of humanitarian assistance. The fact
that the Fund contributed substantially to the so-called
under-funded emergencies, particularly in Africa, is a
welcome success for my delegation.
As one of the original contributors to the Fund,
South Africa will support the appeal made by the
Secretary-General for continued and increased support
to the Fund. This should not only mean financial
support, but also include the need to strengthen the
Secretariat to meet the challenges associated with the
functioning, management and oversight of the Fund. At
the same time, it is important to re-emphasize that
contributions to the Fund should be additional to
current commitments and not be to the detriment of
resources made available for international cooperation
for development.
However, it is also recognized that challenges
within CERF still remain and will need to be addressed
to ensure that the Fund will contribute more effectively
to the workings of the United Nations humanitarian
system. Solutions need to be found to allow
non-governmental organizations to access funding
quicker; better and clearer criteria need to be
developed for resource allocation; quicker methods to
obtain approval for the use of funds and better
communication to allow agencies to better understand
the role and use of the grant facility need to be
developed. This requires continued involvement by
Member States, and a further evaluation of the
effective functioning of the Fund in the General
Assembly will again be needed in the near future.
What the current financial and humanitarian
crisis also highlights is the critical need for effective
partnerships between Member States, the United

2

Nations
humanitarian
organizations
and
non-governmental organizations to work together to
ensure a coordinated approach to providing life-saving
humanitarian assistance to affected communities all
around the world. These partnerships, under the
leadership of national Governments, could also include
the engagement of regional organizations to help
improve humanitarian responses and standby
capacities.
It is important to recognize, however, that owing
to the increase in the scope and severity of the impact
of humanitarian emergencies, many developing
countries do not have the capacity to deal with disaster
preparedness, risk reduction and the impact of these
emergencies. An appeal is, therefore, made in order
that the United Nations system and the international
community continue to play their important role in
assisting developing countries to enhance their
humanitarian capacities in addressing these challenges.
My delegation will, therefore, actively engage in
discussions in an effort to contribute to the collective
wisdom of the United Nations so as to ensure an
increase in the effectiveness of the United Nations
system to provide humanitarian assistance. In
particular, it remains a priority for my delegation to
further the debate on the effective contribution that the
cluster approach could make as one of the measures
seeking to provide better leadership and prevent
duplication and gaps in the provision of humanitarian
assistance.
Also recognizing the role that military assets
could play in the provision of disaster relief, it would
be important to promote the effective use of
internationally recognized guidelines on civil-military
coordination, in full respect of existing humanitarian
principles.
South Africa remains cognizant of the important
role that parties to complex humanitarian emergencies
can play in ensuring safe access to humanitarian
personnel when providing assistance to vulnerable
communities. Rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian personnel and relief consignments to
affected communities is, therefore, critical. It is
essential, however, that humanitarian assistance should
be provided in a manner based on the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, as
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182 and
other relevant General Assembly resolutions.

08-59952

A/63/PV.45

Furthermore, my delegation remains convinced of the
need to protect civilians during complex humanitarian
emergencies and calls on all participants to address
gender-based violence and make all possible efforts to
ensure that adequate measures are put into place to
prevent, promptly investigate and persecute acts of
gender-based violence.
In this regard, South Africa would also like to
express its concern about the increasing number of
attacks against United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel around the world. We would like to
commend the courage and commitment of those brave
men and women and also urge all parties involved in
armed conflicts to comply with international
humanitarian law, in particular their obligations under
the Geneva Conventions and the Additional Protocols.
In conclusion, South Africa would like to
reiterate its commitment to continue to contribute to
the effective working of the humanitarian system,
within its modest means. It is our hope that the
international community will be able to work together
in a spirit of partnership to provide assistance better,
faster, more predictably and in a better coordinated
manner, that will also take the needs of affected
communities into consideration and not be based on
financial considerations alone.
Mr. Suarez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation associates itself with the statement delivered
yesterday on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
In line with General Assembly resolution 46/182,
the Government of Colombia has assumed primary
responsibility for and the main role in the initiation,
organization, coordination and implementation of
humanitarian assistance within its territory. The State
has adopted laws, policies and programmes for
comprehensive assistance that take into account
international standards. National bodies, with significant
technical capacity, coordinate the implementation of these
policies through the organization of actions involving
national, departmental and municipal authorities, with the
participation of the private sector and civil society. I
would like to emphasize, in this respect, the National
Humanitarian Plenary, a coordination initiative led by the
Presidential Agency for Social Action. Representatives of
local government, international humanitarian assistance
organizations and non-governmental organizations
participate in that initiative.

08-59952

Our country has faced natural disasters as a result
of its location in the tropics, climate change and
seismic and volcanic phenomena. In order to deploy
effective responses, both the National System and the
National Plan for Disaster Prevention and Response
have been strengthened. We also have protocols to
guide the response from the presidency, ministries and
the Public Force and guidelines for the formulation of
emergency sectoral plans. We have also provided
cooperation in this field to countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean.
Likewise,
Colombia
implements
solid
humanitarian response policies in response to terrorist
violence caused by illegal armed groups. The State has
progressively
strengthened
its
comprehensive
programmes for the assistance of displaced persons and
other victims of violence. Priority access of this
population to State social services, socio-economic
stabilization and reparations are essential components
in those initiatives. I must stress that a budget close to
$500 million is assigned each year for aid to displaced
people.
In the past six years, the number of violent
incidents has declined substantially, thanks to the
Democratic Security Policy and the massive
demobilization of former members of illegal armed
groups. The consolidation of security is a decisive
factor in mitigating the causes of humanitarian
emergencies in Colombia.
The Secretary-General’s reports refer to several
topics that deserve special attention. With regard to
disasters associated with climate change, we would
highlight the role of international cooperation and
technology transfer in the fields of adaptation, the
development of early warning systems and the
strengthening of national preparedness and response
capacities.
With respect to the global food crisis, short-,
medium- and long-term measures and joint efforts for
solidarity among States and the international
community as a whole, are essential to addressing that
multidimensional problem.
With regard to the safety of humanitarian
personnel, coordination and dialogue between the
United Nations and Governments are required in order
to identify risks, exchange information and define
protection measures that are more effective against acts
of violence affecting humanitarian work.

3

A/63/PV.45

In relation to funding, Colombia appreciates the
consolidation of the Central Emergency Respond Fund
as an effective and flexible instrument that strengthens
the response to time-critical emergencies and to
situations where assistance has been under-funded or
where there is a lack of resources.
Humanitarian assistance must be developed in a
sustainable process aimed at rebuilding the social
fabric of affected communities. In this respect, an
appropriate transition from relief to development is a
critical element in the design of policies and actions for
humanitarian assistance.
The guiding principles set out in resolution
46/182 define the basic framework for humanitarian
assistance. The cooperation of the United Nations and
other actors of the international community must be
provided in accordance with those principles, which
include humanity, impartiality and neutrality, while
also ensuring adequate coordination with the national
programmes and authorities of the affected States. That
is the only way to ensure effectiveness, coherence, a
better response and a more efficient use of resources.
Colombia will remain committed to promoting and
implementing that framework of action.
Mr. Petranto (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes
the continued focus by the General Assembly on this
agenda item. I align Indonesia’s statement with that of
Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General
for the comprehensive reports, which give a detailed
and useful account of efforts to enhance international
humanitarian responses.
Development
and
progress
towards
the
Millennium Development Goals has suffered severe
setbacks. Not only has the global economy been less
conducive to growth, but disasters emanating from
human and natural causes have compounded their
negative impacts.
The timely provision of humanitarian assistance
has therefore become more essential as a means for a
rapid response for the victims but also as a means to
help restore lives and development efforts.
In that context, my delegation continues to believe
that an effective mechanism should be put in place. It
should be demand-driven, as embodied in resolution
46/182 of 19 December 1991. That resolution rightly
underlines the principles of neutrality, humanity and

4

impartiality and calls for full respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity of States.
Indonesia would also like to emphasize the
importance of strengthening the role of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. At the same
time, the Central Emergency Respond Fund (CERF)
has been an important component in providing more
predictable and timely responses to humanitarian
emergencies. Synergies between the two should be
strengthened continually in order to enhance
international humanitarian efforts.
Indonesia appreciates the independent review of
the CERF commissioned by the Secretary-General.
While the Fund’s operations only started two years
ago, it has shown some encouraging results. Indonesia
takes note that the Fund has been more effective in
enabling rapid mobilization of necessary funds for lifesaving operations in many countries that have
experienced sudden disasters and conflicts. The
recommendations of the review have been noted and
should be further discussed with key stakeholders.
Indonesia looks forward to actively contributing to
those discussions. Let us not forget that the CERF
relies on the commitment and contributions of Member
States. We encourage the continued support of Member
States to replenish the Fund.
With the increasing disasters we are witnessing
globally, there is still obvious room for improvement in
coordination, effectiveness and efficiency, with the
objective of strengthening partnerships at all levels.
Although all countries should undertake appropriate
measures to mitigate the impacts of disasters, we
cannot deny that most developing countries lack the
capacity to provide swift and timely relief efforts and
conduct rehabilitation and recovery programmes at
later stages. Therefore, we also believe that the
international community, including the United Nations
system and other relevant actors, should not fail to
support the capacity and capability of developing
countries in, among other areas, developing disaster
preparedness plans. Indonesia itself has developed and
is launching today an Indonesian tsunami early
warning system. We hope that the international
community will support our initiative.
On behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and tsunami-affected countries, Indonesia will
also be submitting a draft resolution entitled
“Strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation,

08-59952

A/63/PV.45

reconstruction and prevention in the aftermath of the
Indian Ocean tsunami disaster” for the General
Assembly’s consideration. The draft resolution builds
on recent developments and lessons learned during the
rehabilitation and reconstruction phase in the affected
countries. Indonesia seeks the continued sponsorship of
Member States of the draft resolution, which will be
taken up for the last time at this year’s session.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 45/6 of 16 October 1990,
I now call on Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Ms. Beerli (International Committee of the Red
Cross): In many places around the world — this week
in particular, we are thinking of the dramatic situation
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo — the
lives of countless men, women and children continue
to be ravaged by armed conflicts or other situations of
violence. Natural disasters are occurring more
frequently. A scarcity of resources, due partly to
environmental degradation and climate change, and
rising food insecurity imperil livelihoods that are
already fragile. All those factors contribute to poverty,
migration and increased public health risks and
aggravate the humanitarian consequences of armed
conflict.
The activities of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) are exclusively humanitarian. It
works throughout the world to protect and assist
persons affected by armed conflict and other situations
of violence. Its aim is to meet their most urgent needs
without discrimination of any kind. The ICRC is
determined to remain a reliable, effective and
predictable organization that can adapt to evolving
humanitarian situations and needs — an organization
whose work is underpinned by a strong culture of
accountability, first and foremost to the affected
persons themselves.
Today, humanitarian action is carried out in
highly complex and sensitive environments and faces
many challenges. Gaining and maintaining access to
persons in need of protection while minimizing
security risks is, beyond a doubt, our top-priority
concern in most operations.
The level of violence has increased considerably
in many countries where the ICRC works, with serious
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population.
The risks of the rejection and instrumentalization of

08-59952

humanitarian staff are growing, and that has dramatic
and dire consequences with regard to their safety.
The ability of its staff to carry out its
humanitarian tasks safely is of extreme importance to
the ICRC. Safety is more than just an issue of physical
protection; if the ICRC is to operate in safety, it must
have acceptance. Acceptance is entirely dependent on
the perception of the parties to an armed conflict, and
of those whom the ICRC assists, with regard to its
exclusively humanitarian and impartial approach and
its dissociation from any kind of political or military
agenda. Impartiality implies that assistance will be
provided without any discrimination and will be based
solely on assessed needs. Credible neutrality and
independence require that we deliberately refrain from
acting in any way or making any kind of statement that
might be interpreted as taking sides or being associated
with a specific agenda. Proximity to affected people is
as essential to the ICRC as sustained dialogue with all
actors in armed conflicts — no matter how they may be
characterized by the international community — and
with all those who are able to influence such actors.
On the basis of its long experience in working in
the area of armed conflict, the ICRC believes that it is
its exclusively humanitarian, neutral, independent and
impartial approach that allows it to operate in places
such as Afghanistan, Colombia and Darfur, to fulfil its
humanitarian mandate in the North and South Caucasus
and Pakistan, and to act as a neutral and humanitarian
intermediary — for example, to facilitate the release of
captured civilians. It considers that way of working to
be the most effective and powerful tool at its disposal
for ensuring access to people and acceptance by all
parties. Of course, that rests on the assumption that
belligerent parties trust the ICRC, but it is precisely
such trust that is increasingly difficult to build and
maintain, as various stakeholders are calling the very
foundations of humanitarian aid into question, which is
yet another challenge of serious concern to the ICRC
today.
The environment for humanitarian action has
changed dramatically in recent years. The integration
of crisis management tools, combining political,
military, humanitarian and development objectives and
activities, is an inherent feature of many contexts
today. United Nations peace support operations are
increasingly multifaceted; their mandates range from
peace maintenance to peace enforcement and postconflict recovery. They are often entrusted with the

5

A/63/PV.45

task of both protecting civilian populations and
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Unfortunately, that has sometimes blurred the
distinction between political goals and humanitarian
operations and between political or military actors and
humanitarian organizations.
Increasingly, political and military actors refer to
humanitarian principles or reasons. That those
principles are being acknowledged is, of course, a
welcome development, but we should recognize that
they apply mainly to the activities of humanitarian
organizations. When used by public authorities and the
military to describe their activities, the term
“humanitarian” may lose some of its essential
attributes. The incorporation of humanitarian aid into a
political strategy might have the very unwelcome
consequence that parties to an armed conflict and
affected populations come to associate all humanitarian
actors with political or military agendas. Furthermore,
humanitarian agencies may cease to be regarded as
independent and neutral and thus no longer acceptable.
The
effectiveness
of
humanitarian
activities,
particularly in gaining access to persons in need of
assistance, may suffer.
States have an important political role in
preventing and resolving conflicts and in creating
sustainable conditions that enable populations to
recover after conflict. Armed and security forces play
an equally important role in stabilizing situations and
providing security. The independence of humanitarian
organizations in making decisions and acting must be
preserved while they engage in appropriate dialogue
with political and military actors for humanitarian
purposes.
The ICRC deems it essential that political or
military action, including that undertaken under United
Nations auspices, be conceived in such a way as not to
erode the acceptability of humanitarian action. While
there are situations in which the military might be
needed to build a bridge, drill a well or otherwise
provide logistical means to bring urgent assistance to
those in need, the military should be entrusted with
humanitarian tasks only in emergency situations in
which humanitarian agencies cannot do the job.
Likewise, humanitarian agencies should resort to the
use of military and civil defence capabilities only when
no alternative is available.

The ICRC has a legal mandate from the
international community to ensure the protection of
internally displaced persons and to provide them with
assistance when they are victims of armed conflict.
Displaced persons are very high on our list of
operational priorities. The ICRC has often pointed to
the need to design flexible response strategies to
situations of internal displacement. Those strategies
would take into account the mandates and comparative
strengths of the actors and agencies in the field. They
would also be adapted to fit the different contexts in
which internal displacement occurs. The ICRC cannot
but reiterate its wish for a coordinated approach that
succeeds in reconciling the ICRC’s specific identity as
a strictly neutral and independent actor with a dynamic
collaboration with United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations in responding to
humanitarian needs on the ground.
In situations of armed conflict or other violence,
the ICRC, in addition to its own activities, coordinates
the international relief operations undertaken by the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
Every national Red Cross and Red Crescent society is
committed, together with the International Federation,
to the fundamental principles of the Movement and to
supporting sister organizations dealing with crises in
their countries neutrally and impartially. In over 80
countries where the ICRC is currently operational,
national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies are its
primary partners for humanitarian action towards
people in need.
However, the ICRC remains committed to
efficient cooperation, in particular in the field, with all
other relevant humanitarian actors that are effectively
delivering protection and assistance. That, of course,
includes the humanitarian agencies within the United
Nations system.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 49/2 of 19 October 1994,
I call on the observer for the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Schulz (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): Thank you, Sir, for
giving me the opportunity to take part in this important
debate on behalf of the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC).
We agree that the increasing frequency and
intensity of disasters, as described in the Secretary-

6

08-59952

A/63/PV.45

General’s report (A/63/277), is a disturbing trend that
requires urgent attention both in terms of improving
local, national, regional and international response
capabilities, and, more importantly, in terms of
addressing disaster risk reduction. That is most
apparent when considering the dramatic impacts of
climate change, the global food crisis, the recent
financial turmoil and global economic decline.
We are seeing the nature of international response
operations changing, with an emerging role for
regional organizations and mechanisms and the
reluctance of some countries to accept unsolicited
external assistance. Both those situations occurred
recently in Myanmar and presented the IFRC with the
challenge of rapidly developing regional Red Cross
and Red Crescent mechanisms that could match and
work alongside the arrangements being designed and
put in place by Asian Governments.
We have also observed that, in the delta region of
Myanmar, international resources were not provided at
the levels that some members of the international
community considered necessary. It was quickly
apparent to us that it is important for all concerned that
as clear an understanding as possible be available of
the coping mechanisms that can be and are being used
in the affected area.
Almost 15 years ago, in May 1994, the global
humanitarian community recognized at the Yokohama
World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction that,
while disasters are obviously related to hazards of one
kind or another, they derive their force from the
vulnerability of people and communities to those
hazards. That underlines the urgency to increase the
humanitarian capacity to respond to disasters that
cannot be avoided in the short term, while we likewise
increase the capacities of individuals, families,
communities and countries to better understand and
address the risks associated with climate change and to
be better protected in the short and medium terms.
The current negotiations of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change for a new
agreement to be completed in Copenhagen in December
2009 provide a welcome and necessary opportunity to
strengthen the integration of climate risk management in
overall disaster risk management and to improve
coherence with longer-term development processes.
The Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement has
worked closely with humanitarian and development

08-59952

organizations in the United Nations system and with
non-governmental organizations to prepare a joint
vision for the upcoming Poznán Conference of the
Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the
Kyoto Protocol on how existing humanitarian and
disaster risk reduction organizations, policies and
measures can help to improve people’s resilience. A
further step in that process is to establish dialogue at
the national level among the humanitarian disaster risk
reduction sector, climate change policymakers and
knowledge centres.
The IFRC welcomes the Secretary-General’s call
for a multi-year commitment to humanitarian funding.
We are pleased that the call is not limited to the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF), as that mechanism
is not accessed by agencies beyond the United Nations
family and the International Organization for
Migration. There is, however, a clear need for
predictable humanitarian funding for humanitarian
actors that are not part of the United Nations system,
such as the IFRC and others.
We therefore also welcome the keen willingness
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to initiate dialogue with the IFRC on
humanitarian funding. That dialogue recognizes that
the IFRC Disaster Response Emergency Fund and
United Nations CERF are complementary funding
mechanisms and both deserve donor support because of
that complementarity.
In recent years, the IFRC has spoken of the
progress of its work under the heading “International
Disaster Response Laws, Rules and Principles”. This
year, with great satisfaction we bring to the Assembly’s
attention the adoption of the Guidelines for the
Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International
Disaster Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance by
States and national societies sitting together at the
thirtieth International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent in 2007. The Guidelines are already
helping Governments to prepare themselves both to
enable and effectively to monitor and coordinate the
international assistance they request.
Experience has shown that good planning in that
area can greatly reduce technical problems, such as
restrictions and delays in customs, visas, transport
permissions and tax exemption procedures, that can
otherwise seriously undermine the speed and
effectiveness of aid provided to stricken communities.

7

A/63/PV.45

It also empowers Governments to ensure that
international assistance is of appropriate quality and
complements their own efforts to assist those in need.
Realizing that, a number of Governments have
already begun to use the Guidelines proactively to
examine their legal preparedness for international
relief. Working with a very wide range of partners,
including the United Nations, specialized agencies, the
Inter-Parliamentary
Union
and
key
regional
organizations, the IFRC and its member national
societies are developing innovative projects and
practical tools to support Governments in that task.
As pointed out by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon in his report, this body can make an important
contribution by promoting the active attention of its
members to the issues raised in the Guidelines. We
were very pleased that the Economic and Social
Council saw the adoption of the Guidelines as of
significance and included a reference to them in its
resolution 2008/36, and it is our hope that the General
Assembly will share that view.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 47/4 of 16 October 1992,
I now call on the observer for the International
Organization for Migration.
Mr. Dall’Oglio (International Organization for
Migration): The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) is pleased to take the floor today with
reference to the report of the Secretary-General entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”
(A/63/81).
The great number of serious humanitarian crises
this year has resulted in the heightened vulnerability of
poor countries that have been exposed to the negative
impact of concomitant and interconnected crises:
financial instability, extreme climatic events,
environmental degradation, volatile prices for food and
energy and unacceptable levels of hunger, poverty and
inequality. The magnitude of the challenges warrants a
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance in a collaborative effort with
all stakeholders.
As we approach the end of this challenging year,
we would like to seize the opportunity to take stock of
progress made and draw lessons for the future with

8

respect to new modalities of working together
promoted by the humanitarian reform process.
Through greater predictability, accountability and
a more deliberate effort to build partnerships, IOM’s
engagement with the humanitarian reform process has
to date centred around enhanced responsibilities for
vulnerable migrants and displaced persons, which we
have assumed under the cluster approach. Through our
cluster lead role on camp coordination and camp
management in situations of natural disasters and our
active engagement in a number of other areas, such as
emergency shelter and early recovery, a new pattern of
collaboration is emerging to deal with both emergency
response as well as capacity development.
The cluster approach supports national responses
and fills gaps where international support and
solidarity are needed. National Governments should be
able to call upon any of the cluster leads as a partner in
relevant sectors whenever appropriate.
IOM has taken an active role within the InterAgency Standing Committee (IASC) in incorporating
climate change into the humanitarian agenda. An
increase in the number of extreme environmental or
climatic events and the resulting internal or crossborder displacement already present a challenge to the
humanitarian community, while the frequency and
intensity of such events are expected to rise further.
There is an urgent need to gain a better understanding
of the important linkages between what can be called
environmentally induced migration and climate
change, with special attention to be paid to the most
vulnerable countries, communities and individuals.
Following a request from the IASC, IOM, in
coordination with the IASC secretariat and in
cooperation with other agencies, is carrying out a
series of informal inter-agency meetings and
consultations to develop appropriate terminology and
typology on migration and displacement and to identify
possible operational and analytical gaps in the context
of the humanitarian response.
Furthermore, in order to create an appropriate
informal framework for efficient, coherent and crosscutting cooperation in the field of climate change and
environmentally induced migration, IOM, together with
the United Nations Environment Programme, United
Nations University and the Munich Re Foundation, is
working on the establishment of the climate change,
environment and migration alliance. The alliance is

08-59952

A/63/PV.45

conceived as a multi-stakeholder global partnership of
concerned actors representing a range of perspectives,
including environment, migration, development and
humanitarian assistance, and aims to promote awarenessraising, research, policy development and practical
actions.

network. We express here our deep appreciation to our
partners, and in particular to the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the leadership of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
unwavering commitment to the improvement of
humanitarian response capacities.

IOM strongly encourages the multilateral
negotiations on climate change to take account of the
humanitarian consequences of climate change, as well
as the need to manage such consequences and to
protect human security through the systematic
reduction of disaster risks, including emergency
preparedness and reinforcement of response and
recovery mechanisms at the local, national, regional
and global levels. IOM looks forward and will be
contributing to a number of events at the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change in Poznán in
December, such as the side event led by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
on “Climate change, migration and forced
displacement: the new humanitarian frontier?”.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 65 and its
sub-items (a) to (c).

On a different note, this year marks the two-year
evaluation of the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF), which has become a valuable tool for the
humanitarian community’s emergency response
activities, including those of IOM. Indeed, CERF has a
relevance and usefulness as a flexible response
mechanism filling an important gap between sudden
emergencies and the timely availability of cash flows.
The life-saving criteria of CERF received substantial
acknowledgement in the evaluation and we welcome a
revisiting of the criteria to recognize the particularly
vulnerable situations of certain displaced persons,
including stranded migrants who require humanitarian
assistance.
IOM acknowledges with appreciation the
contributions it has received from CERF in the amount
to date of some $37 million, which represents a critical
mass of resources to jump-start operations in 61 crises.
As CERF faces competing demands from the adverse
effects of climate change and the food crisis, we would
welcome Member States calling for an increase of
additional contributions to the Fund in the omnibus
humanitarian resolution this fall.
To conclude, IOM is committed to those most
vulnerable in times of crisis and remains dedicated to
working resourcefully and proficiently with our IASC

08-59952

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.21, entitled “Special economic
assistance for Yemen”.
I should like to announce that since the tabling of
the draft resolution, the following countries have
become sponsors: Bangladesh, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Pakistan, the Philippines, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and the United States of America.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.21?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/20).

A/63/L.21

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Sulaimani (Yemen): On behalf of the
Republic of Yemen, I would like to warmly thank all
those who sponsored and supported resolution 63/20
entitled, “Special economic assistance for Yemen”. We
thank the General Assembly for adopting the resolution
by consensus.
We would also like to express our appreciation
for the multifaceted assistance that has been granted by
friendly and brotherly States, the donor community, the
United Nations specialized agencies, international
financial organizations and development and human
relief assistance organizations. We hope that more
technical and material assistance will be granted to
Yemen to help us to overcome the effects of the floods
and torrential rains that have struck some Yemeni
provinces as well as to rebuild housing, property and
infrastructure.
We reaffirm that the relief efforts that have been
made by my country and by civil society organizations,
as well as actions and policies formulated by the

9

A/63/PV.45

national Government have helped to mitigate the
devastating material and psychological effects of this
natural disaster. Our means are limited and that is why
we hope for assistance from the international
community.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 65
and its sub-items (a) through (c).
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution (A/63/L.19)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on this agenda
item at its 35th plenary meeting, on 30 October 2008.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.19.
Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands): I have the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 69, a draft resolution
entitled “Report of the International Criminal Court”
(A/63/L.19).
In addition to the 45 countries mentioned in
document A/63/L.19, which contains the text of the
draft resolution, the following countries have indicated
their wish to be included as sponsors of the resolution:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Barbados, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, the Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Guyana, Iceland, Jamaica,
Japan,
Latvia,
Lesotho,
Liberia,
Lithuania,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru,
Niger, Panama, Paraguay, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Suriname, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Uruguay and Zambia.
This brings the total number of sponsors to 96.
On 30 October, the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Philippe Kirsch,
presented the fourth annual report of the ICC to this
body. We had a very constructive and in-depth debate
then and there is no reason to repeat that discussion
here today. Allow me, though, to highlight a few
elements.

10

The establishment of the Court was the most
significant development of the past decade in our long
and ongoing struggle to eradicate impunity. In the
words of the Secretary-General in his statement
marking the 10th anniversary of the Court on 17 July,
“[T]he creation of the ICC is unquestionably one of the
major achievements of international law during the
past century”.
In that regard, we will continue to strive for
universal adherence to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We are therefore very
pleased to welcome the countries which have recently
become State Parties to the Rome Statute — the Cook
Islands, Madagascar and Suriname — and it is our
sincere hope that others will join soon. We look
forward to welcoming many more States as parties to
the ICC by the 2010 Review Conference, at which
States parties and non-States parties may participate, in
accordance with the Rome Statute and the rules of
procedure for the Review Conference.
The International Criminal Court’s annual report,
as well as the debate in the General Assembly just over
a week ago, underlined the important role the
International Criminal Court plays in our common
multilateral system to end impunity and to establish the
rule of law, to promote and encourage respect for
human rights and to restore and maintain international
peace and security. It is our firm conviction that
sustainable peace cannot be achieved if perpetrators of
the most serious crimes are not brought to justice.
Peace and justice are, in our view, complementary
requirements.
The President of the International Criminal Court,
in his address to the General Assembly (see
A/63/PV.35), stressed the fact that the cooperation of
States, international organizations and civil society are
essential to the Court’s functioning. This is especially
the case in relation to the arrest and surrender of
accused persons, the provision of evidence, the
protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and
the enforcement of sentences.
We are pleased that the United Nations continued
to assist the Court over the past year in its endeavours
through
implementation
of
the
Relationship
Agreement. We also welcome the assistance provided
so far by States parties and non-States parties and call
on all States to continue to support the Court’s efforts
in that regard.

08-59952

A/63/PV.45

Before I outline the three main objectives of the
draft resolution, let me point out a minor, technical
update. The first line of operative paragraph 14 of the
draft resolution, should read “Notes that the Review
Conference to be held in 2010” instead of 2009.
The draft resolution before us serves three main
objectives. First, it seeks to provide political support
for the International Criminal Court as an organization,
for its mandate, for its aims and for the work it carries
out. Secondly, it seeks to underline the importance of
the relationship between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations, which continues to grow
stronger on the basis of the Relationship Agreement.
Lastly, it serves to remind States and international and
regional organizations of the need to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court as it seeks to carry out
its tasks.
The Netherlands hopes that this draft resolution
will be adopted by consensus and that it will lead to
even greater support for the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity and for its attempts
to hold perpetrators of very serious crimes accountable
for their actions.
The Acting President: I should like to announce
that Honduras has become a sponsor of draft resolution
A/63/L.19.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.19. Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Willson (United States of America): The
concerns of the United States about the Rome Statute
and International Criminal Court (ICC) are well known
and date back to 2000, when the United States signed
the Rome Statute but made clear that it would not
submit the Statute for ratification unless its
fundamental concerns were satisfied. Accordingly, the
United States cannot join the consensus on this draft
resolution.
Our concerns about the ICC are concerns about
means, not about ends. We have remained steadfastly
committed to promoting the rule of law and helping to
bring violators of international humanitarian law to
justice, wherever the violations may occur, and have

08-59952

continued to play a leadership role in righting these
wrongs. Our actions over the last years with respect to
the Sudan can leave no doubt about the strength of
these commitments. As we have emphasized, we
cannot ignore the terrible crimes that have occurred
throughout the conflict in Darfur and the massive
human suffering the world has witnessed.
We underscore once again that we respect the
right of other States to become parties to the Rome
Statute and have asked in return that other States
respect our decision and our right not to become a
party. While respecting each other’s choices, there are
practical ways in which the United States and the
supporters of the International Criminal Court can
work together to advance the cause of international
criminal justice.
In this connection, we appreciate the inclusion of
language in this year’s draft resolution that emphasizes
the importance of cooperation by States parties with
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute and that
notes that the upcoming review conference provides an
opportunity to address the concerns of non-parties.
At the same time, we would like to take this
opportunity to underscore once again the importance
we attach to rigorous implementation of resolution
58/318, which provides that
“all expenses resulting from the provision of
services, facilities, cooperation and any other
support rendered to the International Criminal
Court or the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
including under any arrangements that may be
otherwise agreed under article 10 of the
Relationship Agreement, that may accrue to the
United Nations as a result of the implementation
of the Relationship Agreement shall be paid in
full to the Organization” (resolution 58/318,
para. 3).
Mr. Ajawin (Sudan): Draft resolution A/63/L.19
contains contentious procedural issues regarding the
workings of the International Criminal Court and we
would like to inform this Assembly that the Sudan
strongly dissociates itself from the draft for the various
reasons that were outlined by my country when the
report of the activities of the International Criminal
Court was tabled at the General Assembly last week.

11

A/63/PV.45

The Sudan views with serious concern that the
Court, rather than being faithful to the wishes of the
States parties, through its Prosecutor General,
unfortunately, and in the absence of any accountability
on his part, chose to use the Court as a tool in the
hands of ulterior motives and as threat to my country’s
peace and stability. It is no surprise that all regional
and international organizations sharply deplore the
recent indictments brought by him against the
Sudanese leadership and have stated in a single voice
that these indictments will jeopardize peace and
security in the Sudan and in the entire region.
It is regrettable that the Prosecutor General
intentionally overlooked cardinal principles of
international law and the law of treaties and chose to
target a Member State that is not a party to the Rome
Statute, overlooking, also, the immunity enjoyed by its
head of State under the relevant laws and norms,
repeatedly confirmed by the International Court of
Justice.
We look forward to the States parties in the
forthcoming review conference rectifying these
blunders by the Prosecutor General. For this and other
reasons, the Sudan strongly dissociates itself from the
draft resolution and calls on the President to ensure
that its position is properly reflected in the record.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.19. May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/63/L.19, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/63/L.19, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 63/21).
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has requested the floor in order to make a
general statement regarding agenda item 69 following
the adoption of the resolution. I take this opportunity to
repeat Costa Rica’s willingness to contribute to every
effort aimed at strengthening the International Criminal
Court, which is a young institution and one that is in its
consolidation phase. The 108 countries that have
acceded to or ratified the Rome Statute are under the
obligation to educate international public opinion as to
the importance, for the civilized, peaceful coexistence
of nations and for the building of peace, of the
existence of an independent, effective and legitimate

12

mechanism to help heal the wounds that have been
inflicted on our collective memories for many decades
and which often stand in the way of peaceful and
sustainable development. Only our ceaseless efforts
will be able to persuade those who still harbour doubts
of the Court’s enormous potential to contribute, from a
unique perspective and with a strong impact, towards a
better world for the coming generations.
In today’s world, riddled with crises, threats and
bad news, the International Criminal Court is an oasis
of hope. We know that in order to strengthen
humankind’s great qualitative progress, it is necessary
first to overcome the great obstacles facing any attempt
to change the status of things and to place limits on
power. There always has been and always will be a
great lack of understanding, deeply divided interests
and enormous loads of bad faith. For these reasons, no
one should be surprised by the opposition to the Court
from powerful interests that refuse to subject their
conduct to law. Or is it not ancient history, always
repeated, that those who are drunk with power and
wealth believe with vanity that their conduct is above
the law and far from the scrutiny of justice?
We all know who are opposed to the International
Criminal Court, and why. The peoples, their hearts
filled with hope, have acceded to the Rome Statute,
and we know that we have the duty to defend the Court
and to refute the weak arguments that oppose it, to
expose the bad faith and to educate international public
opinion.
Costa Rica is committed in this effort of civilized
humanity by the international community, insisting on
building a future on the solid basis of justice. Those
who seek to deform the face of the Court, those who
with bad intention accuse it of being a political tool, a
mechanism for domination or a tribunal that addresses
African issues exclusively will not succeed.
In this battle the victors will be those of us who
can demonstrate the independence of the Court and its
intrinsic value in the fight against impunity as a solid
foundation of peace. We will be gracious in the
struggle, those of us who are able to distinguish
between the natural mandate of the Prosecutor to
investigate crimes, the tireless efforts of the judges
responsible for impartial analysis of facts brought to
their attention, and the implementation of norms
accepted by all. We will be victorious in the struggle,
those of us who are able to demonstrate, based on solid

08-59952

A/63/PV.45

facts, that the situations submitted to the Court’s
jurisdiction in this period are not the result of
arbitrariness or discrimination but of the unsolicited
intent of the referring States and of the Security
Council.
I will conclude by recalling that there are still
seven outstanding arrest warrants, some three years
after their issuance. We are not ignoring the fact that
this situation endangers, every day, the confidence that
peoples may have in the International Criminal Court.
By its own nature the Court is unable to arrest those
individuals; that is not the role of any court of justice
in the world. Costa Rica understands that the
enforcement of those arrest warrants is the
responsibility of States and, by extension, of the
international community.
In our view, therefore, it is crucial that we
implement a process that will seriously analyze the
problem of complying with the mandates of the Court.
We must examine the broad array of tools available to
the international community to achieve its purposes
and to place some of those instruments at the service of
the Court’s effectiveness, because its future depends on
that effectiveness.
Costa Rica will align its efforts with those of
other States to consolidate the international system of
criminal justice so as to enhance its efficiency and to
sow hope for a solid and durable peace in the minds
and hearts of the peoples who need this hope, for their
progress.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 105 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of a member of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/108)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/63/108, the General Assembly is required, during the
sixty-third session, to appoint a member to fill a
vacancy on the Joint Inspection Unit that will arise

08-59952

from the expiration of the term of office on
31 December 2009 of Mr. Tadanori Inomata, of Japan.
As also indicated in the same document, in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of
the Joint Inspection Unit, the President of the General
Assembly shall consult with Member States to draw up
a list of countries — in this case, one country — which
would be requested to propose a candidate for
appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.
Also, as indicated in document A/63/108,
paragraph 4, the General Assembly, by its resolution
61/238, decided that, beginning on 1 January 2008, the
President of the General Assembly, when drawing up
the list of countries, in accordance with article 3,
paragraph 1, of the statute of the Unit, will invite
Member States to submit the names of the countries
and their respective candidates simultaneously, on the
understanding that the candidates submitted would be
the candidates that the respective Member States
intended to propose, to the extent possible, for
appointment by the Assembly, in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute.
After holding the necessary consultations, I
should like to communicate to the Assembly the
information received from the Chairman of the Group
of Asian States that the Group of Asian States has
endorsed Japan to propose a candidate for the vacancy
from among the Asian States.
In accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the
statute of the Joint Inspection Unit and with resolution
61/238 of the General Assembly, Japan has submitted
the name of a candidate and the relevant curriculum
vitae
highlighting
the
candidate’s
relevant
qualifications for the task.
After holding the appropriate consultations
described in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the
Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I will submit the name of the candidate
to the Assembly for appointment to the Joint Inspection
Unit.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 105.

13

A/63/PV.45

I now give the floor to the representative of
Myanmar, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
Mr. Myint (Myanmar): References to Myanmar
have been made on some occasions in connection with
cyclone Nargis, many months after the event.
One such reference was made by the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross this afternoon under agenda item 65.
Although the real motivation of the reference is not
very clear, we deem it necessary to inform the
Assembly of what actually transpired concerning
cyclone Nargis.

In fact, the Government of Myanmar quickly
responded to the catastrophe, and international
assistance arrived in Myanmar immediately after the
cyclone by land, sea and air. The fact that the response
of the Government was adequate has been confirmed
by the relevant international organizations. The
international community, acting through the United
Nations, could work in partnership with the
Government of Myanmar.
The creation of the Tripartite Core Group — the
TCG — which comprises Myanmar, ASEAN and the
United Nations, has contributed to the smooth
coordination of humanitarian assistance and joint
planning for longer-term recovery and preparedness.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

14

08-59952
