United Nations

S/PV.6450

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6450th meeting
Wednesday, 15 December 2010, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Kyrle
Mr. Alkalaj
Ms. Machado
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Toungui
Mr. Tokunaga
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Davutoğlu
Mr. Bukenya
Mr. Burt

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Letter dated 9 December 2010 from the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/621)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1936
(2010) (S/2010/606)
Letter dated 9 December 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/625)
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution
1905 (2009) (S/2010/563)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-69415 (E)

*1069415*

S/PV.6450

Note verbale dated 28 October 2010 from the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/567)
Note verbale dated 8 December 2010 from the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/618)
Letter dated 8 December 2010 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2010/619)
Note verbale dated 8 December 2010 from the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/620)

2

10-69415

S/PV.6450

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Letter dated 9 December 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States
of America to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2010/621)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1936 (2010)
(S/2010/606)
Letter dated 9 December 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/625)
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 3 of resolution 1905 (2009)
(S/2010/563)
Note verbale dated 28 October 2010 from the
Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/567)
Note verbale dated 8 December 2010 from the
Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/618)
Letter dated 8 December 2010 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2010/619)
Note verbale dated 8 December 2010 from the
Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/620)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Vice-President of Uganda, the Secretary-General,
ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Your presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be addressed.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend an
invitation under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.

10-69415

It is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zebari
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: Members of the Council have
before them documents S/2010/632, S/2010/633 and
S/2010/636, which contain the texts of three draft
resolutions respectively. I also wish to draw the
members’ attention to the documents cited as sub-items
of the agenda of this meeting. The Security Council
will take action on those three draft resolutions prior to
hearing statements. Accordingly, I shall first put to the
vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2010/632 and co-sponsored by Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, China, France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon,
Nigeria, the Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
the Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1956 (2010).
I shall now put to the vote the second draft
resolution, contained in document S/2010/633 and cosponsored by Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Nigeria, the Russian
Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
the Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1957 (2010).

3

S/PV.6450

I shall now put to the vote the third draft
resolution contained in document S/2010/636 and cosponsored by Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China,
Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Nigeria, the Russian
Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria, the
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
France
The President: There were 14 votes in favour,
none against and one abstention. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 1958 (2010).
I have been authorized by the members of the
Council to make the following statement on their
behalf.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
emphasizes the importance of the stability and
security of Iraq for its people, the region and the
international community.
“The Security Council supports the
inclusive political process and power-sharing
agreement reached by Iraqi leaders to form a
representative national partnership Government
that reflects the will of the Iraqi people as
displayed by the parliamentary elections of 7
March 2010. We encourage its leaders to continue
to pursue a federal, democratic, pluralistic and
unified Iraq based upon the rule of law and
respect for human rights.
“The Security Council reaffirms the need to
combat all forms of terrorism and that no terrorist
act can reverse the path towards peace,
democracy and reconstruction in Iraq, which is
supported by its people, the Government of Iraq
and the international community.
“The Security Council welcomes the
positive developments in Iraq and recognizes that

4

the situation now existing in Iraq is significantly
different from that which existed at the time of
the adoption of resolution 661 (1990). Consistent
with resolution 1859 (2008), the Security Council
also welcomes the important progress Iraq has
made in regaining the international standing it
held prior to the adoption of resolution 661
(1990).
“In recognition of Iraq’s progress in
supporting the international non-proliferation
regime and complying with disarmament treaties
and other relevant international instruments, its
commitment to taking additional steps in this
regard and its provisional application of the
Additional Protocol to the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), pending its
ratification, the Security Council has adopted
resolution 1957 (2010), which lifts the
restrictions imposed by resolutions 687 (1991)
and 707 (1991) relating to weapons of mass
destruction and civilian nuclear activities.
“In recognition of Iraq’s success in closing
out the remaining contracts in the Oil-for-Food
programme, the Council has also adopted
resolution 1958 (2010) to terminate the residual
activities of the Oil-for-Food programme.
“In recognition of Iraq’s progress towards
the establishment of effective and accountable
successor arrangements for the transition of the
Development Fund for Iraq, the Security Council
has adopted resolution 1956 (2010), which
terminates arrangements for the Development
Fund for Iraq on 30 June 2011.
“Welcoming the progress made by the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait towards the
resolution of the outstanding issues between both
countries, and encouraging further cooperation,
the Security Council calls on Iraq to quickly fulfil
its remaining obligations under the relevant
Chapter VII Security Council resolutions
pertaining to the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait.
“The Security Council welcomes Iraq’s
reintegration into the region and encourages Iraq
and all regional States to deepen and broaden their
relationships and to conduct those relationships in
a spirit of partnership and cooperation.

10-69415

S/PV.6450

“The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in advising,
supporting and assisting the Iraqi people and
Government
to
strengthen
democratic
institutions, advance inclusive dialogue and
national
reconciliation,
facilitate
regional
dialogue, aid vulnerable groups, strengthen
gender equality, promote the protection of human
rights, including through the establishment of the
Independent High Commission for Human
Rights, promote the protection of affected
civilians, including children, women and
members of religious and ethnic minority groups,
and promote judicial and legal reform.
“The Security Council commends UNAMI,
headed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for its support throughout the
electoral process, consistent with its mandate.
The Security Council encourages UNAMI’s
continued work, in coordination with the
Government of Iraq, to provide protection and
help create conditions conducive to the voluntary,
safe, dignified and, in particular, sustainable
return of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons, and stresses the importance of further
attention to this issue by all concerned.
“The
Security
Council
underscores
UNAMI’s important role in supporting the Iraqi
people and Government to promote dialogue,
ease tension, and encourage a negotiated political
agreement on the nation’s disputed internal
boundaries, and calls upon all relevant parties to
participate in an inclusive dialogue to that end.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/27.
With the Council’s permission, I will now make a
statement in my national capacity.
It is a genuinely rare opportunity to preside over
this meeting of the United Nations Security Council,
which is addressing the important issues relating to the
Republic of Iraq.
Let us briefly reflect on what has been a critically
important period in Iraq’s history. In recent years, the
Iraqi people have emerged from the depths of sectarian
violence and have flatly rejected the grim future
offered by extremists. They have earned themselves a

10-69415

chance for much better days ahead. Iraqi forces are
now in charge of securing their country, and they have
proved themselves more than capable of doing so, as I
and many of those here have seen with our own eyes.
Since our Administration came to office, we have
withdrawn more than 100,000 American troops from
Iraq and ended our combat mission there. We have
transitioned from a military-led to a civilian-led
engagement. The 50,000 troops who remain until the
end of next year, under the security agreement with the
Iraqi Government, have been given a new primary
mission: advising and assisting their Iraqi counterparts.
Meanwhile, the frequency of violent attacks in Iraq has
reached its lowest level — thank the Lord — since
2003.
As the Council knows, in March the Iraqi people
conducted an historic election, and last month Iraq’s
political leaders agreed on a framework for a
Government that reflects the election’s results. That
Government will include blocs representing every
major community and will not exclude or marginalize
anyone. It is made in Iraq, by Iraqis, and it reflects the
remarkable development that in today’s Iraq, politics
has emerged as the dominant means for settling
differences and advancing the country’s interests. The
Iraqi leaders must now honour, in a timely manner, the
commitments to one another and to the Iraqi people
that were made in the negotiating process.
Going forward, the United States will continue to
do its part to reinforce the progress being made in Iraq
consistent with our Strategic Framework Agreement
with the Iraqis, and to forge an enduring partnership
across a range of sectors, including education, energy,
trade, health, culture, information technology, law
enforcement, the judiciary and security. We
respectfully urge other nations to share their expertise
as well with this new, emerging Iraq.
I do not need to remind this gathering of the
important role the United Nations played, and
continues to play, in support of Iraq’s development,
and the very, very heavy price it has paid. We will not
forget the horror of 19 August 2003, when terrorists
took the lives of 22 people, including, I think we would
all agree, an outstanding, remarkable United Nations
envoy, Sergio Vieira de Mello. It was a tragic harbinger
of all that was to follow after August of 2003, but the
important work of the United Nations continued, and
continues to this day. It continues because of the

5

S/PV.6450

foresight
of
that
United
Nations
Special
Representative, who rightly observed, and I quote him,
“There is no longer such a thing as a distant crisis”,
since “You can’t help people from a distance”.
That wisdom, forged during a career spent in the
hard-luck corners of the world, lives on in all of those
who are bravely helping Iraq to build a better future,
including the men and women of the United Nations
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). Over more than a dozen
visits to Iraq since the war began — as their Foreign
Minister can tell you, I jokingly kid that I deserve Iraqi
citizenship, I have spent so much time there, and I have
enjoyed every minute — I have seen first-hand, as I
hope many here have, UNAMI’s efforts to strengthen
democratic institutions, conduct elections, advance
inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation, aid
vulnerable communities, and promote the protection of
human rights and the reform of the justice system.
Quite frankly, I have watched the young men and
women who are the Special Representative’s staff
literally risk their lives. I have watched them, and I
think sometimes those outside this vaulted chamber
underestimate the incredible talent, the incredible
dedication and the incredible devotion of the men and
women we send into those regions. They deserve our
gratitude and our special thanks — not just the special
envoys like Mr. Vieira de Mello, but also Ad Melkert,
who I worked with every single day I was in Iraq. I
will say again, we would not have gotten to this point —
and I think our colleague from Iraq would
acknowledge this — were it not for their staff, whose
work is often done under trying conditions. I might add
that I think that work remains as important as it has
ever been.
To be sure, Iraq faces further challenges on the
road to security and prosperity. Attacks by extremists
remain an unacceptable aspect of daily life in the
country. We are particularly concerned about recent
attempts to target innocents because of their faith,
including both Christians and Muslims, and to lash out
at security forces working to keep the country safe. But
I firmly believe that despite those challenges, Iraq’s
best days are ahead.
As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Iraq seeks and deserves the opportunity to resume its
rightful role in the community of nations. Towards that
end, this meeting formally acknowledges the
significant steps Iraq has taken towards fulfilling its

6

obligations to the United Nations, incurred in the leadup to the 1991 Gulf war. Accordingly, the Security
Council has now lifted restrictions imposed by
resolutions 687 (1991) and 707 (1991), relating to
weapons of mass destruction and civilian nuclear
activities, in recognition of Iraq’s commitment to
non-proliferation, its compliance with relevant treaties
and other international instruments, its adherence to the
highest non-proliferation standards, and its provisional
application of the additional protocols to its agreement
with the International Atomic Energy Agency, pending
that agreement’s entry into force.
The Council has also terminated the residual
activities of the oil-for-food programme, because Iraq
has successfully closed out the remaining contracts.
The Council has ended the Development Fund for Iraq
effective 30 June 2011, due to the steps the country has
taken towards resolving debts and claims inherited
from the previous regime and establishing accountable
arrangements for transitioning the Fund.
We all know that our work on those issues is not
complete. We urge Iraq’s neighbours and the rest of the
international community to continue to work closely
with Iraq on its remaining Chapter VII obligations. We
strongly support the resolution of outstanding issues
between Iraq and Kuwait.
Since President Obama asked me to oversee our
Administration’s Iraq policy when we took office, let
me assure the Council that the United States will
continue to work with Iraqi leaders on the important
tasks that lie ahead: conducting the census, integrating
Kurdish forces into Iraqi security forces, keeping
commitments to the Sons of Iraq, resolving disputed
internal boundaries with regard to the future of Kirkuk,
passing critical hydrocarbon legislation and a fiscally
responsible budget, and helping stabilize the country’s
economy. We must also continue our efforts to protect
and support those displaced by war and help enable
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable returns.
Today, as we take stock of all that the Iraqi
people have endured and accomplished, and all that
still must be done, we cannot lose sight of the fact that
Iraq is on the cusp of something remarkable: a stable,
self-reliant nation with just, representative and
accountable Government — a positive force for peace
and stability in the region. We all have an interest in
redeeming that promise and preserving the gains that
Iraq has made.

10-69415

S/PV.6450

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I invite His Excellency the Secretary-General to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I appreciate VicePresident Biden’s leadership and strong commitment
on Iraq and on other matters of common concern, as
demonstrated by the very strong statement he has just
made and his own participation in this very important
meeting of the Council.
This meeting is a milestone for Iraq. Its people
have known tremendous hardship. They continue to
struggle with insecurity and appalling violence. They
lack jobs and basic services. But today we recognize
how far the country has come in key aspects of its
journey to normalize its status in the community of
nations.
The Security Council has today decided to end
several major Chapter VII mandates relating to Iraq,
including on weapons of mass destruction and the oilfor-food programme. We all know the difficult history
on weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. The decision
to lift the country’s remaining obligations has brought
this chapter to an end. Iraq has pledged to remain free
of weapons of mass destruction. This commitment is
enshrined in its Constitution. The country has also
joined key international agreements, including the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty. These steps bode well for security and
development in Iraq and the wider region.
The Security Council has also decided to end all
residual activities under the oil-for-food programme.
Here, too, the United Nations will do its part to bring
closure to this long-running, complex and
unprecedented initiative.
I commend Iraq’s leaders for their recent
agreements ending months of political deadlock. These
efforts should help pave the way for a national
partnership Government and for the first peaceful
transition between elected Governments under full
Iraqi sovereignty. I urge Iraq’s political blocs to honour
their agreements and move swiftly to conclude the
process.
A new Government will face many challenges in
providing stability and opportunity for all Iraqis. It will

10-69415

have to normalize Arab-Kurd relations in the disputed
areas and ensure the protection of all minorities,
including Christians. It will have to manage oil
production and move forward with the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
The new Government will also need to improve
Iraq’s relations with its neighbours and the region. In
the same spirit, I encourage Iraq’s neighbours to open a
new chapter in their relations with Iraq. The United
Nations is prepared to do its part to support these
efforts and promote peace in a region that has
experienced three major wars in the past three decades.
Indeed, the invasion of Kuwait by Saddam
Hussein’s regime, two decades ago, and its legacy
caused widespread suffering among the peoples of both
countries, and in neighbouring States as well. Iraq
bears the primary responsibility for fulfilling its
Chapter VII obligations to Kuwait. I hope that, after
today’s meeting and after the formation of a new
Government in Baghdad, there will be new impetus for
the two countries to work together in resolving their
outstanding issues.
I encourage Iraq to quickly reaffirm its
commitment to resolution 833 (1993), with respect to
its land and maritime boundary with Kuwait, and to
fulfil all other outstanding obligations, including with
regard to missing Kuwaiti persons and property,
compensation and the maintenance of boundary
markers. Progress on these fronts should enable the
Council to take up the report I submitted pursuant to
resolution 1859 (2008), and to consider further steps
for the full normalization of Iraq’s international status.
At every step of Iraq’s political transition, the
United Nations has been Iraq’s partner. The United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) helped
in the establishment of the Interim Government in
2004. UNAMI worked hard for the success of two
parliamentary elections and a referendum on the
Constitution in 2005, governorate council elections in
2009 and parliamentary elections earlier this year. I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your strong
support and words of encouragement for the staff of
UNAMI, including Special Representative Ad Melkert.
As highlighted in my latest report (S/2010/606) to
the Council, the Mission will continue, in accordance
with its mandate, to promote political dialogue, provide
constitutional support, monitor human rights, deliver
humanitarian assistance to Iraqi refugees and internally

7

S/PV.6450

displaced persons, help build the capacity of Iraq’s
electoral institutions and encourage a negotiated
political agreement to disputed internal boundaries.
The new Government and Parliament will no doubt
shape those priorities further.
The
country’s
development
needs
are
considerable. It remains essential to restore the basic
services that make daily life bearable. Access to
education and health services is likewise critical for the
country’s future. Iraq’s development vision should also
encompass its mosques, churches and shrines, its
archaeological artifacts, its magnificent history and its
contemporary environment. The United Nations is
eager to be part of this wide-ranging drive to
normalization.
The planned United States military drawdown
will have major security implications for the United
Nations presence. UNAMI is carrying out its work with
greater operational autonomy and is receiving more
assistance from the host country. But Iraq remains a
challenging environment. The Mission will continue to
need strong political and financial support from
Member States.
I deeply appreciate the contributions and
sacrifices of United Nations staff and other foreign
nationals who have helped Iraq through its troubled
times. My message to the people of Iraq is this: You
have suffered too much for too long. I pay tribute to
your resilience. There will be more hurdles ahead, but
you have the wisdom and the capacity to overcome
them. You are now in the lead in your quest for a better
life. The United Nations will continue to stand with
you as an impartial partner. We are determined to fulfil
that mandate and help you find, once and for all, the
path of prosperity and peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now invite my friend His Excellency
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq, to take the floor.
Mr. Zebari (Iraq): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this important and historic meeting. It is a great honour
to be invited here today to brief the Council on the
current situation and ongoing developments in Iraq.
This timely meeting is a demonstration of the
international community’s broad support for Iraq. At
the forefront are the efforts of the Security Council,

8

particularly in the areas of reconstruction and support
for the political and constitutional processes.
In this context, allow me to express my
appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon; his Special Representative, Mr. Ad
Melkert; the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and the Iraq Office of the Secretariat for
their contributions within the mandate of UNAMI and
pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions.
Members of the Security Council are aware that a
long period of time elapsed between the parliamentary
elections on 7 March and the meeting of the Council of
Representatives on 11 November. That parliamentary
meeting came after an Iraqi initiative led by the
President of the Kurdistan region, who brought
together all political leaders to meet in Erbil and later
in Baghdad to reach a political settlement in order to
form the new Government of national unity and
partnership. The initiative had immense regional and
international support. It led to the resumption of the
meeting of the Council of Representatives to elect its
President, the Speaker of the Parliament, and to ask
Mr. Nuri al-Maliki to form a new Government within
the constitutional time frame. Political exchanges and
discussions on the new Government will be completed
imminently. The new Government will be a powersharing, representative and inclusive Government that
reflects the will of the Iraqi people, as displayed by the
parliamentary elections of 7 March. Having myself
participated in these discussions, I can report to the
Council that the Government will be formed very soon.
In the last few months of the political stalemate,
we witnessed regional activities that impacted the
process of Government formation. While we Iraqis
welcome any positive contribution of assistance, the
Iraqi people totally reject interference in their internal
affairs by others. As a free, democratic and sovereign
nation, we continue to work to strengthen relations
with our regional neighbours and our brotherly Arab
countries. To this end, we in Iraq have embraced the
important challenge of hosting the upcoming Arab
Summit in Baghdad in March 2011, over which Iraq
will preside. Ensuring its success will be a clear signal
of our progress and that Iraq has been embraced by its
fellow Arab countries.
Iraq has also demonstrated through its foreign
policy that it remains committed to the basic principles
of our constitution: non-interference in the internal

10-69415

S/PV.6450

affairs of other States, seeking to resolve conflicts
through peaceful means, establishing relations on the
basis of common interests and reciprocity, and
respecting our international obligations.
As regards our relations with the Security
Council, Iraq has taken great strides towards meeting
our international commitments. Our key focus has been
to unburden Iraq from the heavy legacy of
non-compliance with international law, break its
isolation and regain its rightful place among the
community of nations.
Pursuant to our Constitution and proceeding from
our commitment to international resolutions, and also
in the context of the Secretary-General’s report
contained in document S/2009/385 on the review of
Security Council resolutions imposed under Chapter
VII, we have accomplished major and significant
progress towards meeting our obligations to the
standards of disarmament and non-proliferation in
record time. In this regard, I refer to my numerous
letters to the President of the Security Council and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency this year, in particular the most recent letter to
the President of the Security Council dated 7 December
2010.
My
Government
welcomes
and
deeply
appreciates the Council’s collective decision and
support in recognizing Iraq’s progress in supporting the
international non-proliferation regime and complying
with disarmament treaties and other relevant
international instruments. My country is committed to
taking additional steps in this regard. The lifting of the
restrictions imposed by resolutions 687 (1991) and 707
(1991) relating to weapons of mass destruction and
civilian nuclear activities is a sign that the new Iraq is
significantly different from Saddam’s Iraq at the time
of the adoption of resolution 661 (1990).
We also worked very hard this year towards
completely closing down the oil-for-food programme.
My Government, with all relevant ministries and
departments, worked with the Security Council and the
financial Controller of the United Nations to conclude
all remaining contracts. Here again, my Government
appreciates the Council’s recognition of the success we
have achieved in closing out the remaining contracts
and terminating the residual activities of the oil-forfood programme. The programme was marred by a web

10-69415

of mismanagement and misappropriation, and its
termination lifts another burden on Iraq’s recovery.
In accordance with resolution 1905 (2009), my
Government has achieved significant progress in 2010
towards developing arrangements to replace the
Development Fund for Iraq and the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board. This progress was
reflected in the three reports presented to the Security
Council in 2010. We have also made concrete progress
in the settlement of sovereign debts and commercial
claims, and concluded bilateral arrangements on other
claims.
My Government therefore appreciates the
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1956
(2010) extending the Development Fund for Iraq and
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board for
another six months. The request for that measure arose
from the delay in Government formation and political
instability, not as a result of a lack of resolve and
determination.
The adoption of these important resolutions
marks the beginning of the end of the sanctions regime
and restrictions on Iraq’s sovereignty, independence
and recovery. Our people will rejoice at having turned
a page on the aggressive, belligerent and defiant
behaviour of the previous regime towards international
law and legitimacy.
Here, I wish to thank Vice President Biden in
person for supporting Iraq’s liberation from these
international sanctions and restrictions, the permanent
and non-permanent members of the Security Council,
and the Secretary-General for standing by Iraq to get
this far.
Despite those positive achievements, Iraq still has
some way to go to resolve all outstanding issues with
our brotherly neighbour Kuwait. There has been
positive cooperation and exchange between our
Governments to resolve and settle all pending issues
between our countries stemming from Saddam
Hussein’s aggression and invasion of Kuwait in 1990.
The remaining issues will be at the top of the new
Government’s agenda, among items demanding serious
political action. My country is committed to fulfilling
its remaining obligations under relevant Chapter VII
resolutions pertaining to the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait.

9

S/PV.6450

Iraq still faces tremendous challenges. We
continue to confront terrorism and criminal elements
bent on destabilizing our country. Despite remarkable
progress in the fight for Iraq’s peace and security, there
are still attempts to revive sectarian, ethnic and
religious strife, such as the recent atrocities committed
against Iraqi Christians. There is shared empathy and a
consensus between the Government and the Iraqi
people to provide security and a safe environment for
Iraqi Christians, who have played an important role in
the national heritage of Iraq, in the national Iraqi
movement and in the building of our country.
International support is critical to encouraging Iraqi
Christians to remain in their homeland as an integral
part of Iraqi society.
The greatest challenge continues to be to build a
State and State institutions on the basis of participation
and inclusion, consolidating national reconciliation and
deferring to an independent judiciary as the arbiter in
implementing the principles of accountability and
justice. Those principles were agreed upon and
endorsed by all Iraqi political leaders and blocs in the
Erbil meeting that took place on 8 November 2010.
They are the foundation for the formation of the
democratically elected Government and a federal,
democratic and unified Iraq, with constitutional
institutions and subject to the rule of law, where human
rights are protected and all components of Iraqi society
are fully respected.
In the economic sector, the situation has greatly
improved through a series of economic, financial and
investment regulations issued by the Government.
Those regulations have contributed to the increase in
per capita income and improved purchasing power and
the level of social welfare. Through the licensing
rounds this year on oil and gas fields, we have brought
qualified international expertise to that sector, which
will improve Iraq’s ability to increase productivity and
export capacity so as to enhance economic
development. In that context, we look forward to the
hydrocarbon law being ratified by the Council of
Representatives as soon as possible.
The Iraqi Government carried out an ambitious
budget for 2010. On 4 April, the Government launched
a five-year national development plan for the period
2010-2014, in order to develop the Iraqi economy,
improve the quality of public services and create job
opportunities. The federal fiscal budget for the 2011
was referred to the Council of Representatives on

10

1 December. The budget, whose ratification is pending,
is designed to sustain the momentum of economic
improvement in the country.
We are aware that the issue of human rights in
Iraq and the problem of internally displaced Iraqis and
refugees in neighbouring and other countries are issues
of concern to the international community. My
Government continues to take proactive measures to
seriously address those issues. In respect to internally
displaced persons and refugees, the improvement in the
security situation and the work of the Iraqi
Government to provide an appropriate environment for
their safe and dignified return have encouraged a
significant number of displaced Iraqis to return
voluntarily. We firmly believe that this is the solution,
as Iraq needs the capacity of all its sons and daughters
to contribute towards building the future of our
country.
In conclusion, Iraq is a country blessed with rich
natural and human resources. However, we continue to
need international cooperation and support to make
progress towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous
future. A democratic and sovereign Iraq that lives in
peace and security with its people and its neighbours
will be a positive factor in the stability and security of
our region. It would also reflect positively on Iraq’s
Arab and international relations as Iraq contributes as a
responsible and rightful member of the international
community.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya, Vice-President of
Uganda, to take the floor.
Mr. Bukenya (Uganda): I thank Vice President
Biden for organizing and presiding over this high-level
meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing, as well as Foreign Minister of Iraq
Hoshyar Zebari for his good statement.
The resolutions (resolutions 1956 (2010), 1957
(2010) and 1958 (2010)) that the Security Council has
adopted today mark an important milestone for the
future of Iraq. Uganda is convinced that the future
stability and prosperity of Iraq lie in its Government
and people taking full charge of their destiny. These
resolutions affirm Iraq’s readiness to take charge of its
own affairs. Uganda welcomes the progress that Iraq
has achieved in the political, security and economic
spheres in spite of many challenges. That progress
would not have been possible without the extraordinary

10-69415

S/PV.6450

courage and resilience of the Iraqi people, supported by
its international partners. The United States has played
a leading role in those efforts.
We commend Iraq’s political leaders and people
for overcoming their political differences and reaching
an inclusive power-sharing agreement in November. It
is important that the Prime Minister form a
Government expeditiously. That will facilitate national
cohesion and foster democratic governance, which are
essential for a stable, secure and prosperous Iraq.
The outcomes of today’s meeting are a clear
testimony that Iraq’s international standing has been
restored to the status it had prior to the adoption of
resolution 661 (1990). Uganda salutes Iraq for the
progress made in putting in place successor
arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq and
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board,
which are expected to take effect by 31 December. It is
important that the Government work steadfastly to
resolve all outstanding issues during this last extension
period.
With regard to weapons of mass destruction,
Uganda welcomes the progress made by Iraq in
complying with non-proliferation and disarmament
commitments. We encourage Iraq to ratify the
additional protocol to its Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty.
We commend the Government of Iraq for its
commitment to finalizing arrangements to provide
appropriate funding for indemnification under the oilfor-food programme.
There are still challenges that Iraq will need to
address, with the support of the international
community, in order to consolidate the gains made so
far. They include dealing with the threats posed by
insecurity and terrorist attacks, ensuring the safe return
of refugees and the resettlement of internally displaced
persons and resolving disputed internal boundaries.
It is essential for Iraqi leaders to work together in
addressing the remaining challenges to ensure political
stability, peace and development. We welcome the
improved bilateral and regional relations because we
are convinced that the stability of Iraq is linked to
regional stability. We therefore encourage Iraq to
strengthen cooperation with neighbouring countries

10-69415

based on a mutual desire to respond to security
concerns and bolster economic cooperation.
The action taken by the Council today highlights
the progress that the Iraqi Government and people are
making in taking responsibility for the stability and
development of their country. Iraq will continue to
require international support. We therefore call upon
development partners and the international community
to align their support with Iraq’s priorities and
programmes, particularly in building the capacities of
its national institutions.
In conclusion, Uganda commends the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for
their important work. We thank the delegation of the
United States for spearheading the drafting of the
resolutions
and
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2010/27) that we have just adopted.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey, to take the floor.
Mr. Davutoğlu (Turkey): Before I start, let me
take a moment to say a couple of words in
remembrance of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. Dick
was a man of peace. He will be remembered for never
taking no for an answer in times of crisis and for
delivering peaceful solutions when all efforts seemed
to have failed. We mourn the loss of a consummate
peacemaker, a real Statesman and a true friend. May
his soul rest in peace.
I would like to thank the United States for
convening this timely meeting, as well as VicePresident Biden, the Secretary-General and Foreign
Minister Zebari for their important remarks.
We meet today in a time of global transformation.
History teaches us that periods of profound change are
almost always difficult and rarely tidy. The current one
is no exception. There are strong undercurrents of
change, and a new dynamism can be felt, in
international affairs. As the prevailing realities of this
new era slowly but surely emerge, the need to promote
and bring about the restoration of regional and
international order becomes ever more evident. During
its tenure on the Security Council, while dealing with
the many issues on the Council’s agenda, Turkey’s
efforts have also been aimed at addressing that
overarching imperative.

11

S/PV.6450

Today, the urgency to restore order is valid for
our region, as it is in the case of Iraq. After decades of
turmoil, strife and suffering, Iraq today is at a critical
moment. The prospects are bright and the challenges
are many. By seizing the opportunity and making the
right choices, Iraqi leaders now have it within their
grasp to make a clean break from the infighting of the
past and to shape a prosperous future together.
Following much turbulence, today we are very happy
to see that Iraqis from all segments of society are once
again coming together and working with each other
through peaceful and democratic means to take charge
of their common destiny and collectively chart a future
devoid of oppression, fear or want. That is the future
for Iraq and for our region.
In moving forward, fundamental political
concepts, such as inclusiveness, national reconciliation
and partnership, will continue to be crucial building
blocks to ensure a political framework within which
democracy, human rights and the rule of law
irreversibly take root. On the other hand, gradually
altering both the perception and the language of
politics in Iraq, from those based on ethnicity and
religion to ones defined by political parties and blocs,
is also vital. Such a major change will not only help to
do away with entrenched divisive rhetoric but also to
realign the political discourse along more democratic
lines.
The legislative elections of 7 March were a
historic milestone for democratization and stabilization
efforts in Iraq. Despite the risk of terror attacks, the
Iraqi people participated in the elections with a high
turnout. The determination of the Iraqi people in
assuming ownership of their country through the
expression of their democratic will was commendable.
We believe that the election results clearly represented
the sovereign will of the Iraqi people and their hope for
a unified, strong and democratic Iraq.
Here, I should pause and applaud the role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in supporting the conduct of free and fair elections. I
take this opportunity to reiterate our full support for the
Secretary-General, the United Nations and UNAMI,
and in particular Special Representative Melkert. I
commend them for their courage and excellent work.
The results of the elections also demonstrate the
voters’ desire for a democratic process in Iraq. In order
to make political progress irreversible in that country,

12

it is crucial that the manifest desire for a broad-based
Government is heeded by all Iraqi leaders. Turkey
welcomes the development that Iraqi political groups
reached an accord on furthering the political process.
We sincerely regret that Iraq had to go through an
eight-month political impasse, which delayed the
implementation of long-needed economic and
comprehensive reconstruction programmes that should
aim to mitigate the daily problems of the Iraqi people.
It is now crucial to complete the political process
with the establishment of a representative, democratic
and effective national partnership Government, based
on the power-sharing arrangements, with full
adherence to the political agreement that the Iraqi
political groups reached. We hope that such a
Government can soon be formed.
During that delicate process, I visited Erbil and
Baghdad on 7 November. We, along with all the Iraqi
leaders, worked very hard in encouraging all political
leaders to reconcile their differences and agree on a
deal that would expedite the political process. We
welcomed the convening of the Iraqi Parliament four
days after my visit and following the national
reconciliation meetings in Erbil.
Turkey’s stance vis-à-vis the Iraqi political
process has always been very clear. Turkey believes
that all segments of Iraqi society should participate in
the political process and in an inclusive political
dialogue to pursue a concerted effort to find fair, just
and consensus solutions to the challenges that Iraq
faces in the political, security, economic and social
fields and to achieve national reconciliation.
There are important challenges awaiting the next
Government in Iraq, such as the census, disputed
internal boundaries, hydrocarbon and revenue-sharing
laws, constitutional amendments, et cetera. Those
challenges cut across all segments of Iraqi society
regardless of their ethnic, sectarian or religious
affiliations. The peaceful resolution of such issues
therefore requires national consensus. Securing
consensus on all those issues will probably not be easy.
However, such solutions will have a greater chance of
implementation once they are achieved. Turkey stands
committed to working with the new Iraqi Government
to help in any way that it can to address the challenges
awaiting the Iraqi people.
We are also pleased to observe that violence has
decreased significantly in recent months. Iraq’s

10-69415

S/PV.6450

national security forces are assuming control over the
country’s overall security. Efforts to rebuild the
security forces should be bolstered. The international
community should continue to support Iraq in
increasing the competency of its people in uniform. We
continue to train, advise and mentor members of the
Iraqi security forces.
After two major wars and years of instability, Iraq
has come a long way in rejoining the family of nations
as a fully sovereign and responsible partner. The
achievements to date are both impressive and
encouraging. It is therefore now high time for Iraq to
return fully to the fold. In that context, we
wholeheartedly welcome the resolutions adopted here
today (resolutions 1956 (2010), 1957 (2010) and 1958
(2010)). By virtue of those important resolutions, Iraq
is taking major strides forward in becoming a nation
that is no longer bound under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter. To be sure, there are still some
tasks to be fulfilled. In particular, issues such as the
border demarcation, compensation, missing persons
and archives pertaining to Saddam’s invasion of
Kuwait still need to be addressed by Iraq. We are
confident that Iraq will be more than up to the
challenge.
Turkey, for its part, is happy to be able to cast its
vote to recognize the achievements of Iraq and lift the
limitations that have been in place for too long.
This is a major accomplishment for Iraq, and we
commend the Iraqi Government for the hard work it
has done so far. In moving forward, we are confident
that the new Iraqi Government will continue to take the
necessary actions with a view to cementing stability
within its borders and working together with regional
and international partners to further enhance security
on a large scale.
By virtue of this meeting, the decisions we have
taken, the presidential statement we adopted and our
national statements, we are essentially closing a sad
but temporary chapter in Iraq’s history and ushering in
a fresh, new era that is full of hope and promise. In a
sense, we are witnessing Iraq’s rightful return to its
former status as a full-fledged sovereign member of the
family of nations. This is a welcome development that
must be applauded.
Turkey, as the only neighbour of Iraq at this table,
has strong and deep-rooted bonds with Iraq. Our
destinies have always been intertwined and they will

10-69415

forever continue to be. To be sure, there are still many
challenges ahead for Iraq and for our region, which has
already seen enough war and strife. But Iraq will not be
alone to meet them.
Iraq’s independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity are vital for the stability and
security of our region and the international community.
Therefore, we are glad to observe Iraq’s great strides in
becoming a secure, stable, prosperous and democratic
country.
Turkey will continue to support Iraq through
thick and thin. The alternative is not only
inconceivable, it is also realistically not possible.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Sven Alkalaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to take the floor.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing and presiding over
this very important high-level meeting dedicated to the
future of Iraq and the Iraqi people. Let me express also
my thanks to the Secretary-General for his valuable
report (S/2010/606) and his briefing on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), as well
as to the Foreign Minister of Iraq, Minister Zebari, for
his statement.
Speaking on today’s topic — Iraq — as an
example of positive achievement in bringing peace and
stability, allow me to commend the role of the United
Nations, the United States and the wider international
community in bringing peace and stability to my
country, Bosnia and Herzegovina, in 1995. Today
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, and our remembering today
the early demise of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke —
the architect of the Dayton-Paris Peace accords — is a
part of Ambassador Holbrooke’s legacy.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is pleased to
acknowledge the significant improvement of the
overall situation in Iraq. Iraqi institutions have been
strengthened despite all the difficulties and challenges
on the ground. The recent transfer of ownership of the
security sector to the Iraqi forces is a very important
achievement for the further enhancement of Iraq’s
sovereignty and stability.
However, we remain deeply concerned about the
security situation in Iraq and strongly condemn the
recent coordinated deadly attacks targeting different

13

S/PV.6450

religious communities. We want to emphasize that only
by providing security to every Iraqi citizen can one
guarantee the security of specific communities.
Therefore, Bosnia and Herzegovina urges all actors in
Iraq, national and international, to redouble their
efforts in the protection of civilians and to bring the
perpetrators of those horrible crimes to justice.
This year, with the assistance of the international
community, Iraq organized successful elections, and
we are pleased to learn that Iraqi political leaders are
very close to forming their Government, which will
provide new and encouraging momentum. Genuine
progress in that regard will help put the country on the
path towards democracy, national reconciliation and
long-term stability, as well as towards the improvement
of the security situation.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Iraqi people for its strength, its courage
and its firm determination to build a democratic and
unified country despite the immense suffering and huge
losses they have experienced over these past two
decades.
Iraq has accomplished significant progress in
resolving outstanding Chapter VII issues by fulfilling
obligations mandated by the Security Council’s
resolutions. To that end, Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the lifting of some of the restrictions imposed
by the Security Council, which will permit Iraq to
restore the international standing it held before
resolution 661 (1990). We base our support on the
following achievements.
First, Iraq has fulfilled all its obligations in
compliance with the international non-proliferation and
disarmament regimes. It has also signed the Hague
Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation,
acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention and
joined the Executive Council of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and has signed
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Furthermore, despite the current political vacuum
due to the process of Government formation, Iraq
voluntary accepted to apply the additional protocol to
the comprehensive safeguards agreement pending its
ratification. We strongly believe that the council of
representatives will set a high priority on its
ratification. We welcome the adoption of resolution
1957 (2010), removing outstanding restrictions relating

14

to disarmament imposed on Iraq in resolutions 687
(1991) and 707 (1991).
Second, we commend the efforts and the strong
commitment of the Iraqi Government in regard to
closing remaining contracts in the oil-for-food
programme. The Iraqi Government has achieved great
progress in that regard, and we support resolution 1958
(2010), terminating the residual activities of the oilfor-food programme. This includes the transfer of all
remaining funds from the Iraqi account created
pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003) to the Development
Fund for Iraq (DFI), with the exception of the funds to
be used by the United Nations for residual activities of
the programme and for the provision of
indemnification to the United Nations.
Third, we welcome the progress towards the
establishment of successor arrangements for the
transition of the DFI. We also reiterate our support for
the extension of the DFI and the related legal
immunities. We therefore consider that the requirement
established in paragraph 21 of resolution 1483 (2003)
should continue to apply. We will support decisions
that will help to ensure that oil revenue will continue to
be used transparently in an accountable manner, and in
the interest and for the benefit of the Iraqi people.
Furthermore, those positive developments
represent an encouraging environment for further
cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait. Bosnia and
Herzegovina expects that Iraq’s fulfilment of its
outstanding obligations — mandated by the Security
Council resolutions related to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti citizens and third-country nationals, Kuwaiti
archives and Iraq’s land and maritime boundaries —
will be priorities for both countries in the coming
period. In that connection, we strongly welcome
regional dialogue and the development of relationships
between Iraq and States in the region based on
partnership and cooperation.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina is very sensitive
to the issue of refugees and internally displaced
persons and would like to reiterate the importance of
resolving that issue. We call upon UNAMI to redouble
its efforts, in coordination with the Iraqi Government,
to help create conditions conducive to safe, dignified
and, in particular, sustainable refugee returns.
The continued strengthening of democratic
institutions, national reconciliation, the protection of
human rights and the creation of new job opportunities

10-69415

S/PV.6450

will certainly help the process of returns, but they will
also reinforce Iraqi institutions and the whole of Iraqi
society. UNAMI has an essential role in advising,
supporting and assisting the Iraqi people and the
Government to achieve that goal.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly supports the work of
UNAMI and highly commends the dedication of
UNAMI staff to bringing stability and prosperity to the
Iraqi people.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Paul Toungui, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Gabon, to take the floor.
Mr. Toungui (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to congratulate the United States of
America for its initiative in organizing this debate on
the situation in Iraq. Your presence among us,
Mr. Vice-President, is proof of the importance that the
American authorities attach to the future of Iraq at a
time when that country is involved in a process of
national reconciliation and transfer of responsibilities
in the security and economic fields.
I also welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral among us here today and thank him for his
informative briefing. I would also like to congratulate
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, for his valuable statement.
The situation in Iraq has been marked in recent
years by notable progress, with which my country is
pleased, especially regarding the strengthening of the
political and institutional process, the definitive
transfer of responsibilities in the economic and security
fields, and cooperation with other States in the region.
Regarding the first point, I would like to welcome
the efforts deployed by the Government and people of
Iraq to promote the political and institutional
reconstruction of their country, despite the recurrent
violence that has affected it in recent years. Those
efforts have been particularly perceptible in the field of
democracy and national reconciliation.
Regarding the evolution of democracy in Iraq, we
are pleased to see that the recent elections were marked
by a significant turnout of Iraqis, especially women,
who have shown by their massive involvement their
firm will to contribute to the future of Iraq.

10-69415

Regarding national reconciliation, my country
welcomes the agreement completed by the political
parties on power-sharing, which has led to consensus
on Mr. Nuri al-Maliki continuing as Prime Minister.
We are convinced that current consultations will soon
lead to the formation of a new Government.
The legitimate ambition expressed by the Iraqi
authorities to see their country once again play a role
within the community of nations will only be effective
if Iraq assumes its full responsibilities as a sovereign
State. It is in that perspective that we welcomed the
decision to draw down United States troops from Iraq
on 31 August 2010. This decision has allowed for the
transfer of responsibility for security in Iraq to the
Iraqi armed forces.
With regard to Iraq’s finances, my country is
pleased to see the Council’s adoption today of a
resolution that extends the mandate of the United
Nations with regard to the Development Fund for Iraq.
We hope that that specific arrangement will enable Iraq
to take responsibility for the management of those
funds on the basis of the plan of action that it presented
to the Council last April.
Concerning the termination of the oil-for-food
programme, my country encourages the Iraqi
Government to fulfil its commitments with regard to
settling the letters of credit.
The future of a stable and prosperous Iraq also
means strengthening its cooperation with countries in
the region. We therefore support the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to normalize its relations with its
neighbours, including Kuwait.
I could not conclude without paying homage to
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for the
central role it has played in the country. The gains
achieved in the evolution of the situation of Iraq should
be maintained. My country exhorts the international
community to continue its efforts at solidarity with
regard to the Government and the people of Iraq.
Accordingly, I am pleased that the newly adopted
Presidential Statement (PRST/2010/27) takes those
serious concerns into account.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Vera Machado, the Vice-Minister of Political
Affairs of the Ministry of External Relations of Brazil,
to take the floor.

15

S/PV.6450

Mrs. Machado (Brazil): Mr. President, I thank
you for your statement and Secretary-General Ban Kimoon and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, for their
statements.
I would also like to commend the United States
for its initiative in convening this meeting during its
presidency, allowing Council members to take stock
and update their assessment of the situation in Iraq. We
are also grateful for the invitation extended to
Brazilian Vice-President Alencar, who was not able to
attend.
In recent years, Iraq has made progress towards
strengthening democracy and the rule of law and
improving security and public order. We commend the
Iraqi Government for successfully holding elections
last March, and we welcome the agreement last month
to form a national partnership Government. It is our
hope that all political leaders will be able to ensure a
broad-based Government of national unity. We
recognize the important role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has had in that
process, and we expect that it will continue to assist the
Government of Iraq, as is foreseen in the Mission’s
mandate. Those achievements will help address the
continued fragility of the security situation in Iraq and
counter recurrent attempts to destabilize that multiethnic and religiously diverse country.
Brazil strongly condemns all forms of violence,
including terrorism. Terrorism must be combated in all
its forms. However, terrorism cannot be fought at the
expense of the respect for human rights.
We must recognize the courage and resilience
with which the Iraqi people have faced so much
suffering since 2003. Brazil deplores all human rights
abuses and the thousands of civilian deaths in Iraq.
Nevertheless, we believe in the capacity of Iraqis to
enable their country to emerge as a stable, peaceful and
prosperous nation.
I join other members of this Council in
recognizing the importance of Iraq achieving an
international status equal to that which it held prior to
the adoption of resolution 661 (1990). That view is
consistent with the progress made so far by the country
in several areas, especially in security and
governmental institutions.

16

It is also consistent with Brazil’s long-standing
position that the future of Iraq should be determined by
the Iraqis themselves. We have always affirmed the
need to fully respect the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq. Brazil profoundly
deplored the 2003 military action, in particular the fact
that it took place without the express authorization of
this Council. After the intervention took place, the
Brazilian Government made clear its view that the
Iraqi people should take full control of their own
affairs at the earliest possible date.
The painful experience of the war in Iraq should
lead the international community to reflect on the
importance of upholding the United Nations Charter
when military action and the resort to Chapter VII
measures are being contemplated.
The time is ripe for bringing a formal end to
Chapter VII measures, such as the oil-for-food
programme and the restrictions on civilian nuclear
activities, thus paving the way for the normalization of
Iraq’s relations with the United Nations and its full
reintegration in the family of nations.
Concerning the issue of disarmament, we
welcome Iraq’s accession to relevant multilateral
treaties, in particular the Chemical Weapons
Convention, as well as its decision to seek
parliamentary approval for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The normalization of Iraq’s relations with all its
neighbours, in particular Kuwait, is essential. Security
in Iraq is one of the pillars of stability in the Middle
East. Once security is sufficiently improved, we must
also ensure a safe return for Iraqi refugees. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, over 4.7 million Iraqis have been
displaced since March 2003.
We welcome the appointment earlier this year of
the first Iraqi Ambassador to Kuwait since 1990 and
other promising bilateral initiatives. More needs to be
done regarding the repatriation and return of all
Kuwaiti missing persons or their remains. There are
also issues not fully resolved with respect to the
demarcation of the Kuwaiti border, along with other
matters relating to property and compensation. We note
the commitment previously expressed by the Iraqi
Government in that regard and expect the new
Government to act accordingly.

10-69415

S/PV.6450

The international community must continue to
support Iraq at this crucial moment for its
independence, sovereignty and stability. Brazil will
soon be the first Latin American country to reopen its
embassy in Baghdad, and we look forward to
strengthening our cooperation with Iraq, which testifies
to our continued commitment to the stability of the
region and to the progress of the country. Brazil
reiterates its confidence in the Iraqi people and
Government and their capacity to build a prosperous,
peaceful and democratic country.
The United Nations can continue to contribute in
facilitating dialogue, defusing tensions and bridging
differences among Iraqi political forces. We reiterate
our full support to UNAMI and Special Representative
Ad Melkert. The Mission, however, will only be able to
play the role expected by the Council if it has the
adequate means and resources at its disposal, including
for its own safety and security. A special account for
UNAMI should be considered.
Iraq has come a long way towards stability and
prosperity. It must regain its rightful place in the
international community. A stable and united Iraq is in
the long-term interest of peace and security in the
region and beyond. Sustaining Iraq’s stability can only
be achieved through its social and economic
development. We must all learn the lessons of history
and continue to cooperate with Iraq to ensure that such
common goals are achieved.
I cannot conclude my statement without thanking
you, Mr. President, for recalling the extraordinary
character of my countryman Sergio Vieira de Mello
and his contributions to world peace.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Johannes Kyrle, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Austria, to take the floor.
Mr. Kyrle (Austria): Let me, at the outset,
convey to you, Mr. President, our deep condolences
upon the passing of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke.
We will remember him in particular for his
contributions to stability in Southeastern Europe and,
more recently, to peace, security and reconciliation in
Afghanistan.
We would also like to thank the United States for
convening this debate at a crucial moment in Iraq’s
democratic process. I would also like to convey to the
Secretary-General Austria’s deep appreciation for the

10-69415

outstanding commitment of the United
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

Nations

Today also marks a milestone in Iraq’s return to
its rightful status in the international community. As a
member of the Security Council in 1991, Austria voted
for a number of the measures that we have brought to a
close today. Austria supports this step in recognition of
the progress achieved by Iraq and in support of
reconstruction and economic development for the
benefit of its people. Last but not least, we do so as
strong encouragement to the incoming Government to
fulfil outstanding Chapter VII obligations.
In 1991, Austria supported resolutions 687 (1991)
and 707 (1991) on the premise that actions requested
from Iraq represented first steps towards the goal of
establishing a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction and missiles for their delivery in the
Middle East. Today this goal remains as important as
ever. In the light of Iraq’s commitment to nonproliferation and disarmament, we hope that the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty will be
ratified soon and that the welcome provisional
application of the additional protocol to the
International Atomic Energy Agency Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement will be followed by its
ratification at the earliest possible moment. We also
expect the destruction of chemical weapons to continue
at a determined pace.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
liberation of Kuwait, we look to Iraq for fresh resolve
to forge a new partnership with Kuwait built on mutual
trust. As border security is paramount to confidence
between neighbours, any shadow of a doubt with
regard to acceptance of the finality and inviolability of
common borders should be avoided. We therefore
encourage Iraq to reaffirm its commitment to
resolution 833 (1993) with respect to its land and
maritime boundaries. Efforts should also be reinforced
to clarify the fate of missing persons, as well as to
settle the issue of the restitution of Kuwait’s national
archives.
Much has been said today on the fundamental
changes we have witnessed in Iraq, a country whose
pluralistic traditions and proud history as a cradle of
civilizations we admire as much as we ardently support
its secure and prosperous future. At the same time,
pressing challenges remain, which require determined
stewardship.

17

S/PV.6450

As European Union Foreign Ministers underlined
on 22 November, there is an urgent need for the
formation of a stable and representative Government
that is able to rededicate itself to the pursuit of national
reconciliation. Such a Government will be vital to
responding to the aspirations of all Iraqis — regardless
of creed or ethnicity — and to respecting, protecting
and promoting their human rights.
We hope to see renewed resolve by the new
federal Government and the leadership of the Iraqi
Kurdistan region to come to a compromise on their
respective boundaries and competences, as well as on
the distribution of revenues, including from
hydrocarbon resources. Austria encourages the
continuation of UNAMI’s efforts to build trust between
Arab and Kurdish communities in the north, in
particular by facilitating dialogue on the safeguarding
of language rights, the rights of detainees and the
resolution of property disputes.
Austria condemns all indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and reiterates its deep concern about recent
attacks on religious minorities, including Christian and
Muslim places of worship. We urge the Iraqi
Government to bring the perpetrators to justice and
ensure that all Iraqis are adequately protected and able
to practice their faith in peace and dignity.
Austria is also concerned about the reported
incidents of harassment and intimidation against
internally displaced persons in Kirkuk, including
threats of forced eviction.
During our term on the Security Council, we have
witnessed a marked decrease in the level of violence.
We have also seen Iraqi security forces progressively
assuming their responsibilities and the steady
anchoring of democratic processes. Those gains have
been hard-won and often challenged by unspeakable
violence against innocent civilians. Austria will
continue to support the Iraqi people in building a
secure, stable, democratic, unified and prosperous
country beyond our term on the Council. We look
forward to working with the new Iraqi Government
towards this goal, both bilaterally and in the framework
of the European Union.
Finally, I wish to assure the Secretary-General of
Austria’s continued support for the important work of
Special Representative Ad Melkert and his entire team.
Let me also assure him that their safety and security —

18

as that of all United Nations personnel — remains of
the utmost concern to us.
The President: I now invite His Excellency The
Right Honourable Alistair Burt, Parliamentary UnderSecretary of State for the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, to take the floor.
Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): May I, too, begin
by remembering Richard Holbrooke. The House of
Commons foreign affairs session yesterday was led by
Foreign Secretary William Hague, who offered a warm
and heartfelt tribute to Ambassador Holbrooke for
those who had worked so closely with him. His
lifetime of effort on behalf of humankind is honoured
and respected in Westminster and will not be forgotten.
It is an honour to be here and to address the
Security Council today. I am grateful to Vice-President
Biden for chairing this meeting, and for his continuing
determination to support Iraq. The United Kingdom
also commends the sustained efforts and support shown
by the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
for Iraq and the High-Level Coordinator for Kuwait
and their teams.
This is, as has been said, a momentous day for
Iraq and all Iraqis. As we speak, Iraq’s leaders are
working hard to complete the formation of a new
Government. This will shape Iraq’s future. They will
face many challenges once they take up office. But
these challenges should be viewed by Iraq’s elected
leaders as an opportunity, after decades of turmoil, to
chart the right path for Iraq domestically, in the region
and internationally. They should be confident that the
international community will continue to support
efforts to institutionalize the rule of law and to achieve
a successful and peaceful transition to a democratic,
inclusive and prosperous State that meets the needs of
all Iraqis.
I was in Iraq earlier this month and saw for
myself the visible steps Iraq has taken towards
stability, security and prosperity. The successful
elections in March confirmed the political progress that
Iraq had made over the past seven years, and
highlighted the powerful desire of the Iraqi people for
a Government that is accountable, inclusive and
representative.
As you are aware, Mr. President, since March
progress in forming the new Government has been

10-69415

S/PV.6450

difficult. But we are pleased that the end of this
process is in sight. We commend our colleagues there
for sticking to their task, continuing to talk and
working to reduce ongoing difficulties. We urge Iraq’s
leaders to sustain the efforts they have made to ensure
that all Iraqis will have a stake in how their country is
run. The new Government will continue to face the
serious challenges of economic reconstruction, energy
policy, the normalization and regularization of security,
and establishing the place of Iraq in the region.
National reconciliation and building a common
purpose among Iraq’s political groupings will be an
essential part of that, and I urge all of Iraq’s leaders to
come together in a spirit of national solidarity to repair
the bonds between communities that have been so
severely strained. Clearly, the United Nations will
continue to play an important role in bringing that
about, and Britain stands in full support of that work.
But we must also look at the other internal
challenges that the new Iraqi Government will face and
will need to prioritize. Although the long delay in
Government formation has put those efforts on hold, I
praise the United Nations for facilitating Arab-Kurdish
dialogue aimed at discussing revenue sharing, a new
hydrocarbons law and disputed internal boundaries and
areas. I urge, with some confidence, the new
Government of Iraq to address those internal
challenges, as a matter of priority and with United
Nations support where appropriate.
As I saw at first hand during my recent visit,
security in Iraq continues to improve but we are
concerned by the continuing activities of those terrorist
groups who target and threaten innocent civilians,
including vulnerable minorities. The new Iraqi
Government has a responsibility to uphold the values
of justice, equality and tolerance in all cases of
violence against minorities or abuse of human rights.
We welcome Prime Minister Al-Maliki’s call to Iraq’s
armed and security forces to secure mosques, churches
and other places of worship. All of Iraq’s vulnerable
minorities have the right to live, work and worship in
peace and security. We also welcome the investigations
by Iraqi authorities, including a committee in
parliament, into recent attacks, particularly those on
Iraqi Christians, who are a uniquely vulnerable group.
So there have been, and will continue to be, security
challenges, but I believe that progress in the overall
security situation in Iraq is clearly positive.

10-69415

Each of Iraq’s neighbours also has a vital role to
play in ensuring that Iraq is a stable and prosperous
country. Support for the new Government of Iraq from
its neighbours will bring mutual benefits, as Iraq
becomes a key partner with friends in the region. Iraq
has much to offer commercially and can be an
important political ally, as long as it continues to act as
a responsible neighbour. In that vein, we welcome the
normalization of the relationship between Syria and
Iraq earlier this year.
As I said at the outset, today is a momentous day
for Iraq and all Iraqis. We are gathered here primarily
to recognize how different the Iraq of today is from the
one of 1990. We are all keenly aware that Iraq has a
long history with the United Nations and the Security
Council. Happily, today we see the progress that can be
made through hard work, determination and
negotiation, to fulfil the longstanding obligations of the
resolutions adopted by the Council. With that in mind,
however, the international community will now expect
to see concrete progress in Iraq over the coming year,
and to see the Iraqis normalize their relations with
Kuwait, including by taking steps to resolve
outstanding bilateral issues, especially those relating to
the land and maritime border. That will not only allow
the two countries concerned to reap huge benefits, but
will also bring about greater stability for the entire
region.
I conclude by offering our congratulations to the
Government of Iraq and my friend, His Excellency the
Foreign Minister, as well as all Iraqis, on their courage
and commitment to define a new future based on
peace, stability and cooperation. We welcome Iraq’s
return to the international fold. Today, we know that
Iraq is taking significant steps in the right direction in
the face of many considerable challenges. We urge all
of the main political blocs in Iraq to work together to
provide stability for the Iraqi people.
At the beginning of your remarks, Sir, you
referred to a positive future for the people of Iraq,
which they richly deserve. We agree. The United
Kingdom has a historic and enduring relationship with
the people of Iraq, and we remain a steadfast partner
and friend, ready to help build a brighter future for Iraq
as a respected member of the international community.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Hisashi Tokunaga, the Parliamentary Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Japan, to take the floor.

19

S/PV.6450

Mr. Tokunaga (Japan): Allow me at the outset to
join others in expressing our tribute to Ambassador
Holbrooke. He was the Assistant Secretary of State for
East Asian and Pacific Affairs in the late 1970s and had
many friends in Japan. He was very highly regarded.
At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the
Honourable Joseph Biden, Vice-President of the United
States of America, for taking the initiative to convene
this timely meeting.
Today, Iraq is at a critical juncture, just a step
away from establishing a new Government. It is
important for us to express our support at the
ministerial level for the efforts made by the
Government and the people of Iraq to build their nation
and regain an international standing equal to that which
their country held prior to the adoption of resolution
661 (1990). It is also opportune to discuss how the
Security Council should involve itself with Iraq. On
behalf of the Government of Japan, it gives me great
pleasure to share with you our Government’s views on
those issues.
Political stability is very important for the
success of nation-building in Iraq. We hope to see the
early establishment of a Government through an
inclusive process that involves Shiites, Sunnis and
Kurds. The international community should continue to
encourage such efforts.
It is necessary for the new Government in Iraq to
continue its efforts to improve the security situation on
the ground. The withdrawal of the United States
combat troops and the transfer of security
responsibilities to the Iraqi Government in August were
significant steps. The overall security situation in Iraq
has improved since then. Japan welcomes that trend
and hopes it will continue.
The circumstances in Iraq have changed
drastically since 2003, and Japan supports the
aspiration of the Government of Iraq to regain an
international standing equal to that before the first Gulf
war. Iraq has now carried out national elections on its
own and is now a fully democratic nation. In order to
encourage the Iraqis to continue in that course, my
Government fully supports the resolutions and the
presidential statement that we adopted today aimed at
closing, one by one, the issues left over from the days
of the former regime.

20

At the same time, we hope that the new
Government of Iraq will work with the Government of
Kuwait to find solutions to pending issues between the
two countries on the basis of mutual trust.
Japan believes that the international community
should continue to support the peacebuilding efforts in
Iraq under the ownership of the Iraqi people. In that
context, we support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which is playing an
important role in promoting political dialogue, national
reconciliation and humanitarian assistance.
Japan, for its part, has almost completed the
implementation of the $5 billion assistance pledged at
the International Donors Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, held in Madrid in 2003, as well
as debt relief of $6.7 billion. Our assistance has
focused on rebuilding livelihoods and improving
security. Japan intends to continue its assistance aimed
at promoting economic and social development in Iraq.
The Government of Japan will work closely with the
private sector on reconstruction and development
projects in Iraq to support the efforts to rebuild the
country’s economy.
I would like to reiterate the significance of the
Security Council sending a unified message at the
ministerial level to encourage Iraq’s nation-building
efforts and efforts to achieve the international standing
it had before the first Gulf war. Strong support from the
international community is important for Iraq to
continue on its path to stability and development. I
would like to conclude by expressing the determination
of my Government to remain actively engaged in this
endeavour.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Vitaly Churkin, the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation, to take the floor.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting of the Security Council
opens a new chapter in the contemporary history of
Iraq. We have just adopted three resolutions lifting the
majority of Chapter VII restrictions placed on that
country. This was possible as a result of the planned
and joint work of the Iraqi authorities and the
Council’s members.
Iraq is gradually acquiring the international status
it possessed before August 1990. We welcome this
process. The Iraqi people, however, still have a great

10-69415

S/PV.6450

deal to do in order to build a secure, stable, united and
democratic State based on the rule of law and respect
for human rights, living in peace and harmony with its
neighbours.
One cannot but be concerned over the security
situation in Iraq. The terrorist threat has not abated.
Armed groups are active. Ethnic and religious friction
is periodically exacerbated. In such conditions, it is
especially important to ensure a sustainable and
broadly representative political process and the
consistent normalization of relations between Iraq and
other States of the region.
We are pleased that the Iraqi political forces have
achieved agreements on establishing their highest
governing bodies. The urgent challenge now is not to
delay the final formation of the Government, which
must fully reflect the concept of a national partnership.
It is important in practice to ensure the contribution of
political groups and broad segments of the population
in the work of the organs of governing power;
otherwise, attempts to normalize the internal political
situation and to maintain Iraq’s territorial integrity will
be jeopardized.
Having adopted today’s resolutions, we wish to
emphasize once again that Russia’s position on
arrangements for withdrawing from sanctions
restrictions remains consistent and unchanged. We
support the phased review by the Security Council of
the provisions of the relevant resolutions, and the
lifting of those that have been implemented or become
irrelevant. We are prepared to do further work on
assessing the implementation of Iraq’s remaining
obligations on the basis of the mechanism enshrined in
resolution 1859 (2008).
The international community expects Iraq
promptly to ratify the additional protocol to the
safeguards agreement of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty. Work must also be completed on the
harmonization of Iraqi legislation with international
norms regarding export controls and control of dualuse items.
Iraq must settle a number of issues with
neighbouring States. In welcoming the improvement in
relations between Baghdad and Damascus and the
positive momentum in relations with other regional
partners, we call for the unconditional observance of
the Iraq-Kuwait borders, the recognition of the finality

10-69415

of their demarcation, and the clear-cut implementation
of the border infrastructure support project. Iraq needs
to enhance its cooperation with Kuwait towards
achieving qualitative progress in the search for missing
Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti property, including the archives.
That will entail further relevant work by the Iraqi
authorities. The prevailing positive potential must still
be converted into concrete results. Of full and ongoing
use is the work of the High-level Coordinator, whose
mandate is solely humanitarian in nature.
Given all the existing problems on the Iraqi
political scene and the withdrawal of the foreign
military contingent, the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq has increased considerably.
We deeply appreciate the Mission’s humanitarian
efforts in helping to establish Government agencies,
resolving internal border issues, and constructively
involving Iraq’s neighbours in the settlement process.
We look forward to further effective work of the
Mission, within its mandate, with the leaders of the
parliamentary caucuses towards agreeing future
amendments to the country’s Constitution. It is
important to ensure substantive assistance for the
future electoral process and the upcoming census of the
population.
It will be impossible to meet all those challenges
without appropriate security for Mission personnel. A
significant share of the responsibility for that falls to
the Iraqi authorities. For our part, we are prepared to
continue to help Iraq to address the challenges ahead.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Li Baodong, Permanent Representative of China,
to take the floor.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the convening of this high-level
meeting of the Security Council at the initiative of the
United States. I am very pleased to see Vice-President
Biden personally presiding over today’s meeting.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing and Foreign Minister Zebari
for his statement.
I wish to make the following observations. First,
Iraq is about to enter a critical period in its
development. Despite many deep challenges, the
overall situation in Iraq is stabilizing. The international
community has increasing confidence in the future of
Iraq. We commend the Iraqi Government and people

21

S/PV.6450

for their efforts in that regard, and support the Iraqi
people in determining the future of their country
independently. China hopes that all parties in Iraq will
work to promote national reconciliation through
political dialogue and consultation, and strive to form a
new Government expeditiously and to facilitate its
effective functioning.
Secondly, now that a new page has been turned in
Iraq’s history, we understand and support Iraq’s
aspirations to complete reintegration into the
international community. China welcomes the adoption
by the Security Council of resolutions lifting the
sanctions imposed under Chapter VII of the Charter
with respect to weapons of mass destruction, missiles
and civilian nuclear activities, concluding the oil-forfood programme, and providing for appropriate
arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq. It is
our hope that Iraq will take this opportunity to
accelerate its peaceful reconstruction process and in so
doing become an active force in maintaining regional
peace and stability and contributing to common
development, together with other countries.
Thirdly, Iraq is still confronting a complex
security situation. China condemns the recent terrorist
attacks in the country. We support the Government and
people of Iraq in their efforts to preserve national
security. We hope to see a timely strengthening of the
Iraqi security forces to fully assume the responsibility
of safeguarding national security as soon as possible.
China encourages Iraq to enhance dialogue and
cooperation with its neighbours in the region and to
find appropriate solutions to outstanding issues in a
common effort to preserve national peace and stability.
Fourthly, the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) has played an important role in the
political process and peaceful reconstruction of Iraq.
China is grateful to the Mission. We hope to see
continued effective cooperation between UNAMI and
the Government of Iraq. We call on all sides to take
effective measures to provide the secure environment
necessary to UNAMI’s operations and to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and
property.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on

22

having convened this high-level meeting on Iraq. We
are particularly honoured by your personal presiding
over the debate and by the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and Foreign Minister Zebari.
The adoption of three resolutions ending the
restrictions imposed on Iraq under Chapter VII of the
Charter, some dating back 20 years, and the important
message of support contained in the presidential
statement adopted this morning (S/PRST/2010/27)
confirm Iraq’s recovery of its place in the community
of nations, rejecting the threats to peace that
characterized the previous regime.
The road to this point has not been easy.
Mexico’s membership of the Security Council in 20022003 and that which shall conclude in a few days
reflect our deepest commitment to the primacy of the
United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Iraq is a clear example of that. At
the time, like a large majority of United Nations
Member States, Mexico condemned the former Iraq
regime’s failure to comply with its international
disarmament obligations.
In 2002, when tensions over Iraq came to a head,
we supported two-stage Security Council action, in
which the first stage established a revised inspection
regime on the basis of which a decision would be
adopted to determine whether non-compliance was a
threat to international peace and security. Mexico
always advocated the need for multilateral efforts to
reach a comprehensive, peaceful and definitive
solution to the issue. In 2003, after the military
intervention began, it became obvious that we had to
deal with the humanitarian situation and reconstruction
in Iraq, appealing to our sense of collective
responsibility.
The disagreements that prevented the Security
Council from pursuing peaceful disarmament in Iraq
did not invalidate the path of multilateralism. What
happened next showed that the world could not manage
without the United Nations. We therefore stressed the
importance of the Security Council respecting the
territorial integrity of Iraq, preserving the fundamental
right of the Iraqi people to its natural resources,
especially oil, and their inalienable right to decide their
own future. We also showed that the United Nations
had the obligation to promote the protection of the
Iraqi people’s human, political, civil, economic and
social rights, and to contribute to their economic

10-69415

S/PV.6450

development. All those principles are reflected in the
texts we adopted today.

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, in particular for his important statement.

Mexico welcomes the gradual departure of the
international forces from Iraq. It is nevertheless
imperative that the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) continue to assist in consolidating
reconstruction efforts, promote development, ensure
the dignified and safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and strengthen the protection of
ethnic and religious minorities, as well as the most
vulnerable groups within the country.

We all know that Iraq was the cradle of
civilization and history and a source of scientific and
legislative knowledge for the world. It is now
recovering that role, despite the wars of the past three
decades. Today, Iraq, whose Arab, ethnic and religious
diversity makes it strong, is on its way to building a
sovereign, independent and united and democratic
State — the only one in the Middle East with a
Constitution that stipulates a minimum 25 per cent
participation of women in Parliament; that reaffirms
that the nation’s natural resources belong to its people
and should be shared equally and fairly throughout the
country and among all the people; and whose laws
state that all Iraqis have the right to parliamentary
representation.

Iraq has succeeded in holding free, plural and
inclusive elections, which have been a triumph for its
people and for democracy as a whole. That momentum
must not be lost, and work must continue towards
forming a Government that represents all sectors of
society and that can consolidate national reconciliation.
In the area of security, although the situation on
the ground today is fundamentally different from that
of the past, numerous indiscriminate attacks on the
civilian population, Iraqi and foreign armed forces and
United Nations staff continue to be reported. It is
essential that the Iraqi armed forces be able to confront
this significant challenge before the final departure of
all international forces, while guaranteeing respect for
human rights. Finding solutions to the internal border
disputes, the status of Kirkuk and the pending issues
with Kuwait is also essential and must be taken into
account if peace is to be achieved throughout the
country.
Iraq was a test of the Security Council and the
United Nations itself. Today, this dark page of history
has been turned. The consolidation of efforts under
way, with the support of UNAMI and the international
community, will be key to strengthening the standing
of our Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency
Mr.
Nawaf
Salam,
Permanent
Representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
high-level meeting, which attests to Iraq’s pivotal role
in the Arab and Muslim worlds. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his reports and detailed
comments. I would like to praise the role of the
Ministers and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ad Melkert, and thank the

10-69415

Lebanon welcomes the agreement to form a new
Government in Iraq that will incorporate all political
viewpoints, strengthen national reconciliation and
resolve the pending political issues in a manner
conducive to preserving its unity and territorial
integrity. We support the efforts of the Iraqi people to
consolidate security and stability in their country and
call on States in the region and the international
community to support them in those efforts.
Lebanon strongly condemns all suicide attacks
and acts of aggression against Iraqis, especially recent
faith-based assaults. We know that Iraqis will confront
such attacks, and we welcome the growing capacity of
the Iraqi armed forces to assume responsibility for
security following the complete drawdown of United
States troops. The measures undertaken by Iraq so far,
as noted in the letter from the Foreign Minister (see
S/2010/567), demonstrate its commitment to the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
confirm that Iraq is not a threat to international peace
and security. The Council’s decision today to lift
sanctions is proof of that.
Iraq’s efforts to honour its commitments and
obligations under resolution 1905 (2009), despite
difficult circumstances, are worthy of praise. The
transitional Government now has a successor to the
Development Fund for Iraq, which is further proof that
it can protect Iraqi assets, despite the delay caused by
the slow formation of the new Government. The
Security Council understands Iraq’s circumstances and
has extended the mandate for another six months. We

23

S/PV.6450

fully support the reconstruction of Iraq, and call for the
cancellation or mitigation of its foreign debt. We
respect Iraq’s commitment to implementing resolution
1483 (2003) regarding the United Nations
Compensation Fund and its acknowledgement of that
commitment. We also welcome Iraq’s efforts to resolve
the pending issues concerning the oil-for-food
programme, which contributed to our decision today to
terminate the programme completely.
Progress on Chapter VII mandates concerning
Iraq and Kuwait has injected new momentum into the
process and brought Iraq back into the international
fold. We welcome the cooperation of the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait in uncovering the fate of
disappeared Kuwaiti persons and prisoners, Kuwaiti
property and the Kuwaiti national archives, and
welcome the positive atmosphere in that regard. We
invite the Iraqi Government to honour its obligations
with respect to the Iraq-Kuwait border, in line with
resolution 833 (1993). We praise the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, and welcome
today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/27)
confirming that the international community trusts in
Iraq and its future.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Gérard Araud, Permanent Representative of France.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Vice President Biden, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Minister Zebari for their statements. I should like
to join in the tribute paid to Ambassador Holbrooke. As
a European, I would like in particular to recall the role
he played in the conclusion of the Dayton Accords,
which put an end to the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
France is pleased to take part in this meeting,
which marks progress in the process of restoring Iraq’s
full sovereignty. Today’s meeting is an opportunity for
France and the entire Council to welcome the progress
made by Iraq since the fall of Saddam Hussein’s
regime. At all levels — political, institutional and
security — the Republic of Iraq is on track towards
completing its reconstruction and normalization, and
its vigorous economy is the best proof of this.
Recent political developments in Iraq give hope
for full normalization at the institutional level. We
hope that the agreement reached among all the
country’s political groups on 11 November to form a
national partnership Government will swiftly come to
fruition. We trust that the spirit of responsibility

24

demonstrated by Iraqi leaders to overcome their
differences will prevail so as to resolve the final
outstanding issues ahead of the effective formation of
the Government. In so doing, the political stakeholders
in Iraq have chosen to take up the challenges of Iraq’s
future, and France wishes to lend them its full support.
On the path towards normalization, France chose
to stand alongside the people and the leaders of Iraq.
This commitment is above all political, reflected by
many high-level visits. Both the President of the
Republic and the Prime Minister visited Baghdad over
the past two years. This commitment is accompanied
by firm engagement on the ground and the resumption
of our bilateral cooperation in the areas of defence,
industry, agriculture, domestic security, governance,
environment and culture.
This support is also reflected at the international
level. France supports the legitimate quest of the Iraqi
authorities to restore the country to the international
status it enjoyed prior to August 1990. Resolution 1859
(2008), which France sponsored in 2008, identified that
objective. Two years later, while Iraq has made
considerable preparatory efforts, the Council has today
closed three components of the measures taken under
Chapter VII. France welcomes this.
With respect first of all to restrictions related to
weapons of mass destruction and civilian nuclear
activities, the Council indicated on 26 February its
readiness to lift those restrictions once the necessary
measures had been taken. Today, we welcome Iraq’s
efforts in this area. The lifting of sanctions with respect
to disarmament and non-proliferation — highly
symbolic in view of past mistakes — will allow the
new Iraq to access technologies hitherto banned. On
the basis of this restored trust, we call on the Iraqi
authorities to pursue their efforts by assuming
international obligations that will mark the end of these
painful episodes in its history.
France also welcomes the fact that Iraq is
regaining full sovereignty over its oil revenues. The
closure of the oil-for-food programme is a symbol of
the normalization of Iraq’s international status and a
return to its sovereignty. While France was unable to
support this text today, it was clearly not because the
resolution’s objective is in the least problematic. The
objective of allowing Iraq to regain its full sovereignty
over the funds retained under the oil-for-food
programme is obviously one that France fully supports.

10-69415

S/PV.6450

The modalities for implementation in respect of
this very technically complex issue remain pending.
Intensive but belated discussions were undertaken to
draft a text that all Council members, including France,
could support. Unfortunately, these discussions did not
result in a text within the necessary time frame that
included all the guarantees France considers to be
necessary to end the activities under this programme.
France hopes that, in the future, its requests will be
thoroughly taken into account when the agreements
provided under the resolution are implemented.
Iraq must be able to emerge from Chapter VII. In
this regard, France welcomes the progress made by the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait in resolving the
remaining issues between them, and urges them to
strengthen their cooperation. To this end, it is crucial
for Iraq to honour without further delay its final
obligations under Council resolutions.
As it has done until now, France will continue to
support the efforts of the Government of Iraq, in
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, to take all
measures enabling Iraq to once again become a nation
that is fully integrated into its regional and
international environment. The United Nations, be it
the Security Council or the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq — whose courageous work on the
ground we wish to salute — will continue to support
this objective.
France wishes to reiterate its willingness to help
these two friendly countries, if so requested, to lay the
groundwork for ambitious cooperation. We hope that
this next stage will hasten the regional integration
process to which Iraq has successfully committed and
which we support.
The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. U. Joy Ogwu, Permanent Representative of
Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, and your delegation on organizing this highlevel meeting to review the journey in Iraq. I would
also like to acknowledge the remarkable effort of the
Secretary-General on behalf of our Organization, and
welcome him to this meeting.
Today’s Iraq bears little resemblance to its image
at the outset of Operation Iraqi Freedom. A new Iraq
has emerged, with a fledgling democratic system
supported by the presence of international combat

10-69415

troops and the United Nations. It is evident that Iraq
enjoys stability and self-governance to a far greater
extent than it did a decade ago. In spite of the phased
withdrawal of the bulk of international combat troops
from its territory, it appears that the country is
regaining its strength and operational capacity.
After months of political stalemate following the
elections of 7 March, it is heartwarming that Iraq’s
political leaders have finally agreed on the formation
of a new, inclusive partnership Government. Nigeria is
encouraged by this demonstration of unity in the
country, involving the Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish
communities. This, we believe, is a long-awaited and
important milestone.
The path to true and lasting political stability and
economic independence is a difficult one for any
nation, not least for a country emerging from war. By
way of example, the provision of basic infrastructure
and services presents ongoing challenges to the Iraqi
people. We are therefore pleased to note the planned
implementation of a five-year National Development
Plan. We are convinced that the implementation of the
Plan within the context of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework will help to
address the current gaps in infrastructure and service
provision.
Given the recent history of Iraq, there is a
continuing imperative for international support and
partnership. We welcome the extension by six months
of the immunity granted to the Development Fund for
Iraq (DFI) to support the Government’s efforts in
setting up the successor mechanism to the
DFI/International Advisory and Monitoring Board. We
particularly welcome the adoption of the resolutions
bringing the oil-for-food programme to an end and
removing Iraq from numerous Chapter VII measures.
While we are encouraged by the progress that has
been made in terms of Iraq’s relationships with its
neighbours, we hope that these positive measures will
help to reinforce the confidence of the international
community in Iraq’s Government and its people. To
ensure sustainable outcomes, it remains important that
Iraq’s Government work assiduously to fulfil all of its
remaining obligations under Chapter VII, including
those owed in respect of Kuwait. We are pleased that
this morning His Excellency Mr. Zebari totally
reaffirmed Iraq’s commitment to meeting its
international obligations.

25

S/PV.6450

The security situation in Iraq remains dire. We
commend the Iraqi forces for assuming leadership of
their security following the end of the United States
combat operation in August 2009. However, insurgent
elements continue to feature in Iraqi life, causing
mayhem with targeted terror attacks against innocent
civilians,
including
minorities
and
religious
sanctuaries. Such incidents are a grim reminder of the
fragility of the security situation and the obligation to
guarantee the rights of minorities, particularly
Christians and other vulnerable persons.
The Government of Iraq should thoroughly
investigate and hold accountable the persons behind all
acts of violence in the country. In cooperation with the
Iraqi authorities, we must bring to justice all
perpetrators, organizers, financers and sponsors of
terrorism who seek to dismantle the hard-won
democracy in Iraq.
Iraq’s future hangs in the balance for several
reasons, not least of which the fragile security
situation. Although 50,000 United States troops will
remain in Iraq, their role will be essentially
non-combat. This shift will create a window of
vulnerability in the country’s security framework that
extremists could possibly exploit. The Council should
therefore lend its weight to further operational and
logistical training and counter-terrorism support for
Iraq’s security sector. Now more than ever, Iraq needs
the backing of the international community in order

26

that we might declare with one voice that no terrorist
act can reverse the path towards peace, democracy and
reconstruction in Iraq — a peace representing the
shared aspiration of the people and Government of Iraq
and the international community.
The President: I thank all the participants for
their contribution to this meeting. My thanks go
particularly to my fellow Vice President, the SecretaryGeneral, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and
other representatives.
I would like to close by saying a few final
remarks in my national capacity.
Today was an important milestone for the
Government of Iraq and the people of Iraq in their
ongoing effort to leave behind their troubled past and
embrace a much brighter future. The three resolutions
we adopted bring an end to the burdensome remnants
of the dark era of Saddam Hussein, lifting restrictions
relating to weapons of mass destruction and civilian
nuclear activities and terminating both the oil-for-food
programme and the Development Fund for Iraq.
It is a rare honour, I say to my colleagues, to be
able to preside over this gathering. I thank them all
once more for their efforts in support of this process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

10-69415
