S/2017/733

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 August 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the forty-second submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to United Nations
agencies and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as from
other Syrian and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 July 2017.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points in July 2017
(1) Several international initiatives carried out in July were focused on reducing
violence and supporting a political solution for the Syrian Arab Republic, including
the seventh round of formal intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, held from 10 to 14 July. A
ceasefire initiative for an area including parts of Qunaytirah, Dar‘a and Suwayda’
Governorates in the south-western part of the country reportedly resulted in a
significant drop in violence.
(2) In Raqqah city, heavy clashes, shelling and air strikes continued to result in
significant civilian casualties and injuries. Between 20,000 and 50,000 people
remain trapped in the city. The number of people displaced since 1 April across the
north-eastern part of the country by the offensive continued to grow, surpassing
200,000.

17-14297 (E)

250817

*1714297*

S/2017/733

(3) An eruption of fighting between non-State armed opposition groups in Idlib
Governorate resulted in civilian casualties. The Bab al-Hawa border crossing area,
used for United Nations cross-border operations from Turkey, was temporarily
closed for a week owing to the fighting; humanitarian partners’ operations were also
affected.
(4) On 30 July, a United Nations inter-agency cross-line operation was the first
convoy ever to reach the besieged town of Nashabiyah, in eastern Ghutah. The
convoy provided 7,200 people with assistance. Five other inter -agency convoys
were dispatched in July, reaching some 190,500 people in hard-to-reach locations.
(5) The removal of medical supplies from humanitarian convoys remains a major
challenge, with supplies sufficient for more than 66,884 treatments removed in July.

3.
My Special Envoy for Syria convened the seventh round of formal intra-Syrian
talks in Geneva from 10 to 14 July. The High Negotiations Committee, along with
the Cairo and Moscow platforms, coalesced around common positions regarding the
principles underpinning the talks and the schedule and process for the drafting of a
new constitution. The Government also continued to discuss the aforementioned
principles and to focus on counter-terrorism issues. During the intra-Syrian talks,
my Special Envoy also met with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Boar d and sought its
insights and inputs. Immediately following the seventh round of talks, between
17 and 27 July, the Office of the Special Envoy conducted a series of simultaneous
regional consultations in Beirut; Gaziantep, Turkey; and Amman that involved more
than 120 actors and networks from Syrian civil society. Those consultations were
conducted to strengthen the inclusivity and continuity of the Civil Society Support
Room as well as its impact on the Geneva political process.
4.
Prior to the formal intra-Syrian talks, my Special Envoy, along with technical
experts from his Office, attended the 4-5 July meeting of the Astana guarantors —
Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey — of the 4 May 2017
memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas. During this round, the
guarantors were not able to reach final agreement on the operational and technical
modalities for all de-escalation areas. There was some continued discussion on
confidence-building measures on humanitarian demining and on the issue of
detainees and missing persons.
5.
The Presidents of the Russian Federation and the United States of America,
following coordination with Jordan, announced a separate ceasefire agreement for
the south-western area of the Syrian Arab Republic at the summit of the Group of 20
held in Hamburg, Germany, on 7 and 8 July. The ceasefire went into effect on 11
July, and since then the southern governorates of Dar‘a, Qunaytirah and Suwayda’
have witnessed a significant reduction in hostilities. In Dar‘a city, only occasional
ground-based strikes were reported after the ceasefire, with no air strikes reported in
the city itself. Other areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups in the
governorate were hit by sporadic air strikes. Intermittent ground-based strikes and
remote-controlled explosive devices also detonated on roadsides during the month,
reportedly killing civilians.

2/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

Figure I
Key dates in July 2017
10 July
Seventh round of
formal intra-Syrian
talks commence

First ever inter-agency
convoy to Nashabiyah

Box 2
Dayr al-Zawr
(1) The area of Dayr al-Zawr city under governmental control has been besieged
by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) since July 2014, which has deprived
up to 93,500 people of regular access to food and medicine. During the reporting
period, the situation of civilians in the besieged parts of Dayr al -Zawr city remained
precarious. Clashes between Syrian government forces and ISIL and affiliated
groups continued in various parts of the city, with high toll of civilian deaths and
injuries reported.
(2) The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate throughout the month.
Reports indicate that ISIL militants blocked the water supply to the besieged
neighbourhoods during part of July. Civilians depend on untreated river wa ter for
regular consumption, which has reportedly led to illness. Civilians are also reported
to be affected by highly inflated food prices, with limited food items available in the
markets.
(3) Basic medical equipment is scarce, and medical treatment is limited to
informal emergency care. During the last week of July, 150 new cases of kidney
disease alone were registered in the hospital in Dayr al-Zawr city. The hospital,
however, does not have sufficient medicine to care for all patients. Many civilian s
have been injured as a result of artillery and aerial shelling, yet trauma care is
scarce. Meanwhile, ISIL continues to prevent even severely ill patients from seeking
medical treatment in areas outside of its control.
(4) As the besieged areas of the city cannot be accessed by land owing to the ISIL
presence, the World Food Programme (WFP) completed 287 airdrops between April
2016 and the end of July 2017, dispatching approximately 5,570 metric tons of WFP
mixed food commodities and other humanitarian supplies, including nutritional
items, medical kits and basic relief items, on behalf of other humanitarian actors.
The Syrian Arab Red Crescent ensures the distribution of the airdropped assistance.

6.
Rif Dimashq Governorate continued to witness high levels of violence in July.
The earlier part of the month saw an escalation of conflict in eastern Ghutah.
Clashes persisted in Duma and the surrounding areas, such as Hawsh al -Dawahira,
as well as the south-eastern part of eastern Ghutah. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) also received increased reports of
strikes and ground combat around residential areas of Ayn Tarma, Hazzah, Zamalka
and Irbin. A ceasefire covering the besieged area of eastern Ghutah, initiated by the
Russian Federation and brokered in Cairo, was declared on 22 July. This led to an
17-14297

3/20

S/2017/733

overall decline in hostilities during the last week of the month, although air strikes
and ground-based strikes continued in Ayn Tarma and the adjacent area of Jawbar in
Damascus, as well as in Government-controlled parts of Damascus. In the western
part of eastern Ghutah, government forces and their allies reportedly carried out
near-daily ground-based strikes and air strikes on areas under the control of the
armed opposition group Rahman Corps, which was not a p arty to the 22 July
agreement.
7.
July saw a major escalation in fighting in Idlib between the Jabhat Fath
al-Sham-led Levant Liberation Organization and the non-State armed opposition
group Ahrar al-Sham. Although no air strikes were reported in July, civilian
casualties were reported, owing to the significant increase in clashes between Ahrar
al-Sham and the Levant Liberation Organization. Those clashes ended wit h the
Levant Liberation Organization emerging as the dominant force in Idlib after
seizing positions from Ahrar al-Sham along the Turkish border, including the Bab
al-Hawa crossing, used by the United Nations and its partners to deliver
humanitarian assistance. The border area was closed from 19 to 25 July;
additionally, some humanitarian activities within the governorate were also affected
by insecurity. After the Levant Liberation Organization had withdrawn from Bab
al-Hawa and handed it back to the local civilian administration, the crossing
reopened for humanitarian shipments.
8.
Elsewhere in Idlib Governorate, the situation in the besieged towns of Fu ‘ah
and Kafraya remained precarious. Following a period of four months since the last
inter-agency convoy to the towns, food stocks in Fu‘ah and Kafraya are nearly
depleted. The prices of available basic food items are several times higher than in
the rest of the governorate. Non-State armed opposition groups and Jabhat Fath
al-Sham have surrounded the besieged villages of Fu‘ah and Kafraya since April
2015, imposing strict restrictions on humanitarian access, commercial traffic and
freedom of movement.
9.
The situation in Aleppo Governorate remained relatively calm during July.
Aleppo city, which remains within the range of non-State armed opposition groups,
was hit by sporadic ground-based fire. Non-State armed opposition groups clashed
with the Kurdish People’s Protection Units (Yekîneyên Parastina Gel, or YPG)
around Jarabulus city in eastern rural Aleppo in early July. There were also reports
of ground-based shelling between YPG and forces on the Turkish side of the border.
10. Multiple national and international actors remained involved in the conduct of
military operations against ISIL in Raqqah Governorate, with an escalation of air
strikes and ground-based strikes on Raqqah city and elsewhere in the governorate.
From 1 April through the end of July, more than 200,000 people were displaced
owing to these operations. The Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the United
States-led international counter-ISIL coalition and led by YPG, surrounded the city
of Raqqah and, on 6 July, broke through the old city walls. By the end of July, the
Syrian Democratic Forces reportedly controlled more than half of the city.
11. The humanitarian situation inside Raqqah city remains dire, with the
population (numbering between 20,000 and 50,000) reportedly facing deteriorating
humanitarian, health, living and security conditions. Civilian movement in and out
of the city is undertaken at great personal risk as a result of the presence of mines,
as well as shelling, sniper activities and air strikes. Those who flee face a number of
protection risks, including punitive measures put in place by ISIL, threats posed by
mine contamination, family separation, and forced recruitment at checkpoints, as
well as the confiscation of identification documents and restricted movement upon
entering displacement camps.

4/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

12. The United States Department of Defense publicly confirmed that in July t he
United States-led coalition had conducted 194 strikes against ISIL targets in Dayr
al-Zawr Governorate — 70 in and around ISIL-controlled Albu Kamal city and 124
in Dayr al-Zawr city. The situation in Dayr al-Zawr city remained extremely
difficult, as outlined in box 2. Meanwhile, government forces and their allies
advanced through the desert area near the Iraqi border towards Albu Kamal city.
13. OHCHR documented frequent air strikes and ground -based strikes on ISILcontrolled areas in the southern part of Hasakah Governorate in July, some of which
reportedly led to civilian casualties. ISIL fighters also carried out periodic ground based strikes on surrounding Kurdish-controlled areas. The United States
Department of Defense publicly confirmed that, in July, the United States-led
coalition had conducted 45 strikes against ISIL targets in the governorate, nearly all
of them in Shaddadah.
14. Despite efforts of the United Nations and its partners at all levels, the situation
of internally displaced persons in the Kurdish Self-Administration-run Hawl and
Mabruk camps, in Hasakah Governorate, remains dire and is exacerbated by the
high summer temperatures. The management procedures and administrative
requirements of the Kurdish Self-Administration with regard to internally displaced
persons pose significant additional challenges to the internally displaced, including
the confiscation of identification documents and the restriction of movement.
Furthermore, access restrictions on humanitarian operations (of the United Nations,
international non-governmental organizations and national non-governmental
organizations) applied by the Kurdish Self-Administration in the north-eastern part
of the Syrian Arab Republic limit the humanitarian response. Those restrictions
include bureaucratic impediments and the suspension of regular programme
activities in Hasakah in an effort to direct aid to specific areas.
15. The government offensive aimed at retaking ISIL-held areas in rural eastern
Hama continued in July, with air strikes and ground-based strikes in support of
ground forces in and around the ISIL-held area of Uqayribat. On 5 July, the
Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation indicated that long-range strategic
bombers had launched cruise missiles at ISIL warehouses of weapons and
ammunition as well as at a command post on the border of Hama and Homs
Governorates. The Ministry also publicly stated on 24 July that some 20,000 square
kilometres had been “liberated” over the previous two months and that Russian
aerospace forces had conducted 2,010 combat flights for that purpose, with 5,850 air
attacks carried out against command posts, weapons and ammunition warehouses,
and bases and training camps. It added that the most important ISIL facilities had
been hit with sea-launched cruise missiles and air-launched missiles, and concluded
that any efforts by terrorists and their supporters to disrupt reconciliation would be
suppressed and operations aimed at liberating territory of the Syrian Arab Republic
from ISIL and the Levant Liberation Organization would continue.
16. The United States Department of Defense publicly confirmed that in July, the
United States-led international counter-ISIL coalition had carried out 885 strikes
against ISIL targets in the governorates of Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah, Homs and
Raqqah. Of those strikes, 645 were reported to have been in Raqqah city and, as
stated above, 194 in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate.
17. On 23 July, a joint operation was launched by Hizbullah and the Syrian army
along the Syrian-Lebanese border. On 26 July, a local agreement between Hizbullah
and the Levant Liberation Organization was reached in order to evacuate fighters
and civilians from nearby refugee camps to Idlib. By the end of the reporting period,
some 5,288 people had reached parts of Idlib and Aleppo Governorates. The United
Nations was neither part of the negotiations nor part of the implementation of the
17-14297

5/20

S/2017/733

agreement. The new influx adds to the already precarious situation in Idlib, where
1 million internally displaced persons are living, many forced to relocate from
formerly besieged areas in the Syrian Arab Republic as a result of previous such
agreements. Humanitarian partners continue to provide multisectoral assistance to
those in need in Idlib.
18. Along the Syrian-Jordanian border, at the area known as the berm,
approximately 50,000 people remain in a precarious protection, security and
humanitarian situation. The establishment of a corridor controlled by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic north of the berm h as reportedly resulted
in restrictions on the movement of both people and goods to the berm from within
the Syrian Arab Republic. As the Government consolidates its control in the east,
military action has intensified, heightening levels of insecurity. Uni ted Nations
agencies have expressed concerns regarding the safety and security of the civilian
population in the settlements of Hadalat and Rukban at the berm. The last cycle of
distribution of humanitarian assistance was halted on 15 June. The United Nati ons
has urgently sought a resumption of the distribution of aid and the authorization to
register the population as a means of further facilitating the delivery of assistance.
19. In a note verbale dated 2 August, the Permanent Mission of the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic provided OHCHR with a table of figures concerning
alleged civilian casualties in the governorates of Aleppo, Damascus, Dar ‘a, Dayr
al-Zawr, Hama, Hasakah, Homs, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah, Rif Dimashq, Suwayda’ and
Qunaytirah resulting from the firing of mortars and the use of improvised explosive
devices by various “terrorist” armed groups for the period from 22 June to 21 July.
The note indicated that 81 civilians had reportedly been killed, among them
15 children, and 489 civilians reportedly injured, including 89 children.
20. OHCHR received reports of the use of toxic agents in several instances,
including on 1 and 14 July in Zamalka and Ayn Tarma, eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq
Governorate, although the Office was unable to independently corroborate those
allegations.
Protection
21. The United Nations and health partners received credible reports of eight
attacks that had affected health-care facilities and personnel in July, of which two
have been verified and six are currently being verified. One verified incident
affected a hospital in Kafr Nubl city, Idlib Governorate, which sustained minor
damage owing to an attack with a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device near
the hospital. No casualties were reported. A second verified in cident occurred
during a vaccination campaign in the town of Mayadin, Dayr al -Zawr Governorate.
A vehicle operated by medical personnel administering the vaccinations was hit by
an air strike and was destroyed.
22. In July, the United Nations verified the following attacks occurring in June: on
15 June in the afternoon, an empty school in Sousa, Albu Kamal, Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate, allegedly used by ISIL, was targeted by four rockets, resulting in
damage to its walls; and on 27 June, more than 40 rockets r eportedly impacted the
Kashif neighbourhood of Dar‘a city, causing extensive damage to the building of a
nearby kindergarten. The number of casualties among children and educational
personnel is not yet known.

6/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

Humanitarian access
Box 3
Key points for humanitarian access
(1) Some 13.5 million people in the Syrian Arab Republic remain in need of
humanitarian assistance, including 6.3 million internally displaced persons. An
estimated 3.9 million people live in hard-to-reach areas, and another 540,000 people
are currently besieged in 11 areas. Seven areas are besieged by the Government
(80 per cent of the total besieged population), one by both the Government and
non-State armed opposition groups (1 per cent of the total besieged population), two
by non-State armed opposition groups (2 per cent of the total besieged population)
and one by ISIL (17 per cent of the total besieged population).
(2) On 30 July, with a convoy to Nashabiyah, eastern Ghutah, reaching 7,200
people, one besieged area was reached through United Nations inter-agency crossline operations during the reporting period, beyond Dayr al -Zawr (reached through
airdrops; see box 2, para. 4). Five more inter-agency convoys were dispatched
during the reporting period, reaching some 190,500 people in the following hard-toreach locations: (a) Yalda, Babila, Bayt Saham and Tadamun; (b) Hulah;
(c) Harbinafsih; (d) Dar al-Kabirah, Ghantu and Tayr Ma‘lah; and (e) Dayr
Khabiyah and Zakiyah. This brings the total number of people reached under the
June-July plan to 400,000, or 37 per cent of the overall number of people to whom
access was originally requested under the plan. Moreover, on 27 July a Syrian Arab
Red Crescent convoy delivered United Nations and International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) medical and nutritional items for 35,000 people in need in
besieged eastern Ghutah in Rif Dimashq Governorate through Duma city, with a
second batch of supplies planned to be delivered in the near future. The removal of
medical supplies from the convoys remains a major challenge, with supplies
sufficient for more than 66,884 treatments removed in July.
(3) Owing to security concerns on the Syrian side of the border, Turkish
authorities temporarily closed the Bab al-Hawa crossing point to commercial traffic
from 19 to 25 July. New cross-border regulations have been set up by the Turkish
border administration to restrict goods that can be shipped commercially. However,
the United Nations has been informed that these new regulations would not affect
United Nations humanitarian shipments. During the reporting period, approximately
700,000 people were provided food assistance by the United Nations and partners
through cross-border operations from Turkey and Jordan.
(4) Land deliveries to the north-eastern governorates through the Aleppo-Manbij
route proceeded in a regular manner throughout the reporting period. In July,
through those deliveries, the United Nations provided food assistance to 193,950
people in Hasakah Governorate, to 165,500 people in Raqqah Governorate and to
15,000 people in north-western Dayr al-Zawr Governorate. The United Nations also
reached Mansurah, in Rif Dimashq Governorate, and Thawrah city (Tabaqah) and
rural areas north of Raqqah city, in Raqqah Governorate, for the first time in three
years, delivering food for some 30,000 people.
(5) Since late 2016, approximately 290,000 people have returned to the formerly
besieged areas of Aleppo city; they are now receiving monthly United Nations food
rations as well as fresh bread on a daily basis. In addition, the United Nations
provided 56.7 metric tons of fortified wheat flour to the hard -to-reach
neighbourhood of Shaykh Maqsud, enabling daily bread distributions for 18,900
people.

17-14297

7/20

S/2017/733

23. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions imposed on the
movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict. In particular, access
for the United Nations and its partners to those living in besieged and hard -to-reach
locations remained a critical concern. The United Nations inter -agency convoy plan
for June and July requested access to 27 locations, including besieged areas, seeking
to reach 1,081,900 people. In July, however, only six inter -agency convoys could be
dispatched to besieged and hard-to-reach locations, reaching only 197,700 of the
227,250 people in need in those areas (see table 3 for a list of inter-agency convoys
sent in July). In addition, a Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy delivered United
Nations and ICRC medical and nutritional items for people in need in besieged
eastern Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq Governorate, through Duma city, reaching 35,000
people. The total number of people reached under the June -July plan is 400,000, or
37 per cent of the overall number of people to whom access was originally
requested under the plan. That number does not include convoys carrying supplies
delivered by other humanitarian actors.
24. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries
during the reporting period to locations across the country. WFP submitted 1,741
official requests to obtain facilitation letters for the transport of food assistance to
targeted locations across the country, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees submitted 44 facilitation letters for the movement of
core relief items and livelihood kits, the large majority of which were approved.
Moreover, both international and Syrian non-governmental organizations continued
to undertake needs assessments and provide support (including medical,
educational, psychosocial and protection services) in besieged and hard -to-reach
locations, under extremely challenging circumstances and in accordance with
humanitarian principles.
Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of
people reached each month in besieged areas, including through airdrops to
Dayr al-Zawr city
100%

80%

60%

Convoys
40%

Airdrops
20%

0%

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

25. The majority of United Nations agencies and partners continue to be unable to
gain access to populations in need in areas of the country controlled by ISIL, as all
plans to deliver assistance to those areas have been suspended as a result of
continued security concerns. This has prevented the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners from reaching Raqqah city and most of Dayr al -Zawr

8/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

Governorate, as well as pockets of northern rural Aleppo and north -western rural
Hama.
26. Land deliveries to the north-eastern governorates through the Aleppo-Manbij
route proceeded in a regular manner in July. Through those deliveries, the United
Nations provided food assistance to 193,950 people in Hasakah Governorate, to
165,500 people in Raqqah Governorate and to 15,000 peopl e in north-western Dayr
al-Zawr Governorate. Furthermore, starting in July, fortified wheat flour was added
to the food rations provided in the north-eastern governorates. Wheat flour had not
been included previously owing to the limited cargo capacity of the airlifts. Since
the resumption of land deliveries in June, a total of 105 trucks have arrived at the
WFP warehouse in Qamishli, enabling the United Nations to provide assistance to
374,450 people in hard-to-reach areas of Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr
Governorates.
Figure III
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations by land, July 2017

197,700 people reached

XL
People reached in

People reached in

People reached in

hard-to-reach areas

besieged areas

priority cross-

190,500

7,200

line areas

0

4.6 %

1.3 %

1 11

People reached in
hard-to-reach areas

People reached in
besieged areas

Besieged
locations reached

Cross-line convoys

Airlifts

Airdrops

5

0

22

of

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas:
3.9 million
Number
540,000

of

people

in

besieged

areas:

27. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for more than 66,884
treatments were removed from convoys in July by the Syrian authorities. Details
regarding the treatments and supplies removed are shown in table 1. Additional
medical supplies were scheduled to be delivered as part of the bimonthly
inter-agency convoy plan, but only five inter-agency convoys were able to proceed
during the June-July cycle. Furthermore, since the beginning of 2017 the World
Health Organization (WHO) has submitted 10 single-agency requests to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to gain access to 14 locations in six
governorates. The Government has approved five requests, four remain unanswere d
and one has been rejected.
17-14297

9/20

S/2017/733

Table 1
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys in July 2017
Location

No. of treatments

Types of supplies

Yalda, Babila, Bayt
Saham and Tadamun

1 160

Oxygen concentrators, sterilizers, X-ray devices,
surgical cautery device for operating rooms, adult
ventilators, ultrasound systems and medicines
including analgesics, pneumonia kits,
anti-hypertensives and anti-epileptic medication

Hulah and Harbinafsih

10 751

Minor surgery instruments, ultrasound systems,
electrocardiograph instruments and medicines
including antihypertensives, anti-epileptic medication,
carbamazepine, pneumonia kits, anti-asthma
medication, salbutamol, beclomethasone dipropionate
and inter-agency emergency health kits 2011. The
number of midwifery kits was reduced from 8 to 2 by
the Ministry of Health in the approval letter, and
quantities of povidone-iodine solution were also
reduced. Resuscitation kits were not approved for
loading.

Dayr Khabiyah and
Zakiyah

1 230

Reduced quantity of anti-asthma medicine

Dar al-Kabirah, Ghantu
and Tayr Ma ‘lah

6 789

Minor-surgery instruments, ultrasound systems,
electrocardiograph instruments, medicines including
antihypertensives, anti-epileptic medication,
carbamazepine, pneumonia kits, anti-asthma
medication, salbutamol, beclomethasone dipropionate
and inter-agency emergency health kits 2011. The
number of midwifery kits was reduced from 2 to 1.
Resuscitation kits were not approved for loading.

Duma

46 954

Medical equipment, including defibrillators, adult
ventilators, ultrasound systems, portable X-ray
machines, autoclave, flame photometer and incubators

Humanitarian response
28. In July, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach
millions of people in need through all available modalities, including from within
the Syrian Arab Republic, in collaboration with the Syrian authorities, and across its
borders (see table 2). In addition to the United Nations and partne rs,
non-governmental organizations continued to deliver life-saving assistance to
people in need. The Government continued to provide basic services both in areas
under its control and in many beyond its control. Local authorities in many areas
controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to provide services
when possible.
Table 2
Number of people reached by the United Nations and other organizations,
July 2017
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

73 230

International Organization for Migration

45 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund

10/20

Number of people reached

130 740
>2 100 000

17-14297

S/2017/733
Organization

Number of people reached

United Nations Development Programme

125 396

United Nations Population Fund

250 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

>250 000

World Food Programme

>4 200 0000

World Health Organization

860 371

29. During the reporting period, cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey
and Jordan into the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (see figure IV
for details). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notifi ed the Syrian
authorities in advance of each shipment, including its content, destination and
number of beneficiaries. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian
Arab Republic continued its operations, monitoring 391 trucks used in 17 convoys
by six United Nations entities in July, confirming the humanitarian nature of each
and notifying the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Mechanism continued
to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners per
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, July 2017
(Thousands)

1,239

662

115
0
Education

Nutrition

20
Water,
sanitation and
hygiene

64
Non-food
items

Food

Health

30. In July, WFP carried out 22 high-altitude airdrop rotations to Dayr al-Zawr
city, airdropping food rations sufficient for 50,445 people as well as supplies from
other humanitarian actors. Since the start of airdrop rotations in April 2016, the
United Nations has completed 287 rotations, dispatching more than 5,570 metric
tons of food assistance and supplies to those in need in Dayr al -Zawr city.

17-14297

11/20

S/2017/733

Table 3
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, July 2017
Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

Type of
assistance

51 000

35 000

Multisectoral

89 000

89 000

Date

Location

7 July

Yalda, Babila, Bayt Saham and
Tadamun

15 July

Hulah

15 July

Harbinafsih

22 July

Dar al-Kabirah, Ghantu and Tayr
Ma ‘lah

37 750

33 500

Multisectoral

29 July

Dayr Khabiyah and Zakiyah

33 000

33 000

Multisectoral

30 July

Nashabiyah

16 500

7 200

Multisectoral

Multisectoral
Multisectoral

31. During the reporting period, WHO, the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) and their implementing partners delivered more than 860,000 medical
treatments in 10 governorates, including nearly 480,000 treatments across borders
and 245,000 treatments across conflict lines. WHO and UNICEF also supported
150,000 consultations and distributed 46 pieces of medical equipment to various
hospitals and clinics. Moreover, a polio vaccination campaign was conducted in
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate from 22 to 26 July, reaching a total of 259,958 children
(aged 0-59 months), or 79 per cent of the total target.
32. On 23 July, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) started the third round of cash assistance for
2017, benefiting up to 418,000 Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Moreover, the first round of food distributions was carried out from 19 February to
30 July, with more than 367,000 Palestine refugees receiving food parcels.
33. Throughout July, the Russian Federation sent to the United Nations
information bulletins from the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
Visas and registrations
34. A total of 81 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in July. Of these, 33 were approve d, 2
were denied and 46 remain pending. Of the new visa applications submitted in
earlier months, a further 19 were approved in July and 18 remain pending. A total of
60 United Nations visa renewal requests were submitted in July, of which 53 were
approved and 7 remain pending. A further 16 visa renewals submitted in earlier
months were also approved, while 3 remain pending.
35. A total of 22 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to opera te in the country. Four
international non-governmental organizations are in the process of completing their
registrations. Those organizations continued to face a series of administrative
hurdles and restrictions that affected their ability to operate, inc luding in gaining
permission to undertake independent needs assessments. The Syrian authorities
have, however, initiated dialogue with the United Nations and international
non-governmental organizations to streamline and simplify registration and
operational procedures for international non-governmental organizations. Moreover,

12/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

some 217 national non-governmental organizations are authorized by the Syrian
Arab Republic to partner with the United Nations.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
36. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 21 staff members of the United Nations, of whom 17 were UNRWA
staff members, 65 were staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, and 8 were staff members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent
Society. In addition, many staff members of international and national
non-governmental organizations are reported to have been killed.
37. A total of 28 United Nations staff members, including 1 UNDP staff member
and 27 UNRWA staff members, are detained or missing.

III. Observations
38. As demonstrated by concurrent developments in Astana, Amman and Cairo
during the reporting period, there remain persistent and determined efforts to reduce
violence through de-escalation agreements. I welcome those efforts, and I hope that
the Astana guarantors will soon reach an agreement on the finalization of
operational and technical modalities for all de-escalation areas, particularly Idlib, as
well as for the promotion of confidence-building measures regarding the issue of
detainees, abductees and missing persons and humanitarian demining.
39. I urge all parties to work together to consolidate and expand these ceasefires. I
wish to stress that any reduction in hostilities must also generate concrete results for
safe, unimpeded and sustained freedom of movement and humanitarian access.
Access to areas identified for de-escalation, and to many other areas across the
Syrian Arab Republic where needs are great, remains far short of what is required.
Millions of civilians remain without critical life-saving assistance. In particular, in
areas where there has been a decrease in fighting, there is no excuse for any side to
restrict access.
40. Furthermore, while acknowledging that de-escalation areas can contribute to
the reduction of violence, I urge all countries to preserve the right of all Syrians to
seek asylum and enjoy refugee protection until conditions are conducive to return in
safety and in dignity. I wish to reiterate that any evacuation of civilians must be
safe, voluntary and to a place of their choosing. Additionally, de -escalation areas
are, and must remain, interim in nature. The United Nations stands ready to provide
technical support and expertise to assist with interim arrangements for
de-escalation, as they have the potential to produce the stability required to support
an inclusive political process guided by resolution 2254 (2015).
41. Air and ground-based strikes continue to kill, injure and displace civilians in
significant numbers. As ISIL continues to lose ground, concerns about the civilian
population remaining under its control increase, while at the same time those who
are able to flee the fighting face difficult and worsening conditions in camps. I
reiterate my call that all those conducting military operations in the Syrian Arab
Republic must do so in compliance with international humanitarian law, in
particular as it relates to the protection of civilians, who have already lost so much
in this terrible conflict, and to civilian infrastructure.
42. I remain deeply troubled by the ongoing allegations of serious violations and
abuses of international human rights law and serious violations of international
humanitarian law that are having a grave impact on the lives of civilians across the
country. I call on all parties to end indiscriminate attacks. I call again for the
17-14297

13/20

S/2017/733

situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International Criminal
Court. I also call on the Syrian Arab Republic to grant access to the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic. In addition, I call
on all Member States, all parties to the conflict, civil society and the United Nations
system as a whole to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
43. Ultimately, the political process is the only course that can provide a lasting
solution to the Syrian conflict and bring an end to the tremendous suffering of the
Syrian people. I am encouraged that the seventh ro und of formal intra-Syrian talks
in Geneva generated incremental and positive progress. I strongly concur with my
Special Envoy on the need to emphasize the importance of continuing to engage
with civil society to support the inclusive mediation approach o f the United Nations.
In support of my Special Envoy, I welcome the constructive engagement by the
High Negotiations Committee and the Cairo and Moscow platforms during the
seventh round of talks in Geneva, and I urge them to continue to consolidate
common positions. I urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
constructively formulate concrete thinking with regard to the four baskets, namely,
governance issues, constitutional issues, electoral issues, and issues related to
counter-terrorism, security and confidence-building measures, particularly the
schedule and process for drafting a new constitution, so that substantive and direct
political negotiations can occur during the forthcoming eighth round of intra -Syrian
talks.
44. While the political process continues, those affected by the conflict continue to
suffer. With 13.5 million people living in the Syrian Arab Republic and another 5
million having fled their country, the needs are staggering. The United Nations will
continue to focus on meeting their needs, providing life-saving assistance and
advocating their protection, but meaningful progress will require that all parties
respect their obligations under international humanitarian and international human
rights law.

14/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
a
July 2017
Rif Dimashq and Damascus Governorates
• On 1 July, an aid worker was reportedly killed by a strike in Zamalka while
providing humanitarian support to those wounded.
• On 2 July, a car bomb detonated in the Bab Tuma neighbourhood of
Damascus, allegedly causing the deaths of at least six civilians and wounding
an unknown number.
• On 2 July, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the vicinity of a mosque
in opposition-controlled Duma, reportedly resulting in the death of a male
civilian.
• On 3 July, a male civilian was allegedly killed by a sniper in the residential
area of Khams in Zamalka.
• On 3 July, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in Duma, reportedly
killing two male civilians.
• On 4 July at approximately 8.30 a.m., air strikes hit a residential area of Duma
and allegedly killed two civilians — a woman and a child — and injured at
least five others, including two children.
• On 5 July, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Duma and reportedly
killed a male civilian.
• On 10 July at approximately 12 p.m., ground -based strikes hit a market in Kafr
Batna and allegedly resulted in the death of two male civilians and the injury
of an unknown number of others, including children.
• On 12 July at approximately 9.30 a.m., ground-based strikes hit a residential
area of Duma and reportedly killed two civilians, including a woman and a
7-month-old girl.
• On 13 July in the morning, air strikes hit residential areas of Hazzah and Ayn
Tarma and allegedly killed two civilians — one of them a woman — in
Hazzah and two civilians in Ayn Tarma.
• On 13 July, air strikes hit a residential area of Hazzah, reportedly resulting in
the deaths of two male civilians.
• On 14 July, eight successive air strikes hit a residential area in Ayn Tarma,
impacting a residential building that collapsed and allegedly killing at least 14
civilians, including 5 women, 2 boys and a girl, and wounding more than 30
others. Among the 14 reportedly killed was a family of three — both parents
and their daughter. A woman injured during the incident died on 17 July.
__________________
a

17-14297

In line with resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on the ground, and
the incidents during the month that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The information is
provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International
Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing of all violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights law that
took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
15/20

S/2017/733

• On 14 July in the morning, air strikes hit a residential area in Zamalka and
reportedly killed one male civilian.
• On 14 July, air strikes hit a nearby residential area in Hazzah and allegedly
caused the death of a male civilian and the injury of several others.
• On 16 July at approximately 11.30 a.m., two successive air strikes hit the main
road between Hazzah and Zamalka, impacting a residential area in Hazzah and
reportedly killing a boy and a girl.
• On 17 July, a civilian woman was allegedly killed when air strikes hit
residential areas of Duma.
• On 17 July, air strikes hit a building in a residential area of Jawbar, reportedly
resulting in the death of two civilians — a wife and her husband.
• On July 24 at approximately 11.30 p.m., seven air strikes hit residential areas
of Irbin and allegedly killed at least seven civilians, including a woman and
three girls, in addition to causing numerous casualties, including among
children.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 1 July at approximately 12.40 p.m., air strikes hit the town of Muzayrib,
reportedly resulting in the death of three civilians — two children and an
internally displaced man.
• On 1 July, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the oppositioncontrolled town of Da‘il, allegedly killing a civilian woman.
• On 1 July, ground-based strikes hit the Government-controlled neighbourhood
of Kashif in Dar‘a city, reportedly causing the death of a married civilian
couple.
• On 2 July at approximately 1 a.m., ground-based strikes hit residential areas
on the western side of opposition-controlled Sanamayn, allegedly causing the
death of a civilian.
• On 2 July at approximately 2 p.m., ground-based strikes hit oppositioncontrolled Tafas city, allegedly killing one male civilian.
• On 3 July, ground-based strikes hit the opposition-controlled town of Izra’,
reportedly killing one civilian woman and wounding several other civilians.
• On 5 July, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the Governmentcontrolled neighbourhood of Dar‘a al-Mahattah in Dar‘a city, allegedly killing
one child.
• On 6 July, ground-based strikes hit the opposition-controlled neighbourhood of
Mukhayyam Dar‘a, reportedly resulting in the death of a displaced girl from
Qunaytirah.
• On 7 July, air strikes hit the opposition-controlled village of Ayb, allegedly
killing a displaced child and injuring an unknown number of other civilians.
• Between 9 and 12 July, Jaish Khalid ibn al-Walid fighters in Shajarah
reportedly killed a 21-year-old civilian man from Tasil and a 52-year-old
civilian man from Saham al-Jawlan, accusing them of “blasphemy.” Both men
were held for several days by the group’s “Hisbah” religious police force
before being killed.

16/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

Aleppo Governorate
• On 10 July, an 18-year-old female civilian was allegedly shot and killed by a
sniper in the village of Tuways, south of the town of Mare’ in northern rural
Aleppo.
• On 8 July, a 6-year-old girl was reportedly killed when she was shot in the
head near the Basil roundabout area of the Furqan neighbourhood of western
Aleppo city.
• On 10 July, ground-based strikes hit Masjid Ar-Rahman Street in the New
Aleppo neighbourhood of western Aleppo city, allegedly killing at least five
civilians and injuring nine others.
Idlib Governorate
• On 4 July, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded next to a
secondary school in Qunaytirah, in western rural Idlib, reportedly killing three
male teachers and four boys.
• On 12 July, ground-based strikes hit rural areas in the vicinity of Jisr al-Shughur
city, allegedly injuring four civilians, including a woman and a child.
• On 14 July, two ground-based strikes hit the villages of Safyan and Bdama, on
the western side of Jisr al-Shughur, and reportedly killed one male civilian.
• On 19 July, more than 1,500 residents of Saraqib reportedly took part in a
protest demanding the cessation of fighting between the Levant Liberation
Organization and Ahrar al-Sham and the departure of Levant Liberation
Organization fighters from the city. When demonstrators reached the vicinity
of the court, around 15 Levant Liberation Organization fighters in a pickup
truck reportedly fired in the air to disperse protesters before opening fire on
the crowd, allegedly killing one journalist and severely injuring two civilians.
Hama Governorate
• On 2 July, air strikes hit the village of Rasm al-Awabid, 5 km south of
Uqayribat, and reportedly killed two boys, one 16 years of age and the other
17.
• On 21 July at approximately 7 p.m., four ground -based strikes hit the western
part of Salamiyah city, allegedly killing 6 civilians, including 3 women, and
injuring at least 30 civilians, including women and children. Two civilians
reportedly died on 22 July as a result of their injuries.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 8 July, at least 5 civilians, 3 of them children, were reportedly killed and
14 others injured when air strikes hit a residential area of ISIL -controlled
Mayadin city in the eastern rural area of the governorate.
• On 8 July, ground-based strikes hit the Government-controlled Harabish
neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr city, allegedly striking close to civilian houses
and killing two children under the age of 9. In its public reporting, the United
States-led coalition stated that on that day four strikes had been carried out
near Dayr al-Zawr, destroying 11 ISIL oil stills, 3 oil-still tanks, 3 oil tankers,
an oil separator tank, a wellhead and a pump jack.
• On 10 July, air strikes hit residential areas of Mayadin city and reportedly
killed 7 civilians and injured 19 others.

17-14297

17/20

S/2017/733

• On 11 July, three children and their mother were allegedly killed when ground based strikes hit a residential area in the Harabish neighbourhood of Dayr
al-Zawr city. The United States-led coalition publicly reported that on that day
it had carried out six strikes on or near Dayr al-Zawr, engaging an ISIL tactical
unit and destroying 25 ISIL oil refinement stills, 5 oil tanks and 10 oil tankers.
• On 11 July, air strikes hit residential areas in ISIL -controlled Albu Kamal city
on the eastern side of the governorate and reportedly killed at least 8 civilians,
including 3 women and 1 child, and injured at least 27 others, including
women and children. The air strikes also reportedly destroyed four civilian
houses and several shops in the area. The United States-led coalition publicly
reported that on that day it had conducted five strikes near Albu Kamal,
destroying 19 ISIL oil refinement stills, 4 weapons caches, 4 wellheads, 3
separator tanks and a storage tank.
• On 12 July, three civilians were allegedly killed and two others were injured
when ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the Government-controlled
Qusur neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr city. In its public reporting, the United
States-led coalition stated that on that day it had carried out six strikes near
Dayr al-Zawr and destroyed 16 ISIL oil stills, 10 oil barrels, 6 oil trucks and 2
wellheads.
• On 15 July, air strikes hit residential areas of Mayadin city near Khawlah bint
al-Azwar School and reportedly killed at least five civilians, including t wo
children. The school was not damaged, but the houses in its vicinity were.
• On 16 July, air strikes hit residential areas in the Mayadin area in the eastern
rural part of the governorate, allegedly killing no fewer than 11 civilians,
including 4 children, and injuring at least 4 other civilians.
• On 19 July, air strikes hit residential areas in the town of Ayyash and
reportedly killed 15 civilians, including 4 women and 2 children, and injured
18 other civilians.
• On 24 July, air strikes hit residential areas at the end of Arba‘in Street in
Mayadin city and allegedly killed at least five civilians and injured several
others.
• On 26 July, air strikes hit three areas in Albu Kamal city, including Thawrah
School, where ISIL fighters are known to gather; the outskirts of the city; and
a civilian house behind the Khalij gallery. At least nine civilians were
reportedly killed, including one woman and two children.
• On 28 July, air strikes hit a civilian house and allegedly killed at least nine
civilians, including a mother and her three children, in the village of Taybah,
in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 2 July, air strikes hit a residential area close to the Jami‘ al -Atiq (Old
Mosque) neighbourhood of Raqqah city and reportedly killed five civilians
from a single family, including three children, and injured at least two other
civilians. On the same day, air strikes hit residential areas of the Dariyah
neighbourhood in the western part of the city, allegedly killing f ive
civilians — two women and three children. The United States-led coalition
publicly reported that on that day it had conducted 14 strikes near Raqqah,
engaged 13 ISIL tactical units and destroyed 10 fighting positions and a mortar
system.

18/20

17-14297

S/2017/733

• On 4 July, a family of seven civilians were reportedly killed when air strikes
hit a residential area of Raqqah city. In its public reporting, the United States led coalition stated that on that day it had conducted 27 strikes near Raqqah,
engaged 19 ISIL tactical units and destroyed 17 fighting positions, three
tactical vehicles, another vehicle, two heavy machine guns, a mortar system, a
weapons cache, a command-and-control node, a vehicle-borne-bomb facility
and a vehicle-borne bomb.
• On 6 July, air strikes hit residential areas of Raqqah city and allegedly killed at
least 4 civilians and injured at least 17 others. The United States -led coalition
publicly reported that on that day it had conducted nine strikes near Raqqah,
engaged nine ISIL tactical units and destroyed seven fighting positions, an
ISIL headquarters and a vehicle bomb.
• On 9 July, air strikes hit residential areas in Raqqah city and reportedly killed
six civilians, including one woman and two children, and injured four other
civilians. The United States-led coalition publicly reported that on that day it
had conducted 11 strikes near Raqqah, engaging nine ISIL tactical units and
destroying seven fighting positions, a weapons cache, a supply cache, an
anti-air-artillery system, a tunnel and an ISIL communications tower.
• On 13 July, seven civilians, including three children and a woman, were
allegedly killed when air strikes hit residential areas of Raqqah city. In its
public reporting, the United States-led coalition stated that on that day it had
carried out nine strikes near Raqqah, engaged five ISIL tactical units,
destroyed three ISIL communications towers, three fighting positions, a
command-and-control node, a front-end loader and an artillery system, and
damaged three supply routes.
• On 15 July, three civilians, including a woman and a child, were reportedly
killed when unexploded ordnance exploded in the village of Akarshah, in the
southern rural area of the governorate. The village was under the control of
ISIL during the first half of July.
• On 16 July, air strikes hit residential areas of Raqqah city and allegedly killed
13 civilians, including 4 children and 2 women. The United States -led
coalition publicly reported that on that day it had conducted 15 strikes near
Raqqah, engaging 13 ISIL tactical units and destroying 18 fighting positions,
two vehicle bomb factories and a mortar system.
• On 17 July, air strikes hit residential areas of Raqqah city, reportedly killing 23
civilians, including at least 3 women and 6 children, and inj uring 24 others. In
its public reporting, the United States-led coalition stated that on that day it
had conducted 16 strikes near Raqqah, engaging 10 ISIL tactical units and
destroying 13 fighting positions, two ISIL-held buildings, a tactical vehicle
and an unmanned aerial system.
• On 18 July, 7 civilians were allegedly killed and a further 12 injured when air
strikes hit residential areas of Raqqah city. The United States -led coalition
publicly reported that on that day it had carried out 12 strikes ne ar Raqqah and
engaged 11 ISIL tactical units as well as destroying nine fighting positions,
two vehicles and a tactical vehicle.
• On 19 July, air strikes reportedly hit residential areas of the ISIL -controlled
village of Zawr Shammar, in the eastern rural part of the governorate, killing
11 civilians.
• On 19 July, eight civilians were allegedly killed when air strikes hit residential
areas of ISIL-controlled Nazlat Shahadah.
17-14297

19/20

S/2017/733

• On 22 July, air strikes hit residential areas in the Dariyah neighbourhood o f
Raqqah city and reportedly killed six civilians, including a 6 -year-old boy and
a 7-year-old girl. The United States-led coalition publicly reported that on that
day it had conducted nine strikes near Raqqah and engaged seven ISIL tactical
units, destroyed eight fighting positions and a mortar system, and damaged
two supply routes.
• On 23 July, air strikes hit residential areas of the ISIL -controlled village of
Zawr Shammar and Ma‘dan city and allegedly killed 4 civilians in Zawr
Shammar and 2 in Ma‘dan, with a further 19 injured in both areas. Zawr
Shammar is now within the range of fire of the advancing government forces.
• On 28 July, at least 15 civilians, including 2 women and 8 children, were
reportedly killed when air strikes hit their home in the centre of Raqqah city.
Among those killed were a mother and her five children. At least three other
civilians were also reportedly injured. In its public reporting, the United
States-led coalition stated that on that day it had carried out 12 strikes nea r
Raqqah, engaging 10 ISIL tactical units, destroying eight fighting positions, an
artillery system and a vehicle, and suppressing a fighting position.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 3 July, air strikes hit residential areas of the ISIL -controlled village of
Ziyanat, south of the town of Shaddadah, in the southern rural area of the
governorate, and reportedly killed eight civilians from two families, including
one woman and six children.
• On 4 July, air strikes hit a residential area in the ISIL-controlled village of Tall
al-Shayir, south of the town of Shaddadah, in the southern part of the
governorate, allegedly killing at least 12 civilians, including 3 women and 2
children.
• On 11 July, Ziyanat was hit again with air strikes that report edly killed at least
10 civilians, including 2 women and 1 child.
• On 12 July, air strikes hit a residential area of the village of Sa‘dah, in
southern Hasakah, and reportedly killed three civilians — one woman and two
children.

20/20

17-14297
