106

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

1. Urges ali States, in the implementation of agreements reached with the United Nations regarding peacekeeping arrangements, further to strengthen co-operation
with the Secretary-General in the discbarge of bis functions deriving from the Cbarter of tbe United Nations as
well as from the mandates and decisions of tbe Security
Council and the General Assembly;
2. Affirms tbat tbe adoption and implementation of
confidence- and security-building measures, taking into
account tbe Cbarter and tbe specificity of eacb particular
region, would contribute to the strengtbening of regional
as well as international peace and security.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

43/86.

5. Welcomes the recent encouraging co-operation
among the members of the Security Council enabling tbe
Council to carry out more effectively its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter;
6. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue bis
efforts, in accordance with the Charter, to facilitate dialogue and co-operation as a means to reduce tensions, to
promete the peaceful settlement of regional and international conflicts and to enhance international peace and
security;
7. Stresses tbe importance of a more adequate consideration ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization. 12 8
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

Need for a result-oriented political dialogue to
improve the international situation
43/87.

The General Assembly,
Having considered tbe item entitled "Need for a resultoriented political dialogue to improve the international
situation",
Welcoming tbe favourable trends in tbe current international environment, in particular tbe first, tbougb limited,
step in tbe field of nuclear disarmament and tbe progress
reacbed in solving regional conflicts,
Noting with satisfaction the growing awareness that dialogue and co-operation are imperative in arder furtber to
improve international relations, genera te a clima te of trust
and resolve global problems facing humanity,
Conscious of tbe urgent need for progress in reducing tbe
levels of armament, both nuclear and conventional, and in
solving global problems such as the development of equitable international economic relations, measures to alleviate the externa) indebtedness of the developing countries,
protection of the environment and the elimination of racism and apartheid, as well as tbe removal of hunger and
poverty,
Considering that durable peace and security cannot be
achieved through confrontation, but only through policies
of dialogue and co-operation as well as by measures aimed
at strengthening the United Nations in accordance witb its
Charter, particularly in tbe nuclear and space age,
1. Reaffirms the obligation ofStates to abide strictly by
the purposes and principies of the Charter of the United
Nations;
2. Calls for the continuation and intensification of result-oriented political dialogue and co-operation at the
multilateral, regional and bilateral levels, in accordance
with the relevant principies of the Charter;
3. Reaffirms its appeal to ali Member States to enhance
the role ofthe United Nations as a forum for political dialogue and negotiation in order to preserve peace,
strengthen international security, promote arms limitation
and disarmament, develop equitable international economic relations, implement the right to self-determination
of peoples under colonial domination and foreign occupation, eradicate racism and apartheid, promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms and settle other
urgent international issues;
4. Appeals to Member States to consider ways and
means of strengthening the role and efficiency of the General Assembly as the most representative international
forum for dialogue and co-operation, as well as of increasing the political authority of its resolutions;

Tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Preparation of Societies for Life in
Peace

The General Assemb/y,
Considering that the year 1988 marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Preparation
of Societies for Life in Peace, 129
Reiterating that the promotion of peace is one of the primary purposes of the United Nations and that its attainment is the most cherished ideal of the peoples of the
world,
We/coming tbe active promotion of the idea of the
preparation of societies for life in peace by Governments,
the United Nations and international and national organizations, as reflected in tbe reports oftbe Secretary-General
prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 33/73 of 15 December 1978, 130 36/104 of9 December 198Jl 31 and 39/157 of 17 December 1984, 132
Welcoming a/so the growing involvement of majar
political, social and religious movements in the promotion
of peace,
Recalling its resolution 42/91 of 7 December 1987 on
the implementation of the Declaration,
Noting with satisfaction that the issue of the preparation
of societies for Iife in peace was given a prominent place in
the observances of the International Year of Peace,
Recognizing the determination of Sta tes to undertake efforts towards a more peaceful and secure world through
tangible disarmament,
Aware of the timeliness of the Declaration as well as the
valuable experience gained in the course of the implementation of its principies and objectives,
1. Solemnly reaffirms the lasting validity of the purposes and principies enshrined in the Declaration on the
Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace, based on the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Noting with appreciation the important role that the
Declaration has played in promoting world peace and international security, common understanding and mutually beneficia! co-operation;

128 Official Rccords of !he General Assembly. Forty-1hird Session,
Supp/ement No. 1 (A/43/1 ).
119 Resolution 33/73.
t30 A/36/386 and Add.1-J.
131 A/39/143 and Add 1.
132 A/42/668.
