S/PV.7753

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7753rd meeting

Tuesday, 2 August 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim/Mrs. Adnin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2016/360)
Letter dated 29 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/662)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-24437 (E)
*1624437*

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of August, I wish
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Koro Bessho,
Permanent Representative of Japan, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of July. I am
sure that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Bessho
and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with
which they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2016/360)
Letter dated 29 July 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/662)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, Pakistan,
Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, and
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Charles
2/88

02/08/2016

Whiteley, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/360, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/662, which contains a letter dated
29 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Malaysia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: The global security
landscape continues to change dramatically, but one
grim reality does not — children still pay the highest
price in wartime. Young boys and girls are directly
targeted and conscripted. They are tortured, maimed,
imprisoned, starved, sexually abused and killed. Their
homes and schools are destroyed. In places such as
Iraq, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen,
children suffer through a living hell.
And in many cases, it is getting even worse.
Thousands of Syrian children have been killed since
the start of the conflict. Millions more are traumatized.
Last year, Afghanistan recorded its highest rate of child
casualties since 2009. In Somalia, recorded violations
increased by 50 per cent from 2014 to 2015. In South
Sudan, children continue to pay the heaviest price for
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

leaders’ failure to commit to peace. In Yemen, six
times as many children were killed and maimed in 2015
compared to just one year before, and five times as many
were recruited into fighting. Violence continues to take
a toll on Palestinian and Israeli children. My last report
(S/2015/409) called on Israel to ensure accountability.
That remains critical.
More than half of the world’s refugees are frightened
children. We must urgently address the root causes of
displacement. At the same time, we have to confront
this massive crisis. On 19 September, we will hold a
United Nations Summit for Refugees and Migrants. I
urge all Governments to bring ideas and commitments
with a special focus on protecting children.
Violent extremism is forcing people from their
homes and communities. Extremists are torturing,
detaining and killing children, sending them on suicide
missions and selling them as sex slaves. An effective
response must place respect for human rights and
humanitarian law at the centre. That includes protecting
children during and after military operations, regardless
of their affiliation. I am deeply concerned that more
and more children are being arrested, detained or even
killed in counter-terrorism operations.
I am also alarmed by violations of international
humanitarian law caused by aerial bombardments.
Even wars have rules. Hospitals and schools should be
protected. Civilians should be spared. Children should
not be used to fight. Peacekeeping also has rules. We
must end the outrage of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeepers, staff and non-United
Nations forces. I thank the Council for endorsing my
decision to repatriate units when we have credible
evidence against them, but we all must do more to
secure accountability, enforce standards, provide
training, assist victims and achieve justice.
Once again this year, objections to the annual
report (S/2016/360) forced me to make a difficult
decision. After very careful consideration, the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition was removed from the annexes,
pending the conclusions of a review. I have held talks
with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia at the highest level
possible, including meetings in New York with the
Deputy Crown Prince, the Minister of Defence and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, to express my serious
concerns about the situation on the ground and the
devastating impact on children. My senior advisers
were also intensely engaged. I have since received

S/PV.7753

information on measures taken by the coalition to
prevent and end grave violations against children. I
still have very strong concerns about the protection of
Yemeni children. They must always come first. The
forward-looking review continues, and the situation on
the ground will be closely monitored. We will continue
our engagement to ensure that concrete measures to
protect children are implemented.
But I want to repeat that the content of the
report stands. Let me be clear — the report and its
annexes may cause discomfort, but that is not a goal
in itself. Our aim is to protect children in danger by
ensuring concrete change. Today I renew my appeal to
every Member State and every party to conflict: If you
want to protect your image, protect children.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict. My Special Representative and her
predecessors have made a meaningful difference for
the youngest victims of war. Courageous and hardworking staff in the field have collected and verified
information, sometimes at great personal risk. I fully
support them. This work and my Special Representative
deserve the full political backing of all Member States.
We need resources, but much more than that, we
need political will. Commitment yields results. In 2015,
more than 8,000 child soldiers were released. They are
getting help to rebuild their lives. Many countries have
also passed laws — with enforcement mechanisms — to
add new safeguards for children against recruitment.
The ultimate goal is to end these grave violations of
the human rights of children. That demands ending
conflicts and establishing peace. I call on the Council
and all countries to do everything possible to back
their words with actions that protect children from
the scourge of armed conflict now and spare others in
the future.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to start by expressing my gratitude to Malaysia for
organizing this open debate and to thanking all
participants for attending.
The Secretary-General has just outlined how
children remain the primary victims of armed
conflict. This was Graça Machel’s most troubling

16-244373/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

conclusion in her report of 20 years ago (see A/51/306).
Unfortunately, despite concerted efforts and significant
progress, we have yet to change this fact. The report
before the Council (S/2016/360) notes that a multitude
of prolonged and increasingly complex conflicts are
having a devastating impact on children. In a number
of situations, a shocking disregard for international law
is in evidence and impunity prevails.
(spoke in English)
In 2015, armed groups and Government forces
killed, maimed, recruited and used, and inflicted
sexual violence upon tens of thousands of boys and
girls. There were over 2,000 attacks on schools and
hospitals documented in 19 out of 20 situations in the
report. Abduction remained a widespread concern,
with over 4,000 incidents in 2015. Conflict also impacts
children in ways that are not captured by the report’s
statistics. Children lose their parents, they are disabled
due to easily curable illnesses and they suffer long-term
psychological trauma.
As the Council is well aware, children have been
significantly affected by violent extremism. Many
groups operating today defy the norm that attacks must
not be directed against civilians, and commit routine
and brutal acts. To give an example, in April in Iraq the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant publicly executed a
15 year-old boy who they accused of being a disbeliever.
The boy was tied between two cars that were driven in
opposite directions. It was terrible. While the challenges
faced by Member States to address these groups and
protect civilians are evident, security responses that do
not comply with international law inflict further harm;
they even risk aiding the very groups Governments
seek to combat.
The besiegement of civilians by Government forces
is unconscionable. Airstrikes and the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas by international coalitions
or individual Member States are an acute concern.
They have contributed to some of the highest numbers
of documented child casualties. Extrajudicial killings
and torture of civilians have also been reported in
territory liberated from armed groups. Governments
are increasingly using militias to fight in support of
their forces. These groups frequently lack respect for
or even understanding of international humanitarian
law. The ongoing reports of the recruitment and use of
children by this group of actors are another concern.
4/88

02/08/2016

Counter-terrorism legislation is being broadly
applied in many situations without appropriate checks
and balances. Children are being apprehended on
the basis of alleged links to non-State armed groups
or of expansive interpretations of protecting national
security. Civilian courts are being marginalized and
juvenile justice is non-existent. Children can be held for
months or even years by military or intelligence actors.
If a child goes before a judge, it is often in a military or
special court where due process and fair trial standards
are sorely lacking.
Children have even been sentenced to death. Just
two weeks ago in Somalia, I met boys condemned to
death for their alleged association with Al-Shabaab.
This cannot be an acceptable outcome for children
when they are rescued from armed groups. Many
have been abducted and forcibly recruited and are
primarily victims. Detention is also employed in some
situations as a tactic to recruit and use children for
intelligence-gathering purposes. I cannot emphasize
enough the danger they are put in when they are used in
this way. Reports of children being executed by armed
groups for suspicion of collaboration with Government
forces are all too common.
The lack of respect for international humanitarian
law is also having ramifications beyond conflict zones.
As the Secretary-General noted, children are being
displaced in ever-increasing numbers. Unfortunately,
the response of some Member States has not always
been in the best interests of children. We must do more,
including by supporting the small number of conflictaffected Member States that host 90 per cent of the
refugee population in providing basic services.
While the overall picture today is not positive,
we cannot forget that progress has been achieved and
continues in many places. I would like to seize the
opportunity of briefing the Council in the twentieth
year since the creation of the mandate to briefly reflect
on some key accomplishments. Since the SecretaryGeneral’s first report to this body (S/2000/712), more
than 115,000 children associated with parties to conflict
have been released as a result of dialogue and action
plans. To date, 25 action plans have been signed with
parties to conflict; nine parties have fully complied and
were delisted in Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Nepal, Sri Lanka,
and Uganda.
The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has also
helped to consolidate the emerging global consensus
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

that child soldiers should not be used in conflict. With
the Government of the Sudan signing an action plan
earlier this year, the United Nations is now engaged in
implementing a written commitment with all Member
States listed for recruitment and use of children. Since
the launch of the campaign, there has been a significant
reduction in verified cases of the recruitment and use
of children by national security forces, especially in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Myanmar. I call on all concerned Governments and
on all those who can provide support to do their utmost
to fully implement these action plans.
Peace processes continue to represent a vital
opportunity to engage with parties to conflict on child
protection. Most recently, in Colombia, the Government
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo concluded an historic
agreement to separate and reintegrate all children
associated with the armed group. The agreement’s
successful implementation will be an important signal
to parties to other protracted conflicts that committed
dialogue can lead to results.
The United Nations is also engaged in dialogue with
listed armed groups in the Central African Republic,
Mali, Myanmar, the Philippines, the Sudan and South
Sudan. Years of work with Governments to improve
legislative frameworks, build institutional capacity
and address challenges, such as birth registrations, are
bearing fruit. I am pleased to say that this engagement
has helped thousands of children in the past 18 months,
as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his statement.
I urge national authorities to support ongoing and future
discussions with armed groups on action plans so that
many more can benefit.
The coordinated action generated by this mandate
is at the heart of these achievements. The dedication
and tireless efforts of Member States, United Nations
colleagues, civil society and many more have and
continue to bring about positive change for boys and
girls living in communities ravaged by war. This
shows that when parties to conflict faithfully engage
and where there is political space to act on behalf of
children, we are able to achieve results.
We are mandated to work and to achieve results
with Governments and non-State armed groups,
operating in the world’s most difficult environments.
As the Secretary-General noted, the goal of the report
before the Council today is not to cause discomfort,

S/PV.7753

but rather to bring about change for boys and girls
confronted by violations the international community
considers abhorrent. Our work often involves a difficult
balancing act, but the tools developed by the Council to
address grave violations against children are invaluable.
The progress I have just outlined demonstrates that they
are pragmatic, constructive and powerful enough to
convince parties to conflict of the urgent need to protect
children. Our success will depend on our impartiality,
on the credibility of the tools at our disposal, and on the
international community’s support for our work. I want
to reiterate my support for our dedicated colleagues on
the ground who work tirelessly to achieve results.
Despite successes over the years, there is no denying
that the overall picture of violations in situations of
armed conflict is extremely worrisome. Concerned
Governments bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians. The United Nations stands
ready to support Governments in their efforts to
protect children and help address violations outlined
in the report, but we cannot make up for the lack of
political will.
Others in this Chamber have a critical role to
support these efforts. As members of the Security
Council and the international community, they can and
must do more to address the root causes of the suffering
of children. Greater efforts must be made to prioritize
conflict prevention and support peace processes,
ensure respect for international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, and seek accountability when
violations are committed. Impunity remains in times
of war; this organ has a crucial role to play in ending it.
The number of crises we are faced with today will
test our capacity in 2016 and for many years into the
future. We face a considerable challenge and we need
creative ways to support initiatives and programmes
to protect children. I call on Member States to ensure
adequate resources for education and health services
in emergencies and to provide financial and technical
support to effective reintegration programmes for
former child soldiers. These initiatives are vital if we
are to build long-term sustainable peace and security.
This mandate and the action it continues to generate
represent a beacon of hope for millions of children
affected by war. Our capacity to work together, to
generate will to untangle the most difficult situations,
will have a decisive impact on the present and future of
millions of children.

16-244375/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for
her statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lake.
Mr. Lake: I would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his strong words and his strong
commitment to this issue, and my colleagues Leila
Zerrougui for all her very determined work. All of us
at UNICEF are truly grateful for the continuous efforts
of the Security Council to protect the lives and futures
of children who are threatened by armed conflict. We
are also grateful to Malaysia for its leadership in the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Nearly 250 million — a number we often hear,
but that is 250 million — children are living in
countries and areas affected by war. Over 30 million
have been displaced by conflict. Millions more have
been physically and emotionally scarred by violence,
witnessing the worst of humankind and seeing things
in their young lives that no child should see. These
numbers alone, and the many others outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/360), paint a
devastating picture.
But more, we can never forget that behind these
statistics are millions of individual girls and boys. Child
after child after child, millions of individual futures
are at terrible risk — at risk of being killed in attacks
on schools and hospitals; at risk of being maimed by a
landmine or an airstrike; at risk of abduction, sexual
violence and trafficking; and at risk of being recruited
to fight, including, outrageously, as suicide bombers.
They are victimized by warring adults who have lost
any sense of simple morality and legal obligation. We
are not human if we are not outraged by all of this. But
our outrage and anger must be matched by action, not
only, for example, to end the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, but also to support them as
they rebuild their lives and contribute to the future of
their societies, and to seek measures that will prevent
other children from suffering the same fate.
While the picture remains grim, we can be
encouraged by our progress to date. Last year alone,
thanks to the tireless efforts of so many of our partners
dedicated to this cause, nearly 10,000 girls and boys
were released from armed forces or armed groups,
and nearly 7,000 accessed services, such as medical
screening, psychosocial support and counselling,
family tracing and reunification, and education and
vocational training. This is all to get them back where
6/88

02/08/2016

they belong — with loved ones, in school, in a safe
place where they can begin to heal and build the futures
they deserve.
We also welcome the progress that individual
countries are making on their action plans to prevent and
end the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict,
including through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
Governments are enacting legislation and establishing
procedures to keep children from being recruited. That
includes age-assessment protocols to keep children
from entering the military in Myanmar, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Afghanistan, and legislation
enacted to criminalize child recruitment in countries
where no such laws existed before.
In Colombia, children’s rights are being woven
into the peace agreement being negotiated in Havana,
including a pilot initiative to release and provide
assistance to children involved in the conflict. This is
an important first step not only for these children, but
for the many more who must follow — and indeed, a big
step for Colombia’s future. Another example was the
signing just four months ago by the Government of the
Sudan of an action plan to prevent the recruitment and
use of children by its security forces.
But there is much more to be done beyond
preventing and ending recruitment. The scale of all the
violations against children — and indeed, the stakes
of the violations for their societies — demand that all
parties to conflict do far more to protect children’s
rights in conflict, whether they are tragically drawn
into the fighting as combatants or have their health,
education and very lives jeopardized by it. The United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict continues to help define the full scale of the
crisis by providing vital information on the unspeakable
atrocities they have experienced and witnessed. Using
that information, we must and will continue working
with parties to conflict to better prevent violations
of the rights of children in armed conflicts and help
shape programmes and services that can brighten these
children’s futures. That includes focused action in three
particular key areas: explosive weapons and remnants
of war, health care and education.
First, I note the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. These weapons accounted for almost
44,000 deaths and injuries last year alone. When they
were used in densely populated areas, nine out of ten
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

victims were civilians. Not only does the use of these
weapons kill and maim children; not only does it deny
these children safe access to hospitals, schools and
water facilities; but it also results in new and permanent
disabilities among children and makes life even more
difficult and dangerous for those already living with
disabilities. Children are the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable in any conflict, and children living with
disabilities are even more so.
We all should call on all parties to conflict to
commit to protecting children by changing the way
they wage their wars, including by ending the use of
explosive weapons in densely populated areas. We
should call on them to join the ban on landmines and
cluster munitions. Children make up about half of those
killed and injured by cluster munitions. We should call
on them to share information and include provisions in
ceasefire and peace agreements that will expedite the
clearance of unexploded ordnance and provide targeted
risk education to make communities safer. We should
call on them to protect children with disabilities during
military operations and in evacuation plans. And as
always, we should continue calling on them to allow
humanitarian aid to reach those most in need.
Secondly, I refer to health care. Beyond their
illegality and immediate devastating impact, attacks
against health workers and facilities have far-reaching
consequences for children, their communities and
health-care systems. All parties to conflict must protect
and allow for the safe delivery of health care to these
children and their families because every child has a
right to health even in the midst of conflict — indeed,
especially in the midst of conflict.
Thirdly, education is key. As with attacks against
health facilities, the devastating impact of attacks on
schools for children and the future of their societies
cannot be overstated, which is why the Education
Cannot Wait fund aims to reach those millions of
young people whose education has been disrupted by
crises, including by conflicts. Education improves their
futures and is therefore vital to the futures of their
communities and societies.
Our progress to date has shown that the children
trapped by conflicts are not beyond our reach. With
the support of Governments, the global community
and all parties to conflict, we can and indeed must help
these young lives to emerge from the shadows of war,
not only through our resolutions, but also through our

S/PV.7753

resolve; not only through our outrage, but also through
our action.
The President: I thank Mr. Lake for his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Malaysia.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
remarks and his steadfast commitment to the children
and armed conflict agenda. I also wish to express my
heartfelt appreciation to Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui and Executive Director Anthony Lake of
UNICEF for their insightful and compelling briefings.
My delegation pays tribute to them both, as well as to the
people and institutions they represent, for their tireless
dedication to and relentless advocacy for the protection
of rights of children affected by armed conflict.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
In making her call for action 20 years ago, Graça
Machel appealed for daring solutions to address the
impact of conflict on children. The international
community rose to that challenge by embracing the
children and armed conflict agenda both in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council. Under this
agenda, the landscape of international child protection
has evolved over the past two decades through the
development of a unique set of tools within the United
Nations system to end grave violations against children,
channel assistance and support to children affected by
conflict, and hold parties to conflict accountable for
their obligations under international law.
In that regard, the important role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, as a high-level
advocate who gives children scarred by war a voice
and a champion for their cause, must continue to
be supported. Ms. Zarrougui and her predecessors
have been successful in galvanizing international
commitment to child protection, both through the
close engagement of Member States and partners as
well as through campaigns that raise broad awareness
and support.
One heartening example is the progress achieved
through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, co-led by
the Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UNICEF, to eliminate the recruitment and
use of children in national security forces. Malaysia

16-244377/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

commends the resolute commitment of Member States
that have signed action plans to achieve that objective,
and calls for continued international support for their
efforts beyond 2016.
The deployment of child protection advisers
in United Nations peace operations has also been
instrumental to mainstreaming and implementing the
child protection mandate in that field. Child protection
advisers, together with other actors in the United Nations
country task force, play an important advocacy role in
dialogue with Governments and parties to conflict on
child protection concerns, including developing action
plans.
In that regard, we are closely following the
consolidation of protection functions exercises in three
United Nations peace operations: the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia. We call on the Secretary-General to continue
ensuring that dedicated child protection capacities
are maintained and strengthened, including if and
when embedded in larger human rights units, and
urge consultations to be held with Member States on
this issue.
Malaysia also reaffirms its strong support for
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict, established under resolution 1612 (2005),
which enables the collection of verified information
on grave violations against children that is crucial to
ensuring that such heinous acts do not go unreported.
We reiterate that accurate and objective facts, including
information gathered through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, should be the determining factor
that guides our actions in seeking the compliance of
parties to conflict and holding perpetrators of grave
violations accountable. The mandate and the tools it
created remain urgently relevant today as children
continue to suffer the horrifying consequences of war.
We echo Ms. Machel’s call for daring solutions in
the face of evolving trends and persisting challenges
affecting children in situations of conflict. Non-State
armed groups remain among the biggest perpetrators
of grave violations against children, and ensuring their
compliance with child protection’s obligations under
international humanitarian law is an ongoing challenge.
8/88

02/08/2016

We are deeply alarmed that non-State armed groups,
including groups employing violent extremist tactics,
remain the main perpetrators of the recruitment and
use of children. One Boko Haram militiaman told
a kidnapped girl who had been repeatedly raped by
militias and subsequently trained to become a suicide
bomber,
“It would not be painful to be a suicide bomber. It
would be just like if an ant bites you”.
Even more heartbreaking, children who have
been kidnapped by the non-State armed groups are
stigmatized and shunned by their own families and
communities upon their return or escape. They are
treated with suspicion as possible suicide bombers or
for having a baby fathered by a kidnapper. We urge
Member States to treat children associated with such
groups primarily as victims and to consider alternatives
to prosecution and detention where appropriate, as
well as to prioritize reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes. The peace talks between the Government
of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo provides a positive
example in ensuring the protections and rights of
children separated from armed groups.
Another challenge is addressing the needs created
by the large scale of the displacement of children
by armed conflicts. The image of Aylan Kurdi, the
3-year-old boy who drowned as his family attempted
to escape the Syrian conflict in 2015, is emblematic of
the fate of hundreds of children forced to flee armed
conflict. Surviving a perilous journey, however, does
not guarantee safety. Displaced children, particularly
separated and unaccompanied children, are especially
vulnerable to exploitation and grave violations by
unscrupulous parties. It is therefore imperative that
children in situations of displacement be given support
to help them adapt to their new surroundings, including
access to medical and psychosocial services, education
and recreational activities.
Malaysia firmly believes that the agenda on children
and armed conflict must continue to be strengthened and
enhanced. In the two decades since the establishment of
the agenda, the hopes and dreams of children in many
parts of the world have continued to be dashed and their
innocence robbed. The international community must
redouble its efforts to secure peace and lift them from
the depths of despair. While we have made progress
in using the tools at our disposal, much more needs
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

to be done. Our work is far from over. I pledge my
delegation’s enduring commitment to that end.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you
so much, Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting
and for all the work you and your team have done to
shine a light on how children are faring around the
world in your time on the Security Council.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
for consistently giving the issue of children in armed
conflict the attention it so clearly deserves. We are
grateful to Special Representative Zerrougui and her
team for their determined efforts to bring to light the
plight of affected children. We also thank UNICEF
Executive Director Lake for his lifelong dedication to
supporting and protecting children. I also want to single
out for thanks the diverse range of ambassadors and
other diplomats who have turned out today. I think this
turnout reflects how important the broader membership
of the United Nations deems this issue.
Let me begin with what should be a non-controversial
point, which is that two decades after Graça Machel’s
groundbreaking report (see A/51/306) highlighted the
disproportionate and devastating impact of armed
conflict on children, the Secretary-General’s annual
report continues to be a valuable tool for documenting
abuses and for identifying those responsible.
The Security Council’s mandate on children and
armed conflict, which includes monitoring, reporting
and listing of parties for violations, is crucial and
must be maintained. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism must play a central role in this process,
including subjecting incoming reports to what needs to
be a transparent, independent, impartial and thorough
review. Yet to continue to be effective, adequate measures
must be put in place to ensure sound methodology and
to protect sources. The methodological approach needs
to be continually strengthened to meet the highest
standards, and victims. United Nations agencies and
others must be able to provide information without fear
of their identity being revealed or fear of reprisals.
Member States, all of us, have a responsibility to
cooperate with the Secretary-General’s reporting on
this issue. We do not expect Governments to agree with

S/PV.7753

everything in the Secretary-General’s report. In fact,
we encourage Member States to engage with the United
Nations early and often and to challenge findings they
deem inaccurate or unjustified, as well as to present
evidence to support their views. That means Member
States and the United Nations working together in good
faith to share information and to address concerns,
ascertain the facts and look for ways to improve. Even
if we Governments do not ultimately agree with certain
United Nations findings or conclusions, we must
maintain support for the United Nations, such a vital
organization that is aiming, as we have heard today, to
help children everywhere.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/360)
provides a bleak yet unsurprising picture of the
human rights violations committed against children in
conflicts, many of which are actually worsening. The
examples are myriad. In Yemen, the United Nations
verified a five-fold increase in the number of children
recruited during 2015, and a six-fold increase in the
number of children killed and maimed during 2015, as
compared to the previous year. In Afghanistan, 2015
saw the highest number of child casualties since the
United Nations began systematically documenting
them in 2009, with an average of more than 50 kids
killed or injured every week.
In Syria, the Secretary-General’s report highlighted
the massive recruitment of children by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), including child foreign
fighters as young as 7 years old. Seven — that is the
age of my son, who is about to start the second grade.
The report also documents the detention, and in some
instances the torture, of children by the Al-Assad
regime. For a sense of the horrors children are enduring
in real time, just look at the Al-Assad regime’s current
siege of Aleppo. Of the 300,000 civilians trapped
in the city, an estimated 100,000 are children, the
overwhelming majority of whom do not have clean
water to drink. When kids hear the sound of a helicopter
or fighter jet overhead, one medical worker said, “They
start screaming, hugging you and crying.” It is not hard
to understand why.
A non-governmental organization that runs an
ambulance network said that approximately one third of
the casualties in Aleppo are children. One relief worker
described arriving at the scene of an air strike to help
dig through rubble for survivors and seeing a small boy,
who could not have been older than 10 years, walking
towards him. The boy was holding his amputated left

16-244379/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

arm in his right hand and shouting, “Sir, please put my
arm back.” Wounded children like that little boy arrive
at the few hospitals that are still standing only to find
there are no doctors or nurses to treat them because they
are so overwhelmed by patients. Or they find medical
professionals who cannot help them because they lack
basic equipment or have run out of medicine due to the
siege.
Often, as we all know, hospitals themselves are
bombed. On 23 July, a paediatric hospital in Aleppo
was hit by air strikes, not once but twice in a single
night. The second blast shut down the oxygen supply
to the room where newborns were being held, forcing
the staff to evacuate the babies to a bomb shelter in
the basement. An infant who had been alive for just
two days reportedly died when he was taken from the
room — a 2-day-old infant. This is the world that the
children in Aleppo and so many other Syrian cities and
towns are growing up in day after day. For children
younger than 5 years old, it is all they have ever known.
So once again, we call on the Al-Assad regime
to lift its deadly siege of all the other Syrian cities
and towns where it is using these barbaric starve-orsurrender tactics — or perhaps more accurately:
starve, get bombed or surrender. In Aleppo, the
regime and allied militias must immediately allow
all non-military traffic, including humanitarian and
commercial suppliers, to move along Castello Road in
order to address the tremendous needs exacerbated by
the deadly siege. We also call on Russia to stop its air
strikes on civilian targets, as well as to halt its support
for the regime’s encirclement of the city.
In addition to protecting children in conflict, we
must address the mass displacement of children caused
by conflict. As we all know, at the end of 2015 more
than 65 million people were displaced worldwide,
and more than half were children. Not only are more
children displaced than at any time since the Second
World War, but — and it is worth pausing on this — it is
increasingly common for kids uprooted by war to spend
their entire childhoods as refugees. Yet the world is not
doing nearly enough to provide for child refugees — or
for refugees in general, for that matter.
To help address this problem, President Obama
is convening a refugee summit in September on
the margins of the General Assembly to try to get
Member States to take on more of their share. Together
with Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, Jordan, Mexico
10/88

02/08/2016

and Sweden, we are asking Governments to make
a deeper commitment to funding United Nations
and humanitarian organizations and appeals and to
welcome more refugees into their countries. And we
are asking front-line countries, which are already doing
way more than their fair share, to take additional steps
to facilitate refugee education and employment. To that
end, we hope that all members of the Council that have
not yet made new commitments will send word back
to their capitals about the need to step up. The lives of
millions of children depend on it.
Let me conclude by saying that in June I travelled
to Germany, where had the opportunity to meet with
thousands of refugees. One was a 16-year-old Syrian
girl named Nujeen Mustafa, who has cerebral palsy and
relies on a wheelchair to get around. Nujeen and her
family used to live in Kobani, which was taken over by
ISIL in 2014. When ISIL arrived, Nujeen told me that
one of two fates awaited her. Either she would be killed
for being a Kurd or she would be thrown into a mental
institution, because that is how ISIL treats people with
disabilities. So, together with her older sister, Nujeen
fled, first across northern Syria and Turkey and then
Greece, Croatia and Slovenia. She travelled by train,
taxi, inflatable dinghy and on her own two wheels
before arriving in Germany, where she was reunited
with her older brother.
When we met, Nujeen told me that if one thing
made her sad, it was that people found her optimism
so rare. When did being positive become so unusual,
she asked. But Nujeen also recognize how exceedingly
fortunate she was to have made it out of Syria and to
have survived her journey in her wheelchair. People are
dying every day for a normal daily routine, she told me,
for the chance to get up and brush their teeth in the
morning and go to school. It can be easy to forget that
for millions of children living in conflicts around the
world, that simple routine is a dream, a routine every
kid deserves, something countless children would risk
their lives for. No child should be put in that position.
We must do everything we can to ensure that they do
not end up in that position.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Malaysia for having convened this debate
on this crucial topic, as the protection of children in
armed conflict represents a universal moral duty. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for being
with us today, for his statement and his commitment to
this crucial issue.
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

As has been highlighted, important progress has
been made since the call to action made by Ms. Graça
Machel. This progress would not have been possible
without the praiseworthy work undertaken for several
years now by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as well as the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake. On behalf of France,
I should like warmly to thank Ms. Zerrougui and
Mr. Lake and their teams for their exemplary action
and the statements they made today. I should like also
to thank civil-society actors, who play a vital role in
supporting the work of the United Nations.
However, in spite of this progress, children
continue to be recruited, torn from their families and
denied education and health care. They are the victims
of murder, mutilation, rape and other forms of sexual
violence. As the black list shows, non-State armed
groups are the perpetrators of most of these violations.
Among them, the terrorist groups Da’esh and Boko
Haram represent a particular threat, as they intensify
the horror by making children not only the direct targets
but also the perpetrators of terrorism, through suicide
bombings, executions and trafficking in human beings.
Above and beyond those children who are recruited and
kidnapped, we must also think about the fate of children
born to these armed groups, who risk perpetuating and
making extremist violence seem normal, as if it were
in their DNA.
The international community has a moral and
political obligation to undertake this crucial existential
combat for the sake of the children and of us all. The
required mobilization includes not only military action
but also tackling the root causes of this tragedy. That
is the thrust of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism, which France fully
endorses. These root causes include education, which
plays a key role. In Syria, almost 4 million children
are deprived of access to education. France firmly
condemns attacks against schools and calls upon States
to uphold international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, and to spare no effort to prevent a
lost generation of children deprived of education, in
particular young Syrian refugees in Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey.
Combating terrorism is a sine qua non, but it cannot
justify arbitrary detention. This is, however, the case in
a number of theatres of conflict, where thousands of
children are detained because of their affiliation with

S/PV.7753

armed groups or in a totally arbitrary manner. This
is the case in Syria, where many children, probably
thousands, have been beaten and tortured in the prisons
of the regime, often perishing there. That is not even
to mention the mass bombings of civilians, including
children, undertaken relentlessly by the Damascus
regime in Aleppo and elsewhere.
We must never forget that Governments bear
responsibility for protecting their people and must
deal with children associated with armed groups in
the most appropriate manner based on their age and
life experience, pursuant to international standards of
justice applicable to minors.
Given these weighty challenges, I would like to
briefly highlight three areas of action.
First, at the institutional level, the United Nations
has effective mechanisms to protect children in armed
conflict. The Security Council’s Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, currently chaired
by Malaysia, must continue to facilitate dialogue
with Governments in New York and on the ground.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism is also
particularly useful, because it helps to identify all
serious violations committed on the ground, so as to
add them to the Secretary-General’s annual black list.
It is key for the United Nations and all States to ensure
that these mechanisms are impartial so as to preserve
their effectiveness.
We must also organize our actions at the
operational level. The United Nations Must continue
to deploy child protection advisers to identify and
prevent rights violations and to ensure the protection
of children is fully integrated into the planning of
peacekeeping operations.
Finally, we need to ratchet up our action at a
political level. In March 2016, the primary goal of
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by
Ms. Zerrougui and UNICEF was achieved. Eight of the
States concerned signed a national action plan to halt
the recruitment of children in national security forces.
Now the full implementation of those plans is required
in order to reach a new goal, namely, a world free of
child soldiers. That should be our shared goal. We can
achieve it if we support and strengthen the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
by applying the Children, Not Soldiers campaign to
non-State armed groups so as to secure additional
concrete commitments on the ground.

16-2443711/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

Before concluding, I should like to pay tribute to
the commitment and determination of the SecretaryGeneral to combat sexual abuse within the United
Nations and with respect to national forces under a
United Nations mandate. France, as the Council is aware,
remains fully mobilized in the areas of prevention, the
training of staff and dealing with all allegations.
The protection of children in armed conflict
requires exemplary behaviour from everyone and an
unwavering commitment. France chose this path several
years ago. Since the adoption of resolutions 1539 (2004)
and 1612 (2005), initiated by my country and which
form the cornerstone of our shared efforts, France has
continued to play a crucial role along these lines. It is
in this spirit that in February 2017 in Paris, along with
UNICEF, we will organize an international conference
on the protection of children in armed conflict, to mark
the 10-year anniversary of the Paris Commitments and
Paris Principles on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups, which have been signed by
105 countries to date. I call on all States to participate
in this event and endorse the Paris Commitments and
Paris Principles at this time in order to demonstrate
their commitment to the universal cause of protecting
children in armed conflict.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Council during the month of August.
I wish you and your delegation every success.
I would also like to start by welcoming the efforts
of the delegation of Malaysia to address the question of
children in armed conflict in the Security Council, as
well as the efforts deployed by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and Armed Conflict and by
UNICEF. I also welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral at our meeting today.
This month we are observing the twentieth
anniversary of the Graça Machel report (see A/51/306),
which initially prompted the Security Council to
set up the institutional and legal framework to
address the issue of children and armed conflict in
the Council and to provide them with the necessary
means of protection. The international community
succeeded in implementing the recommendations of
the report on child soldiers by entering into talks with
the Governments and non-governmental actors with
a view to releasing child soldiers and stressing the
12/88

02/08/2016

need to include in most peace conventions provisions
for the reintegration of those children and for their
necessary care and protection, as well as the urgency
of the entry into force of the 2002 Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
Despite all these achievements, we have
still not managed to fulfil most of the report’s
recommendations. The international community must
review the recommendations, in particular those
relating to displaced and refugee children. Given the
shortage of financial resources available to carry out
the recommendations relating to the host States in
particular, much remains to be done with regard to
sexual exploitation and gender violence cases, as well
as the effects of sanctions regimes, health, nutrition,
psychological rehabilitation and education.
The responsibility for protecting civilians, in
particular children, rests first and foremost with States.
At the same time, Egypt emphasizes its full commitment
to the development of the children and armed conflict
issue in the Security Council, including improving the
institutional and legal framework aimed at providing
the necessary protection for children living in hotbeds
of tension and conflict.
During our presidency of the Council in May,
in cooperation with the delegations of Japan, New
Zealand, Uruguay and Spain, we managed to ensure
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) on
medical care in armed conflict with the sponsorship
of a large number of non-Council members. As
mentioned by Mr. Anthony Lake in his statement, that
resolution relates directly to the protection of children
in danger. Despite the effectiveness and efficiency
of the mechanisms set up by the United Nations to
monitor the violations against children in zones of
conflict, children continue to be subjected to the most
horrendous violations. In this connection, we wish to
emphasize the following points.
First, the limitation of human and material
resources represents a serious problem faced by
States during and after conflicts. The Office of the
Special Representative also suffers from a shortage
of resources. My delegation would like to underscore
that this hinders the reintegration of children released
by armed groups. Secondly, limiting the mission of
the established mechanisms to information-gathering
on the violations committed in hotbeds of tension and
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

conflict, the numbers of victims and the perpetrators
of those crimes and listing them in the annexes of the
reports makes those reports a mere means of monitoring
and fails to provide the necessary practical and realistic
means of protection for children — a task with which
they are mandated. Thirdly and lastly, it is important
to verify the sources of information contained in the
reports and not to restrict them to one party to the
conflict alone. We must avoid double standards and
contradictions between the body of the report and its
annexes in some cases.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Malaysia’s initiative in convening today’s
meeting. We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict Ms. Zerrougui, and
Executive Director of UNICEF Mr. Anthony Lake for
their briefings.
Children are the primary victims of armed conflicts
in war-torn countries and regions. As terrorist activities
escalate and spread, terrorist organizations’ killings,
abductions and recruitment of children for terrorist
attacks have become an increasingly serious problem.
The continuing turbulence in parts of the Middle East
has triggered large waves of refugees and migrants.
Displacement and trafficking in children are becoming
even more rampant. The international community
should, in light of the new situation and dynamics, take
effective measures for the protection of children in
armed conflict.
First, we must wage a resolute fight against the
heinous acts and violations carried out by terrorist
organizations against children. The international
community should maintain consistent standards, zero
tolerance for and non-distinction vis-à-vis terrorism,
bring great pressure to bear on terrorists, and firmly
combat the killing, abuse and abduction of children
carried out by terrorist organizations. All countries
should step up their law enforcement cooperation
to ensure that all those responsible for violations
against children are severely punished in any country
they may flee to. In rescuing children abducted by
terrorist organizations, countries should increase their
intelligence and information-sharing so as to fully
mobilize all forces and come to the rescue of children
held hostage.
Secondly, children should be prevented from
becoming the victims of terrorist and extremist

S/PV.7753

ideologies. The international community should take
effective measures and effectively combat the use by
terrorist organizations of the Internet to spread terror
through audiovisual means and to carry out recruitment
and incitement activities. We should improve the
education of children and help them develop a mentality
of respect, openness and tolerance, reject violence and
avoid the negative influences of terrorist and extremist
ideologies. We should give full play to the role of the
family, the school and the community in forming
a protective umbrella against the encroachment on
children by terrorist ideologies.
Thirdly, a proper response should be made to
trafficking in refugees and migrants. The countries of
origin, transit and destination of refugees and migrants
should improve their border enforcement cooperation,
improve mechanisms for immigration, border control,
customs and coast guards, combat related crimes,
reduce the incidence of exploitation of children, step
up the identification, repatriation and protection of
children subject to trafficking, and protect children’s
legitimate rights and interests.
Fourthly, international humanitarian relief for
displaced children needs to be strengthened. While
respecting the sovereignty of a country in conflict and
the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality,
the international community should ensure that children
are provided with food, medical care, education and
legal aid and help their reintegration into society. The
role of the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Population Fund, inter alia, should be fully leveraged in
coordinating international humanitarian relief efforts
and forming synergies.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for having attended our open debate today and I thank
him for his statement. I am also grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Zerrougui,
for presenting the annual report (S/2016/360). I thank
the Executive Director of UNICEF for his briefing,
which I found to be quite striking.
The delegation of Malaysia is doing an excellent job
steering the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict in a very discreet and effective manner.
Malaysia is contributing to promoting the protection of
children in armed conflict using all of the tools that

16-2443713/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

02/08/2016

the Security Council has at its disposal. I commend
Malaysia for that work.

monitoring and reporting mechanism of the United
Nations. I would like to make three comments.

Children and armed conflict is a topic that is so
much more than an item on the agenda of the Security
Council: it is a collective responsibility and an ethical
imperative for all of us, as States Members of the United
Nations and as human beings. Given the recruitment of
minors and the bombing of schools and the kidnapping,
rape and killing of children, we have to be intransigent
when it comes to the protection of children and demand
strict compliance with domestic and international
law. That is why I would like to focus my comments
on an essential question, namely, the credibility of
those responsible for attacks against children in armed
conflict. I am going to refer very briefly to three
matters — the attacks against doctors and hospitals, the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign and the fight against
terrorism.

First of all, Spain had the honour of belonging to
the drafting team of resolution 2286 (2016) adopted in
May of this year, concerning the attacks against doctors
and hospitals referred to by my colleague from Egypt.
We take note of the mentions made in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children and armed conflict.
These are two parallel agendas, but they mutually
reinforce each other. We are grateful for the letter that
the Secretary-General just sent to the President of the
Security Council announcing his intention to present
a set of recommendations on the practical application
of the resolution. We will naturally follow these
recommendations very closely.

When the Charter of the United Nations was
adopted, the nature of armed conflict was different
than it is today. Wars and conflicts have evolved over
the last 70 years. It has therefore been necessary for
the Council to adopt new instruments to tackle the
threats to peace and security. Resolution 1379 (2001) is
an excellent example of this process of adaptation. At
that time, the Secretariat was given the task of drawing
up an annual list of parties responsible for deliberate
attacks against children in a dispute. In a globalized
world, with the possibilities of having access to means
of communication and to social networks where
information constantly flows in real time to any part of
the world, this United Nations black list is called upon
to mobilize trust and to have a record of violations of
international humanitarian law and especially to ensure
that we combine all of our efforts at every level to
protect children in armed conflict.
This list could be a very useful instrument, but
it will be useful only insofar as it is credible. As a
result, we have to very strictly respect the process of
compiling data on the part of the United Nations, which
must continue to be completely transparent and neutral.
When there are Member States that never appear on that
list and where year after year we see their involvement
in attacks on children, or when we decide to include
or exclude a country for political reasons, we are
irreparably eroding the credibility of the list and of the
Organization. Therefore, we urge the Secretary-General
and all Member States to respect the conclusions of the
14/88

Secondly, we welcome, as the Secretary-General
said, the success of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
which has made it possible to conclude national action
plans for putting an end to the recruitment of children
in the armed forces of States Members of the United
Nations. Spain, which has contributed to financing this
campaign, trusts that it will be a stimulus for addressing
the challenge that remains, namely, non-State actors.
Thirdly and lastly, it is those non-State actors, in
particular terrorists, who concern us the most. Episodes
such as the beheading of an 11-year-old child, which
took place in Aleppo, the abduction of girls by Boko
Haram, the massive recruitment of minors by Da’esh,
the suicide attacks carried out by minors — all of
these acts show that children are increasingly exposed
to violent extremism. We are not just talking about
child soldiers, but also child terrorists, who are both
executioners and victims. We have to use all of the
tools that we have at our disposal to ensure that these
attacks are investigated, that we identify and hold to
account those who are responsible for them. That is the
minimum that the victims deserve.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate and acknowledge your work as Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I would also like to congratulate Malaysia and the
Malaysian delegation in its capacity as president of
the Council during the month of August. We wish you
every success, Sir, and emphasize that you can count
on our full support. We would also like to congratulate
Japan and its entire delegation for their extraordinary
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7753

work in presiding over the Security Council in the
month of July.

regarding protection and respect for the rights of the
most vulnerable.

We welcome the presence and the statement of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and we thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
her briefing. We offer her our support and praise for
her efforts to promote and protect the rights of children
affected by armed conflict. Of course, we also highlight
the work done by the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Mr. Anthony Lake./

In several conflicts throughout the world,
especially in the Middle East, the Council has reacted
inconsistently despite the suffering and the obvious and
documented serious violations suffered by children.
While in several cases we have adopted resolutions
to facilitate humanitarian assistance and protection
measures for civilians, including children, in other
cases it has been impossible to make progress on the
issue. Several countries in the region face a serious
humanitarian crisis resulting from the wars in Syria,
Iraq and Yemen, in which more than 80 per cent of
the population is in need of humanitarian assistance.
However, no progress has been made due to varying
interests that deviate from the principles guiding the
Organization. The report (S/2016/360) of the SecretaryGeneral should not remain silent or dilute or put off
addressing those issues because of political pressure of
any kind.

The concept note (S/2016/662, annex) prepared
for this debate begins with an eloquent quotation from
the 1996 Graça Machel report, which calls upon the
conscience of each and every one of us in the light of
the fact that,
“[i]t is unconscionable that we so clearly and
consistently see children’s rights attacked and
that we fail to defend them. It is unforgivable that
children are assaulted, violated, murdered and yet
our conscience is not revolted nor our sense of
dignity challenged.” (A/51/306, para. 317)
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela considers it
tragic and ethically unacceptable that year after year
ever more serious difficulties persist in protecting
children affected by armed conflict and that in many
of those cases the situation has worsened in the past
two decades.
Approximately 60 million people are forcibly
displaced worldwide, of which half are under 18 and
all as a result of the tragedy of war, political and
economic destabilization, poverty, violent extremism
and terrorism. It is contradictory to aspire to lasting
and sustainable peace when a significant number of
children have grown up in an environment of armed
violence and hatred, as well as the economic and social
deprivation resulting from poverty and social exclusion.
Without any doubt, those situations compromise the
chances that such children can build up and in a few
years take over the future of their countries based on a
culture of peace and sustainable development.
Venezuela recognizes the political and legislative
progress made in terms of the protection of children in
armed conflicts, which is reflected in the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Additional Protocol.
However, despite those advances, humankind continues
to face enormous challenges and contradictions

The first great challenge we face is more than ever
a moral and ethical imperative for the United Nations.
It requires us to act consistently in our discussions
on actions to protect children in armed conflict. The
practice of using double standards in those areas
only undermines the international efforts in favour of
child protection and is an immoral contradiction and
wholly unethical. Venezuela opposes and condemns
all violations of international humanitarian or human
rights committed against children in armed conflict
by whomever, and calls upon all parties to a conflict
to meet their obligations under international law. This
Organization, in all instances, from the Secretariat to
all of its Member States, must avoid impunity for those
who commit grave violations against children in armed
conflict. The United Nations must raise its voice for all
children worldwide, particularly those who are victims
of armed conflict, without distinction of any kind.
We note with concern and with shame how some
countries are called to accountability for violations
against children in armed conflict, and yet in response
to calls for accountability for crimes and violations
committed against Palestinian children by Israel a
terrible silence remains. According to figures published
by UNICEF, 22 children were killed by Israel in the first
quarter of 2016. Moreover, more than 400 Palestinian
children have been deprived of their freedom illegally,
still unrecognized as minors and further subjected to
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Approximately

16-2443715/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

500 to 700 Palestinian children are tried before Israeli
military courts each year.
We are alarmed by the double standard policy
used in the case of Palestine, whereby the discussion
changes in order to restrict the calls aimed at
strengthening efforts to fulfil obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the principle
of proportionality. Accountability for violations
committed against children in armed conflict must
comply fully with the principles of objectivity,
non-selectivity and impartiality. No one can be exempt,
whether representing a non-State armed group, a State’s
military forces or whatever political interests.
The second of the great challenges that is before
us is that of terrorism and violent extremism. In recent
years, children have been significantly affected by those
scourges and are often direct targets of acts designed
to cause maximum civilian casualties and terrorize
communities, even designating children as executioners
or forcing them to become suicide bombers. The most
outrageous case is that of the mass kidnappings and
abuses committed against children by Boko Haram,
Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front. The increase in violent
extremism and terrorism in the Middle East, among
other things, is a product of military interventions and
assistance to armed extremists and terrorists in order to
destabilize States, dismantle their institutional capacity
and destroy the social fabric. That has led to adverse
consequences for international peace and security,
particularly security matters affecting children.
Violent non-State actors, including terrorist
organizations, commit barbarous acts that threaten the
human condition and facilitate abuse and violations of
the rights of children, as happened recently in Syria,
where Abdullah Issa, a Palestinian child 12 years of age,
was beheaded in Aleppo by the forces of the misnamed
“moderate” opposition, which uses the same tactics as
the terrorists of the Al-Nusra Front, Da’esh and their
associated entities.
Foreign military interventions and wars launched
since 2001 in the Middle East, as in the case of Iraq,
have been the main cause of children of no more than 10
years of age becoming the victims of trauma and abuse
and direct victims of violence due to the destruction
of societies in an environment that has been forcefully
transformed in order to justify fear and death. Today
many young people have been recruited by extremist
organizations, such as Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front,
16/88

02/08/2016

to spread terror and instability throughout the world,
thereby, and sadly, imposing a culture of death, with no
expectation of a peaceful future for the children of the
Middle East.
In that regard, we demand an end to all foreign
military intervention in that region and the destabilization
of entire societies by way of geopolitical and economic
goals, and the transfer of weapons, funding, training
and safe havens to terrorist and extremist groups. We
urge all States to act in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the provisions of international
instruments and the resolutions of both the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
It is worrying that in many instances the answer
to the threat posed by extreme violence gives rise to
further human rights violations and increased suffering
on the part of the civilian population, particularly
children. It is alarming that the military operations
conducted by the various coalitions, despite their
names, have resulted in the same harm and pain against
the civilian population — a situation that has fuelled
the violent narrative of the groups they are combating.
We call for any response to confront terrorism and
violent extremism be consistent with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
States must make use of measures and procedures
consistent with the protections provided by international
humanitarian law and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child when dealing with children associated
with armed or extremist groups. Prosecution and
detention alternatives should be developed consonant
with the interests of the child and prioritizing their
effective reintegration.
We also believe that the most appropriate
strategy to protect children from participation in and
the consequences of war is to prevent and resolve
conflict situations through a comprehensive approach
to the structural causes. We recognize as a fact that
in numerous cases the socioeconomic vulnerability,
abuse, ethnic and religious intolerance, discrimination
and exclusion that children face as a result of war
facilitate their participation in hostilities and amplifies
the adverse effects that armed conflict has on them.
It is therefore crucial that we prevent the use and
recruitment of children in armed conflict and ensure
their protection and rights in such situations. In that
way we can overcome the vicious cycle of violence
and promote sustainable and inclusive social, political
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

and economic conditions. We must accordingly
continue to support disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, including capacity-building
devoted in particular to the protection of children as
laid out within the framework of the peacebuilding
architecture. That is a crucial key for the effective and
sustainable transition from war to peace. They must be
in line with the special requirements needed to protect
and assist children, including gender criteria as well the
appropriate budgetary and timely international support.
Venezuela reiterates that the protection of children
affected by armed conflict must be a fundamental
priority for all States Members of the Organization,
as well as for the entire United Nations system, in
all stages of conflict. Under that premise, we are
committed to continue providing our unwavering
support to the efforts in line with international law and
protect children as an inescapable ethical commitment.
I wish to conclude with an excerpt from a poem
entitled “The Infinite Children”, written by the
Venezuelan poet Andrés Eloy Blanco:
“When one has a child, every laugh sates us, every
tear wrenches us, from wherever it comes. When
one has a child, one has the world inside and the
heart outside. And when one has a child, one has all
the children of the world, the millions of children
with whom all peoples cry, with whom mothers
laugh and everyone dreams.”
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
the Malaysian initiative to hold this open debate on
children and armed conflict. It is timely and symbolic,
considering that this year we are marking the twentieth
anniversary of the creation of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, as well as all the briefers for
their contributions. Ukraine commends the work of the
Office of the Special Representative.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union later today.
The progress achieved over the past 20 years on the
implementation of the mandate on children and armed
conflict is quite impressive. We commend the fact that
25 action plans were signed between parties to conflict.
Nine parties to conflict were delisted from the annexes
of the annual reports. Yet Ukraine is deeply concerned
over the increase in grave violations of children’s

S/PV.7753

rights, as outlined in the latest report (S/2016/360) of
the Secretary-General. It is completely unacceptable
that children continue to bear the brunt of suffering
in war and armed conflict. The ongoing crises and
violent conflicts in the Central African Republic,
Iraq, Nigeria, South Sudan, Syria, Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in many other
places have claimed the lives of thousands of children
and disrupted the daily lives of millions of others. The
most recent terrifying example of that is the Syrian city
of Aleppo.
Armed conflicts result not only in senseless injuries
and deaths but also severely disrupt children’s lives. In
zones of fighting children become separated from their
parents and families in the chaos. Communities’ lives are
ruined. Schools are forced to close and health facilities
cannot provide services, which are needed more than
ever. Ongoing armed conflicts lead to an increase in the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). That is a challenge with which we have to find a
way to effectively deal. The plight of children displaced
by armed conflict is especially of very serious concern.
In situations of conflict, the risks for displaced children
and child refugees to be recruited, abused or abducted
are chillingly real. We all have to ask ourselves: Have
we as members of the international community done
enough to ensure the protection of those children?
The report highlights the concerns with regard
to Member States’ responses to violent extremism.
Ukraine fully shares the Secretary-General’s opinion
that we need to identify and address the root causes
of violent extremism. In our view, education is a key
factor in countering extremist narratives. However,
every child’s right to a quality education is out of
reach for millions of children affected by conflict. Yet
education alone is not enough. To address the vicious
cycle of conflict, violence and hatred, more must be
done to put an end to impunity for the grave crimes that
take place in various regions. According to UNICEF,
nearly 1 in 4 of approximately 110 million children of
primary and lower-secondary school age — typically
between 6- and 15-years-old — living in conflict areas
is missing out on their education. An average of four
schools or hospitals is attacked or occupied by armed
forces and groups every day. More has to be done to
better protect schools from attack and deter the military
use of them in accordance with international law.
Unfortunately, we know first-hand what negative
impact armed conflicts can have on children. According

16-2443717/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

to our data, 68 children have been killed and 186 have
been wounded in the eastern part of Ukraine since the
beginning of the conflict masterminded by Russia.
The number of internally displaced persons IDPs in
Ukraine who were forced to leave their homes in war
affected regions now stands at 1.7 million, including
215,000 children. The Ukrainian Government is doing
its utmost to strengthen social protection for displaced
children and families with children, including through
the elaboration of relevant legislation. As UNICEF
reports, the lives of 580,000 children living in
non-government-controlled areas and along the contact
line in eastern Ukraine have been severely effected
as a result of the continuing conflict. According
to the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine, 39 schools,
kindergartens and other facilities for children in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine are used
for military purposes by the Russian-backed illegal
armed groups. They have transformed those sites into
barracks, fortified military outposts and ammunition
and weapons storage facilities.
On numerous occasions Russian-backed separatists
have used school grounds as artillery and mortar
positions. There are also extremely worrying reports
on the establishment of camps in which children are
trained to handle weapons and on the use of children
for intelligence gathering and manning checkpoints.
For example, in May 2015, at a checkpoint on the
outskirts of Makiivka under the control of the so
called Donetsk People’s Republic, 10 kilometres to the
east of Donetsk, monitors from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) observed
a child, approximately 12 to 14 years of age, wearing
a camouflage uniform and holding an AK-47 rifle.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
has on several occasions reported that irregular armed
formations in the east are allegedly preventing young
men from leaving Donetsk and forcefully recruiting
them to join their ranks, which could amount to human
trafficking. In particular, at checkpoints controlled
by the Donetsk People’s Republic, the OSCE Mission
observed young armed persons, with some of the male
individuals estimated to be minors. There have also
been reports from various sources that children as
young as 15 years of age were being recruited to armed
youth groups and taking part in active combat as fullfledged members of the combined Russian-backed
militant forces, including as youth reconnaissance
and sabotage groups operating within Governmentcontrolled territory.
18/88

02/08/2016

It all amounts to child recruitment, which is a
grave violation of international humanitarian law. In
that light, the fact that the Secretary-General’s report
on children and armed conflict does not include any
reference to the situation of Ukrainian children affected
by the conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine is an
omission that should be corrected. Unfortunately, this
is another example of turning a blind eye to the sole
ongoing armed conflict in Europe.
Ukraine highly appreciates the financial and
technical assistance provided to our country by the
United Nations Children’s Fund. We are especially
grateful to UNICEF and its partners for their
continuous support of children, in particular those
affected by the consequences of the Russian aggression
against Ukraine.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Ukraine’s
commitment to the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child. We will continue to do our utmost to
that end in the framework of the United Nations system,
regional organizations and civil society.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
Malaysia for its initiative to organize today’s meeting,
a well as for its able and dynamic leadership of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral and to today’s briefers for their substantive
contributions to today’s meeting.
We carefully studied the report (S/2016/360) of the
Secretary-General on the issue of children and armed
conflict. We would like to note the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, including in
the now-concluding Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
We share the concern of the authors of the report
about the consequences for children as a result of the
numerous conflicts around the world. Modern-day
savagery is what we would call instances where children
become targets of deliberate attacks. We are seriously
concerned about the destruction of schools, hospitals
and other civilian infrastructure. The situation is dire
in a number of countries in the Middle East and North
Africa. In recent days, as a result of the United Statesled air strikes, dozens of civilians have been killed in
Syria, including women and children. The erosion of
State institutions as a result of external intervention in
the region has created a breeding ground for terrorism
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

and violent extremism. It is no surprise that children
are used as terrorists, suicide bombers or martyrs to
be beheaded. Such grisly crimes point to the urgent
need for coordinated and sustained efforts by the
international community to combat terrorism.
Unfortunately, some international actors and
groups perpetrating such atrocities are referrred to as
“moderates”. That brings to mind the recent attack
against the Palestinian child beheaded by armed elements
of the Noureddin Al-Zanki group. We are convinced
that allowing such “opposition” is unconscionable. It is
high time that the Security Council expand the list of
terrorist groups operating in Syria.
We support the appeal of the Secretary-General
to scale up programmes to prevent the recruitment of
children via social networks and to combat the spread
of violent extremism through social media.
The report notes an increase in the number of
children displaced as a result of numerous conflicts.
We agree with the conclusion that lasting peace is
the best way to reduce the flow of displaced persons,
including children.
We note the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the use of country visits
aimed at ensuring that parties to a conflict, including
non-State armed groups, take the necessary measures
to protect children.
Given that these issues are the responsibility of
national Governments, it is particularly important to
establish cooperation with Governments. We think
that measuring progress in the protection of children
must be based primarily on an objective asssessment
of the situation on the ground, rather than being guided
by statistics included in action plans. An impartial
approach and using only verified information are of
crucial importance, including in the drafting of reports
on this issue. There is a need to draw upon data from
reliable sources, following thorough checking. There
should be no attempts to bring outside political pressure
to bear with respect to the activities of the Special
Representative as she carries out her mandate.
In order to ensure effective United Nations action
to protect children in situations of armed conflict,
adequate capacity should be provided in peacekeeping
operations. Missions should be equipped with devoted,
highly qualified professionals who stay far removed
from politics. We have questions with regard to the idea

S/PV.7753

of so-called consolidation of specialized protection
functions under the human rights component. Such
an initiative could have a negative impact on the
effectiveness of United Nations missions in protecting
children, shifting the emphasis to human rights issues.
We believe that this type of decision should not be taken
without prior consultation with States, especially as the
work on the subject of children and armed conflict is
carried out on the basis of Security Council mandates.
However much the Ukrainian delegation would
like to place the blame on the Russian Federation for
the situation in Donbas, including that of children, the
situation is in fact the result of a military operation by
Kyiv against the east of Ukraine. Unfortunately, in spite
of statements of commitment to the Minsk package,
Ukrainian military activities continue. According to
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, between 12 and
20 July alone, rebel-controlled residential areas were
shelled from positions held by the Ukrainian armed
forces. Houses, schools and electrical facilities and gas
plants came under fire. Civilians were wounded and
killed.
The Mission’s report indicates that approximately
70 per cent of all shelling targeted residential areas of
Dombas and was carried out by the Ukrainian military.
Military activity by the Ukrainian armed forces is
continuing along with stubborn determination not to
implement the Minsk agreements and the obligations
entered into by Kyiv. There is a focus on ensuring
lasting security, but Kyiv is actually provoking clashes
along the line of contact.
The economic blockade of Donbas is on Kyiv’s
conscience, as is hurting children, including hampering
basic services and goods such as medication, education,
health care and so on. Numerous accounts from
non-governmental organizations point to the use of
schools and other educational institutions by Ukrainian
military forces, including the destruction and seizure
of property.
We have noted many times that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Ukraine. We must prevent the
increasing tensions in the east from leading to full
military action. We once again appeal to the Ukrainian
representatives not to escalate tensions and instead
to concentrate on full and strict compliance with the
package of measures through direct dialogue between
Kyiv and Donbas.

16-2443719/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

The Graça Machel report on children and armed
conflict (see A/51/306) was published 20 years ago.
The report focused on the disproportionate effect of
war on children. Over the years, the Security Council
has developed a toolkit to systematically address
this challenge. In today’s complex environment, it
is important that all links in the chain hold up, that
they be impartial and that they be guided by the need
to cooperate.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We congratulate Malaysia
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. We express our gratitude
for the convening of this open debate and commend
the Malaysian delegation for its excellent work and
dedication in chairing the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. We assure you, Mr. President, of
Angola’s full cooperation towards the success of the
Security Council’s proceedings during your presidency.
We thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
remarks. A special word of praise goes to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of her Office. We pledge to Ms. Zerrougui
our full political backing for the outstanding mission
entrusted to her Office.
We also thank the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Mr. Anthony Lake, for his remarks and for the work of
UNICEF to better the fate of children all over the world.
Current conflicts disproportionately impact
children. Civilians are the main victims of
indiscriminate attacks, with disturbing repercussions
on children. The report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2016/360) highlights
serious challenges to the protection of children and
the increasing violations inflicted upon them. The
situations in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Somalia,
South Sudan, Yemen, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Nigeria and Palestine are some of the instances
reported by the United Nations of children being
brutally killed, injured, maimed, abducted, forcibly
recruited into armed groups and exposed to sexual
abuse and exploitation.
The gruesome reality shows an increasing number
of children affected by violent extremism. They are
used as executioners or suicide bombers; targeted
by acts intended to destroy, humiliate and terrorize
communities in order to force them into compliance;
20/88

02/08/2016

and subject to massive displacement and all sorts of
trafficking, including the slave trade. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights cases of the deprivation
of the liberty of children formerly associated with
extremists or armed groups, without due process. In
our view, these cases should be carefully reviewed,
since many of those children are victims and should be
treated as such. Member States must ensure that trial
procedures are consistent with international standards
of juvenile justice and the principles of the best interests
of the child and their specific needs and vulnerabilities.
The reintegration, not punishment, of children formerly
associated with armed groups should be the priority.
One very disturbing trend is that of increasing
attacks on densely populated areas — including
schools, hospitals and medical facilities — by military
forces and armed and terrorist groups. These criminal
actions must end and, in due time, the perpetrators must
be held accountable. The recently adopted resolution
2286 (2016) recalls the specific obligation under
international humanitarian law to respect and protect
medical and humanitarian personnel, their means
of transport and equipment, and hospitals and other
medical facilities in situations of armed conflict, and
to ensure that the wounded and sick receive the medical
care and assistance required.
Member States and the international community
must do all in their power to help protect schools,
students and teachers in situations of armed conflict
and ensure that schools remain a safe place, while
strictly respecting their civil character. Angola recently
adhered to the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted at the
Oslo conference in May 2015, endorsing the guidelines
for protecting schools and universities from military
use duringt conflict. This process has been driven
by Member States, civil society and child protection
actors.
Another area of concern is the continued
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers and non-United Nations
international forces. In that regard, we are of the
view that peacekeeping operations should establish a
mandatory predeployment requirement for all troopcontributing countries in training on child protection,
aimed at radically changing the current state of affairs.
The systematic inclusion of child protection advisers
in the mandates of special political and peacekeeping
missions is important in making troop-contributing
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

countries and individual members of peacekeeping
missions further aware of this critical issue.
On a positive note, we would like to underline
the progress made by the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign. The commitments of Governments involved
in the campaign bring them into compliance with
international standards bearing on the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict. Governments listed
in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s reports are
now implementing action plans with the United Nations
aimed at eliminating the recruitment and use of children
in national security forces. Most parties listed in the
reports are non-State armed groups. We call on the
United Nations to continue striving to identify concrete
commitments by engaging with armed groups in order
to attain new action plans while implementing existing
ones with a view to ending the recruitment and use of
children as soldiers.
The engagement with non-State armed groups has
had remarkable results, in particular in the Central
African Republic. The signing of an agreement to end
the recruitment and use of and other violations against
children led to the release, during the Bangui Forum
in 2015, of over 3,000 children from the ranks of
signatory armed groups. Similar events in Colombia,
Mali, Myanmar, Philippines, the Sudan and South
Sudan are other examples of progress in that sense. The
inclusion in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
of specific commitments related to child protection,
and the provision of requirements for the rapid release
of children from armed forces and non-State armed
groups are, in our view, important measures in postconflicts situations.
In conclusion, ongoing armed conflicts have
resulted in the forced displacement of ever-growing
numbers of people. In 2015, children — many of them
unaccompanied or separated from their families and in
high-risk situations — constituted half of the refugee
population. Preventing the outbreak of conflicts is still
the best way to protect children. Unfortunately, the
international community still lacks appropriate tools for
effective preventive action. Meanwhile, the protection
of children in armed conflict must continue to be at the
centre of the international community’s priorities and
of a true, comprehensive strategy of active protection
and humanitarian response.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We
congratulate Malaysia on convening this debate and on

S/PV.7753

its leadership of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We thank the Secretary-General for
his careful briefing, and Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake
both for their briefings and for their important work in
protecting the interests of children.
As others have noted, it has been 20 years since
the Graça Machel report (see A/51/306) was released,
drawing global attention to the devastating impact
of armed conflict on children. Since then, we have
established a strong framework to monitor and address
violations against children in armed conflict. Its
purpose is not simply to criticize or censure, but also
to drive practical improvements on the ground. The
Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake, as
well as other speakers, have described the places and
ways in which children are suffering in conflict zones.
We are all horrified at the way children are used,
abused, manipulated and killed; their lives blighted,
their futures destroyed. Yet far too often, we see utter
indifference to this suffering of the innocent on the part
of those who could make a difference yet chose not to.
There are real limits to what we as a Council and as
a United Nations can do to change things. But we must
make full use of the tools available to us. The SecretaryGeneral has been given a clear mandate to report on
and list those parties responsible for grave violations
committed against children in armed conflict.
It is, of course, possible that information used in
such reports is contested, and it is important that there
are discussions to ensure that reports are as accurate
as possible. Nevertheless, the Secretary-General and
his office must be able to discharge their mandate
independently in order to maintain a transparent and
credible listing process. All Member States must respect
the Secretary-General’s independence, as required by
the Charter. This is a collective responsibility that we
all must uphold. So too must the United Nations and we
Member States live up to our commitments to protect
children and others from sexual abuse and exploitation
by United Nations peacekeepers and personnel.
Complaints must be investigated and perpetrators must
be brought to justice.
As Ms. Zerrougui has reminded us, action plans
with listed parties are delivering clear, practical results.
Since 2003, nine parties to conflicts in Chad, Cote
d’Ivoire, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Uganda have completed
their action plans and have been delisted from the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual report.

16-2443721/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

This progress is welcome. At the same time, we must
acknowledge that the situation of children in many
conflict settings remains grave.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2016/360)
paints a harrowing picture. I wish to highlight several
issues that demand urgent attention. Both schools and
hospitals have special protections under international
humanitarian law. Yet attacks on schools and hospitals
were documented in 19 out of 20 situations of conflict
in 2015. Parties to conflict continue to use schools and
universities for military purposes, leaving children
vulnerable to retaliatory attack. Even where no military
attack occurs, the presence of armed forces within
schools exposes children to increased risk of sexual
violence and of recruitment by armed actors. New
Zealand has endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration,
as have 52 other Member States. We urge others to do
the same.
In May, at the initiative of New Zealand and four
other elected members, the Council adopted a resolution
on health care in armed conflict, which unequivocally
condemned attacks on health-care workers and healthcare facilities. Our message was clear: the wounded
and sick, medical personnel, facilities, transport
and equipment must be respected and protected. The
delivery of medical assistance must not be obstructed.
It is that simple.
And yet attacks on hospitals have continued, with
children frequently among the casualties. The recent
fighting in Aleppo has seen further egregious examples.
These attacks are an affront to our common humanity
and must stop. We urge all States and parties to conflict
to comply with international humanitarian law and to
redouble their efforts to protect civilians and limit the
harm to which they are exposed.
Where fear of violent extremism builds, we see
increasing numbers of children detained without charge
by Governments that consider them security threats.
These children are frequently subject to torture and illtreatment. As the Secretary-General has underlined,
depriving children of their liberty is contrary to the best
interests of both the child and of society as a whole. The
abuse of children in detention only creates a greater
sense of grievance in communities and further fuels the
spread of violent extremism. The detention of children
without charge must stop. Children associated with
armed groups should be transferred to child protection
authorities for rehabilitation. If charged with a valid
22/88

02/08/2016

criminal offence, children must be treated in accordance
with international juvenile justice standards. We urge
Member States to treat children associated with armed
groups as victims entitled to full protection of their
human rights.
In that regard, we fully support the Secretary
General’s
message
around
reintegration
and
rehabilitation. No child’s story ends simply with his
or her release by an armed group. Adequately funded
reintegration programmes for children separated from
armed forces and groups are needed to enable children
to rebuild their lives in safety and dignity. Without
support, children may return to violence.
Former child soldiers who have acquired a disability
during conflict have particular rehabilitation and
reintegration needs. Such children are especially likely
to experience isolation and neglect. We would welcome
discussion among the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, UNICEF, the Special Rapporteur
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other
relevant stakeholders to develop recommendations or
guidance for the reintegration and rehabilitation of
these children.
In closing, let me reiterate New Zealand’s full
support for the work of the Special Representative and
her office, the rigour and integrity of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism, and the Secretary General’s
comprehensive reporting and recommendations. We
urge all Member States to continue to support their vital
work and to help them translate the global consensus
on the need to protect the rights of children in conflict
settings into a much better reality than we see today.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, at the outset may I congratulate you on
Malaysia’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council in this month of August and assure you of the
full support of the Senegalese delegation. I would also
like to thank Malaysia’s predecessor in the post, Japan,
for its outstanding presidency in July.
Ambassador Ibrahim, it is true that sometimes
one topic is hidden within another. By devoting an
open debate to the crucial problem of children in
armed conflicts at the beginning of your presidency,
you are demonstrating the remarkable leadership you
have shown and will continue to show at the head of
the Security Council Working Group on Children in
Armed Conflict. You have highlighted our humanity,
as Anthony Lake reminded us, as well as the humanity
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

of the Security Council by consistently promoting the
action of the Council for the protection of children in
armed conflict.
Stéphane Hessel, a brilliant French intellectual
has said: “Be outraged”. Here, in the Council, were
are outraged, but more than that, we are mobilized,
and we have chosen to act to improve the situation of
children affected by armed conflict. By inviting us this
morning to reflect upon children in armed conflicts,
you clearly intended, Mr. President, to call attention
to the three-fold tragedy of these children: as civilian
victims of the worst atrocities in theatres of operation;
as victims of forced recruitment by parties to the
conflict, particularly non-State armed groups; and as
victims of extreme physical and psychological trauma.
That is the reason the Senegalese delegation
welcomes the holding of this debate. We extend
heartfelt thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
to his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Leila Zerrougui, and to the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
brilliant statements, which further elucidate the gravity
and scope of the phenomenon we are up against.

S/PV.7753

strengthening preventive measures and, finally,
ensuring accountability for perpetrators of war crimes.
The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has had a
significant impact in the protection of child victims
of armed conflict, including through the signing of 25
action plans that contributed to the efforts that made
possible the freeing of more than 115,000 children
since 2000, including 8,000 in 2015 alone, if my figures
are correct. The campaign has also facilitated the
taking into account of the situation of children in the
drafting and signing of ceasefire and peace agreements
around the globe. This trend should be continued and
strengthened. Likewise, the integration of this matter
into the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be systematic, from the peacekeeping
phase to that of peacebuilding. And it should include
the deployment of child protection advisers.
Given the numerous challenges to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, my delegation believes that
humanitarian pauses are obligatory for the parties in
conflict. We take this opportunity to strongly condemn
the militarization of schools and hospitals. Firing on
ambulances and schools must cease.

In looking at the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/360) we see that children, in addition to
forced recruitment, killings, maiming, abduction,
displacement and sexual violence, are also victims
of violent extremism and of terrorists who cynically
exploit them as sexual slaves and, even worse, as
human bombs. They do so in flagrant violation of
international law, notably the four Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols and of resolution 1261
(1999) — the first of its type adopted by the Council
on the topic. That is why the Senegalese delegation
endorses the words of the Secretary-General as he
affirms in his report:

This brings me to the second part of my statement,
namely, the prevention of conflicts, which should be at
the core of our concerns. This moves from promoting
ongoing and inclusive political dialogue to rapid alert,
via good offices, all in the framework of a regional and
subregional approach supported by the international
community. Prevention should also involve tracking and
controling the flow of weapons, including small arms
and light weapons, so as to address their proliferation,
in accordance with the Arms Trade Treaty. Equally
important are the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for child soldiers to prevent
their taking up arms again.

“The impact on children of our collective failure
to prevent and end conflict is severe ... . Those
violations are directly related to the denigration
of the respect for international humanitarian
and human rights law by parties to the conflict.”
(S/2016/360, para. 4)

Speaking of the social reintegration of children
through psychological support, educational programmes
and professional training, I would like to note here
the creation in the member States of the Economic
Community of West African States, including Senegal,
of welcome and family placement centres for child
soldiers, as well as jurisdictions and specialized centres
for the detention of minors.

The current debate is therefore a way to challenge
the universal conscience regarding the disgrace
represented by the fate of children in conflicts. It
is Senegal’s belief that the situation has gone on far
too long. Senegal urgently calls for three-fold action:
first, guaranteeing the protection of children, then

These different measures were introduced to
mitigate the disastrous impact of the conscription of
children on society, conscription that undermines the
social contract that links the security forces to the

16-2443723/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

civilian populations that they are supposed to protect. It is
imperative to ensure accountability for the perpetrators
of such atrocities. The success of the difficult process
of reconciliation depends on that. The determination of
warlords to continue to carry out abominable crimes
should be countered by our unshakable will and our
collective responsibility to halt impunity and to ensure
that justice is served. We owe this to the victims; we
owe this to current and future generations.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance
of establishing a holistic strategy that takes into
account all of the elements I have mentioned. I would
like to reaffirm Senegal’s determination to continue
to contribute to the work of eliminating this scourge.
That is how we will see the peaceful and inclusive
societies advocated in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me express my
congratulations to you, Sir, on assuming the post of
President for August. I look forward to working with
Malaysia in the Security Council presidency. I would
like to express my sincere appreciation for your
initiative in convening today’s open debate. Let me also
thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
as well as the briefers for their respective briefings.
Japan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. We are proud to be a member of that Group.
Twenty years have passed since the General
Assembly adopted the mandate for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. I welcome the progress that has
been made in the years since. Very recently, as of March,
all the countries engaged in the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign had signed their respective action plans. I
welcome this achievement and would like to commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her tireless work in promoting the campaign. I should like
to point out, however, that signing an action plan is just
a starting point, not the goal. As the report (S/2016/360)
of the Secretary-General issued in April emphasizes,
it is difficult for child soldiers released from militaries
or armed groups to reintegrate themselves into the
societies to which they once belonged. Their time spent
as soldiers deprived them of invaluable opportunities,
such as education. Furthermore, these children often
24/88

02/08/2016

lack the appropriate psychosocial support required for
their reintegration.
While tackling this issue, we need to remind
ourselves that children under armed conflict are
disparately vulnerable. Programmes to support them
must address their unique needs, as these children
often lack the knowledge and experience to make the
appropriate decisions on their own. Furthermore, in
most cases it is difficult to expect the States affected
by armed conflict to cope with the situation alone. It
is indispensable that the whole of international society
supports the conflict-affected States in funding and
sharing good practices. In that context, I would like to
commend the activities of UNICEF to support conflictaffected children. I can refer to the projects in the
Central African Republic, the Sudan, Cameroon and so
forth. Japan has contributed $81.5 million over the past
seven years to these challenges throughout Africa, the
Middle East and Asia. We are committed to continuing
our efforts.
The issue of displaced children is one of the
challenges that has proved even more complicated
in the past 20 years. Those children are deprived
of access to education and health care. When the
growth of children is hampered, that could lead to
marginalization and possibly to the further rise of violent
extremism — depending upon the circumstances, of
course. Efforts should be made to provide education
and health care to those children. Japan is ready to
continue its support in these areas as well. We have
provided such health-care support as hygiene assistance
and vaccinations for refugees and internally displaced
persons, including children. We have also provided
temporary classrooms and educational equipment for
children affected by armed conflict.
Last but not least, monitoring and reporting
mechanisms based on resolution 1612 (2005) have been
critical for the progress so far. Information gathered
by this mechanism is the foundation of structuring
supporting activities for the children in need. The
Security Council must continue to address this agenda, as
violations of the rights of the vulnerable — in our context
today, the children — can threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security. Japan will continue its
active efforts to promote this agenda.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming the briefings from the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Zerrougui and UNICEF
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

Executive Director Anthony Lake. Their specific
examples and the scale of the numbers that they just
gave underline how important this is.
At the outset, I should like to express my gratitude
for the latest annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2016/360). I also
recognize the hard work that goes into this, and I really
want to thank the United Nations country task forces for
all that they do, often in very difficult circumstances,
to provide reliable evidence-based information on
violations against children. As the Secretary-General
said, they are courageous.
Sadly, as we have heard today, the evidence shows
that children continue to be targeted, maimed and killed
in conflicts across the world, so I should like to focus
my remarks today on two issues in particular.
First, as we heard so clearly during last week’s
meeting on Aleppo (see S/PV.7744), the continuing
violence in Syria is putting the lives of hundreds of
thousands of children at risk. Continuing attacks on
populated areas, hospitals and maternity and paediatric
words, in particular by the Syrian regime and its allies,
all are having a devastating impact on children’s welfare,
their physical and mental health and, ultimately, their
future. The children of Syria risk becoming a lost
generation, one without hope or prospects. Tony Lake
rightly pointed out the importance of education just
now. That is why the United Kingdom is championing
the essential role that education can play for children
affected by this conflict. Education can restore hope;
it can create prospects. We are building on the success
of the “No Lost Generation” initiative, which has
helped more than a quarter of a million children access
schooling in Syria and the region, to develop “Education
Cannot Wait”, a fund for education in emergencies that
was launched at the World Humanitarian Summit. That
fund aims to address chronic underfunding by raising
$1.5 billion to reach more than 13 million children. It
aims to significantly improve how that money is spent
through supporting better ways of working together.
The United Kingdom has committed $40 million to
Education Cannot Wait over the next two years, which
will help reach more than 4.5 million children and
young people by 2018. I call on all Member States to
support this initiative today.
My second point concerns the sexual exploitation
and abuse of children by United Nations peacekeepers
and personnel. Children expect and trust peacekeepers

S/PV.7753

to protect them. Every time a peacekeeper fails to so,
that trust is undermined and, with it, the integrity of the
United Nations. It is absolutely crucial that respect for
children’s rights within United Nations peacekeeping
operations be strengthened. The adoption of Security
Council resolution 2272 (2016) was a step in the right
direction. Zero tolerance must mean zero tolerance. So
we now need to see implementation of the commitments
we made in the resolution.
Troop-contributing countries as well as non-United
Nations forces must swiftly, thoroughly and transparently
investigate all allegations of violations against children
committed by peacekeepers. Perpetrators must be
held to account and receive the harshest of sanctions
for child sex offences. If perpetrators are not held to
account by their own systems, we fully support the
Secretary-General’s ability to repatriate military and
police peacekeepers, and we fully endorse his decision
to prohibit the States listed in the annexes to the report
on children and armed conflict from contributing
troops to United Nations peacekeeping.
Given the clear need for a greater focus on child
protection in United Nations peace operations, we
are also concerned by the potential consequences
of consolidating this work into the human rights
component of such missions, so we believe that this
change needs to be kept under review. The key here
is for the United Nations to preserve the specialized
role of child protection advisers and their direct, not
mediated, access to senior leadership. They must be
allowed to continue their important work in advocacy
with Government and dialogue with parties to conflict.
One other quick point before I conclude. It will
come as no surprise that we do not agree with Russia’s
characterization just now of what is going on in Ukraine.
Abiding by international law has been a key element of
this debate. That must apply to Russia’s actions as much
as to everyone else’s.
Let me close with this final point. As we reflect
today on how much we have to do, it would be remiss
not to acknowledge how far we have come in this past
year. Last year, more than 8,000 children were released
from the hell that is life as a child soldier. That is
8,000 children putting down their guns and picking up
their lives, 8,000 children now looking to the future
and hope, not inferior. In March, the Sudan signed
an action plan with the United Nations on ending the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. It was the last

16-2443725/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

Government with underage soldiers in its forces to do
so. And in May, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia signed an agreement with the Government of
Colombia to release all remaining child soldiers. This
was a vital step in bringing a decades-long conflict to
an overdue conclusion.
These are historic commitments, perhaps
unthinkable 20 years ago, when the Graça Machel
report (see A/51/306) was released. Such commitments
would not have been possible without the mandate of
the Special Representative, and they will have a huge
impact on children’s lives across the world when they
are implemented.
So yes, there is much more to do. We can make a
difference; let us all work together to do so.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to wish you a very productive month. I also thank
you for having convened this very important open debate
to mark the 20-year anniversary of the Graça Machel
report (see A/51/306). I should like also to express
my gratitude for the briefings given by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui and the Executive director of UNICEF,
Mr. Anthony Lake.
Uruguay supports the statement made by Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.
Conflicts today more than ever have a marked
impact on the civilian population, in particular children,
given their particular vulnerability, and, in the twentyfirst century, continue to represent one of the major
threats to the protection and promotion of their human
rights. Uruguay has historically been committed to
respecting and promoting the rights of the child and,
among other things, we have promoted year after year
the General Assembly resolution on this item.
My country categorically condemns the repeated
violations of the human rights of the boys and girls, and
reiterates its dismay at the fact that they continue to be
killed, maimed, mutilated, kidnapped, and subjected to
rape and other forms of sexual violence, recruited as
child soldiers and used in acts of war, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/360) sadly points out.
Also of particular concern is the situation of girls
sold into slavery as well as the victims of abduction
26/88

02/08/2016

and those forced into sexual unions or forced or
early marriage. These practices represent a flagrant
violation of their human rights and have an irreversible
impact on their physical and mental integrity as well
as their future development. Also reprehensible is the
growing use of explosive weapons and aerial bombings
against civilian targets perpetrated by various parties
to armed conflicts, including schools, hospitals and
populated areas, which deprives children of access to
education and has an adverse effect on the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
In Syria, indiscriminate air attacks against civilian
targets and zones are the main cause of death and
maiming of children during the period covered by the
report of the Secretary-General. The actions of armed
groups also prevented 35,000 children from being
vaccinated. According to the report, the number of
attacks against schools and hospitals doubled in Yemen
in 2014, with 59 attacks against hospitals and 42 against
schools.
We are also dismayed at the impact of terrorism
and violent extremism on the promotion and protection
of the human rights of children. According to the report
of the Secretary-General, more than 6,500 schools
have been destroyed, damaged or used as shelters
in Syria, while terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, or Da’esh, continue to use education to
indoctrinate and recruit children.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights the
serious violations being committed against children.
In this situation, the adoption of urgent measures is
an inescapable moral duty and a legal obligation of the
international community towards current and future
generations. That is why my country, while it reiterates
its firm commitment to eradicating violence against
children, also calls on the countries that have not yet
done so to sign or ratify the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols and Convention
No. 182 of the International Labour Organization, on
the prohibition of the worst forms of child labour, which
are based on the Cape Town Principles adopted in 1997.
We also reiterate our concern about the continued
violations by the parties to armed conflicts of the
provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, including those related to the
protection of civilians and in particular children. All
parties to conflicts must fully comply with the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

of 1977, which are of vital importance to respecting
the rights of the child. As underscored today by the
Secretary-General, even in time of war certain rules
must be followed. We also call for effective compliance
with, and the implementation of, resolution 2143 (2014),
resolution 2225 (2015), with regard to children abducted
by non-State armed groups or recruited by State armed
forces, and resolution 2286 (2016), which was adopted
in May, with regard to attacks on medical facilities
and personnel.
Among other measures to be taken are those
designed to address the basic needs of the large number
of children who are displaced owing to armed conflict,
many of whom are unaccompanied minors and could
be subjected to serious violations or be recruited by
parties to conflicts within refugee camps or zones. In
that context, it is crucial that States of origin, transit and
destination ensure the protection of displaced children
and guarantee their access, especially to medical
assistance and education. The international community
must also fight against impunity and adopt measures
against those responsible for serious violations against
children. When appropriate, the perpetrators should be
referred to the International Criminal Court, since the
Rome Statute categorizes as war crimes those involving
sexual violence and the conscription or enlistment of
children under the age of 15 or using them to participate
actively in the hostilities of armed conflicts.
We would like to refer to a subject we consider to
be of great importance, namely, the reintegration of
children who have been involved with armed groups
and have been victims of violent extremism and have
suffered other serious violations of their rights, in
particular in cases of abuse or sexual exploitation. For
their social reintegration, we need the commitment
of the State concerned, but also the cooperation of
the international community. Children should be
considered first as victims, and be treated as such within
the framework of legislation and a juvenile legal system
oriented to their social rehabilitation. We must also
create protective environments, including programmes
and services for social and psychological care to
overcome the effects of the experiences of conflict
and facilitate their rehabilitation and reintegration in
the community as a key element of the post-conflict
process. The implementation of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes to
promote the well-being of affected children is of
particular importance in that regard. We understand

S/PV.7753

that these efforts must include short-, medium- and
long-term plans and must have adequate human and
financial resources for the reintegration to be effective
and sustainable over time.
Education is another vital factor in achieving
reintegration, as it offers children valid alternatives to
a future that often is presented as grim and devastating.
Children who have grown up experiencing violence on
a daily basis lack such concepts as how to live in peace
or how to have respect for human life. That is why there
must be education to train them, first in those lacking
concepts, such as peaceful social coexistence and
respect for human rights. Secondly, through education
we must offer these children professional opportunities
and economic security to enable them to break the
cycle of violence and prevent them from being forced
to resort to delinquency or to joining other groups that
commit illegal or terrorists activities.
In the United Nations and the Security Council,
we must redouble our efforts to address the terrible
situation faced by children who are victims of violent
conflicts. Uruguay supports the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and reiterates the importance it
attaches to fulfilling her mandate. We value the role
played by instruments that are part of the children and
armed conflict agenda, including the annual report of
the Secretary-General, the list attached to his report
and the monitoring and reporting mechanism. These
instruments are necessary and fundamental since
accurate, timely and objective information on serious
violations committed against children during armed
conflicts would help the parties to a conflict to comply
with international standards on the protection of
children and accountability.
That is why Uruguay expresses its concern about the
fact that States Members of the Organization are using
pressure to avoid international scrutiny, such as is the
case with the suspension of the coalition operating in
Yemen from the list annexed to report of the SecretaryGeneral. These actions are particularly disturbing,
primarily because they undermine the effectiveness
of the instruments adopted to provide a response and
a solution to the serious violations committed against
children in conflict situations.
I would like to conclude by referring to the
role that can be played by peacekeeping operations
with respect to this agenda. As a troop-contributing

16-2443727/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

country, Uruguay shows on the ground its unequivocal
commitment to protecting the civilian population in
general and to children in particular by supporting the
recommendation to include specific provisions for the
protection of children in all peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we understand that we must strengthen
within these operations the monitoring and information
functions on violations committed against children
and provide them with experts in the field and devote
financial resources to that end. Moreover, we must also
provide training on the protection and prevention of
sexual exploitation to troops before deployment.
The history of humankind shows that wars do not
produce winners, but rather victims and destruction.
Among the millions of deaths, injuries and those
suffering from physical and psychological wounds
persons, the main victims of armed conflicts are
children. According to UNICEF data on children born
in conflict, 86.7 million children have experienced
only war in their lives. This terrible reality shows that
armed conflicts robs them of their childhood, safety,
their family and feelings, robs them of their innocence
and denies them the right to play, learn and have fun
like other children. They have been denied for long
enough; it is now our collective responsibility make
sure they are not denied their future, their opportunities
or their dreams.
Some day all of us will have to learn that children
are untouchable.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber. I would also like to appeal to all speakers
to deliver their statements at a reasonable speed so that
interpretation may be provided accurately.

02/08/2016

for convening this timely and important open debate
to address the grave violations against children in
armed conflicts. I would like to formally thank the
Secretary-General, whom I saw a few moments ago,
for his insightful remarks earlier and for his tireless
and sincere efforts to address this painful issue. My
delegation commends Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF, whom I was able to congratulate
personally, and the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for their tireless efforts
to tackle this problem.
Despite all international action and increased global
concern, children continue to be disproportionately
affected during and in the aftermath of conflicts. This
situation calls for strong and urgent action by Member
States. My country fully endorses UNICEF’s Children,
Not Soldiers campaign and urges the speedy and full
implementation of its action plans designed to end
violations against children.
We call for increased political will and the
commitment of Member States to shifting to a broader
perspective by sustaining long-term rehabilitation and
reintegration of children, child soldiers and, especially,
girls into normal life. Education programmes,
vocational training and adequate psychological support
need to be integrated so that former child soldiers are
treated as victims rather than security threats.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Erlan
Idrissov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.

We believe that the machinery of the
non-governmental organization community, such
as Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, Save
the Children Alliance and the Geneva Call, should
be mobilized to get more non-State actors to join the
latter’s “Deed of Commitment”. We are convinced that
every effort should be made to protect schools, hospitals
and humanitarian facilities from attacks in order to
ensure safe access to education and health care. In
that regard, my country co-sponsored resolution 2286
(2016), recently adopted on this matter. Kazakhstan
has also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and
calls on parties to conflicts to uphold its Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict.

Mr. Idrissov (Kazakhstan): Let me first of all
commend Malaysia on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. I would like
to join in thanking Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim

Realizing the important role that education can play
in promoting peace and stability, we have allocated a
total of more than $53 million for various humanitarian
projects in Afghanistan. Our record of assistance

I wish to inform all concerned that we will carry
on this open debate right through the lunch hour, as we
have a large number of speakers.

28/88

16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

includes the construction of schools and hospitals in
that country and the funding of annual scholarships for
Afghan students.
As a State fully committed to its international
obligations, Kazakhstan ratified, in July 2011, the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and accordingly adapted its own national
Children’s Rights Act. We also introduced legal
measures to prohibit the enlistment of persons
under the age of 18 or their use as mercenaries, and
strengthened the relevant provisions of our national
criminal code. As part of our school curriculum, we
focus on interfaith and inter-ethnic education in order
to form a national identity based on the shared human
values of tolerance in a global civilization, and thereby
prevent violent extremism.
We would like to suggest the following
recommendations for strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations to protect children in armed conflict.
Thia grave situation demands that a child-protection
mandate be incorporated into the work of the Security
Council and of peacekeeping and political missions,
with dedicated child-protection capacity at every level.
Intensive special training of troops, police and civilian
personnel before deployment would ensure effective
detection, tracing, rescue and rehabilitation operations,
as well as monitoring and reporting procedures on
behalf of child victims. Child protection should also be
an integral element of all peace processes.
Of late we have learned of despicable plans of
the self-proclaimed group called the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Shams, or Da’esh, to massively use
children to train future terrorists. These are absolutely
reprehensible and unacceptable plans, and we should
respond in a united and global manner to foil them.
Another aspect of this issue is mass migration
and refugee flows. In the case of mass refugee flows,
States of origin, transit and destination must be held
accountable to fulfil their obligations to uphold the
rights of children.
All aspects of this integrated approach call for
greater coordination between all States Members of the
United Nations, specifically the members of the Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,

S/PV.7753

the United Nations country teams on the ground and, of
course, the Human Rights Council.
It is an honour for Kazakhstan to have been elected
to serve on the Council for the years 2017 and 2018. We
pledge to undertake that responsibility with the utmost
seriousness, and we see upholding the rights, dignity
and protection of children in time of conflict as a most
sacred mission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Malaysia for convening this open
debate, and the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
their respective briefings.
My country aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.
Mexico condemns any activity that violates the
rights and well-being of children and adolescents,
including situations of armed conflict, where the
essential rights of children are especially affected.
Today’s debate is particularly relevant, as it
celebrates the twentieth anniversary of the introduction
of the issue into the agenda of the Security Council. At
that time there emerged a consensus and an international
awareness regarding the importance of preventing and
addressing recruitment and use of children by armed
groups under any circumstances. In the 20 years since
then, we have made significant progress, such as the
inclusion of the lists of perpetrators of grave violations
against children in the annexes to the reports of the
Secretary-General.
Nevertheless, we are also aware that there remain
worrying challenges, as is the case with the noted
increasing intensity of serious violations in various
armed conflicts, the prolongation of such conflicts and
the resulting increased forced displacement of children,
and the use of violent extremism and the recruitment of
children by different parties to armed conflict.
These facts must serve to reaffirm our collective
determination to keep the subject at the centre of the
international agenda. The Government of Mexico
reiterates its support for the important work of the
Office of the Special Representative. It is essential

16-2443729/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

that the work of the Office, in particular through the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, be respected by
all involved. Reports should be accepted and valued,
because their content constitutes transparent and
objective advocacy for the best interests of children in
situations of particular vulnerability.
We also express our deep concern over the
consequences of the increase in recent years of forced
displacement of children. Displaced and refugee minors
are doubly vulnerable to becoming victims of serious
human rights violations. It is essential that the Council
reiterate its calls for all parties to a conflict and the
international community to respect international law
and the human rights of children, who are the main
victims of conflict and violence.
That is why Mexico has agreed to be one of the
pathfinder countries of the Global Partnership to End
Violence Against Children, an initiative that seeks
to ensure the conditions for children to enjoy a life
without violence. We reiterate the commitment of
our Government to work outside and within Mexico
to promote this global initiative. We also reiterate
our support for the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
launched in 2014 by the Office of the Special
Representative and UNICEF, and our unwavering
commitment to achieve its goals.
We welcome and will follow up in a timely manner
the measures taken by the Organization to prevent
and combat violence and sexual abuse committed by
United Nations personnel in peacekeeping operations
of which children have been the unfortunate victims.
We consider it essential to ensure compliance with the
policy of zero tolerance for exploitation and sexual
abuse committed by civilian or military personnel of
peacekeeping operations or any other force authorized
by the Security Council, and to bring to justice those
who have committed them.
We reiterate our call on the members of the Council
to promote measures that contribute to full respect
for international law; include specific provisions for
the protection of minors in peacekeeping operations
and special political missions by mainstreaming child
protection in the field; encourage warring parties to
include in peace talks or negotiations measures for the
protection of children; require the sanctions committees
that have not done so to include in their work criteria
for serious violations of the rights of children in order to
strengthen measures against systematic perpetrators of
30/88

02/08/2016

these violations; and provide more systematic follow-up
to the decisions and recommendations of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, particularly
when considering conflict situations under its agenda.
Finally, I wish to reiterate that full respect for the
rights of children can be achieved only in peace and
security. The prevention of conflicts and the search
for sustainable peace must therefore be priority
objectives of the international community. We need to
redouble our efforts, in line with the objectives of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), to find long-term solutions
to mitigate the causes of armed conflict, care for the
most vulnerable populations and mitigate the harm
done to victims of serious violations of international
humanitarian law in post-conflict settings. In that
regard, Mexico’s priority before the Council will be to
continue to prevent and alleviate the suffering of those
who are the future and present of our societies. Our
ethical and moral obligation is to protect the rights of
children in all circumstances and to turn environments
of adversity into environments of opportunity for all
children around the world.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by congratulating Malaysia on assuming
the presidency of the Council and organizing this timely
open debate.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/360), 2015 was, sadly, another horrific year
for children trapped in conflict zones and targeted
by warring factions with no respect for international
humanitarian law or the welfare of our children. The
complete disregard for civilians, including children,
exhibited by Da’esh, Al-Qaeda and their affiliates,
especially in Syria and Iraq, has been particularly
shocking, and the proliferation of these tactics among
such groups worrying. Violent extremists have
adopted widespread abduction as a feature of their
operations to inflict terror and for the purpose of
political brainwashing, ransom, retaliation or sexual
exploitation. Boko Haram’s gangs have been ravaging
parts of Nigeria and terrorizing children. Likewise,
the targeting of the children of religious and ethnic
minority groups is also a matter of grave concern.
The situation of children in Yemen, and especially
the United Nations-verified sixfold increase in the
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

number of children killed and maimed, is also a
matter of great concern. The Secretary-General’s
report indicates that, of a total 1,953 child casualties,
including 785 children killed and 1,168 injured, 60 per
cent of them were caused by air strikes. This marks
an exponential and unacceptable leap compared to the
entire year of 2014 and makes clear how the intensity of
the conflict in Yemen can lead to humanitarian crises.
The Secretary-General’s 2015 report on this issue
(S/2015/409) and other United Nations agencies attest
to the fact that, only in Gaza between 8 July and
26 August 2014, 540 Palestinian children were killed,
2,955 injured, among whom as many as 1,000 were
estimated to be permanently disabled as a result of the
latest Israeli invasion of Gaza. The number of schools,
kindergartens and hospitals damaged or completely
destroyed by Israeli forces during the same period is
the highest recorded numbers of all situations in 2014.
The international community, including the Security
Council, should ensure serious follow-up efforts to
bring an end to Israel’s impunity and to secure justice
for the victims. This impunity has led to actions taken
by the Israeli Government “that further restrict the
rights of Palestinians, including children” (S/2016/360,
para. 79).
In the face of children killed and their homes,
schools and hospitals destroyed, it is disappointing
that undue pressure and lobbying were exerted that
could change the course of events. Last year, Israel was
not blacklisted despite flagrantly targeting children
in Gaza. This year in Yemen, the Saudi Arabia-led
coalition was first blacklisted, based on United Nations
findings that it was directly responsible for 60 per cent
of child casualties, including the deaths of 785 children
due to bombing campaigns. But surprisingly, its name
was finally removed from the list.
Finally, have the ongoing airstrikes in Yemen, which
have already led to the deaths of hundreds of Yemeni
children, had any result other than strengthening
Da’esh and Al-Qaida? While the world seems mostly
unconscious of and indifferent to the killing and
suffering of Yemeni children, can the international
community be protected against the growing strategic
threat of terrorism and violent extremism?
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I congratulate Malaysia on its accession to

S/PV.7753

the Council presidency and wish it every success in its
endeavours. We also thank the Malaysian presidency
for inviting us to participate in this debate and welcome
Malaysia’ leadership role in the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
I also thank the Secretary-General, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict Leila Zerrougui and UNICEF
Executive Director Anthony Lake for their briefings.
It has been 20 years since the publication of the
Graça Machel report on the impact of armed conflict
on children (see A/51/306). Despite ongoing efforts
to protect children since the question of children and
armed conflict has been inscribed on the agenda of the
Security Council, and despite the limited progress that
has been made — such as the Children, Not Soldiers
initiative and others — children are still the primary
victims of armed conflict.
My delegation is very concerned about the increase
in the number of serious violations of children’s
rights. We strongly condemn the atrocities described
in the report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-General
committed by such groups as Da’esh, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab, as well as other religious movements.
Such groups exploit children, maim them, deprive them
of freedom, abduct them and sexually exploit them.
The deterioration with regard to the situation of
persons displaced by conflict has had a serious impact
on chidren, including in South Sudan and Syria. My
delegation emphasizes that the best way to provide the
protection children need is to ensure sustainable peace
and prevent or contain conflict. That must also include
ending occupation of all kinds and complying with
international law and international humanitarian law.
Palestinian children are the first victims of Israel,
which is continuing its military occupation and
pursuing its terrorist and aggressive policies. It is also
continuing its siege and its violations of international
law without fear of sanction or being brought to
justice. Israel continues to use excessive force against
children, including executions. Israel holds children in
its prisons, where it mistreats them, tortures them and
exploits them. Children are tried by military courts,
even if they are not of age to stand trial. Their homes
are destroyed. They are forcibly displaced. Hospitals
and schools are attacked. And that is to say nothing of
the crimes committed by the terrorist settlers.

16-2443731/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

Once again, we call on the Security Council to
make Israel bear the legal and criminal responsibility
for the serious violations it commits. We call on the
Council to compel Israel to release child prisoners
and to stop exploiting and abusing them. We call for
an immediate end to the occupation, in line with the
Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant international
instruments. We also call for a return to the 1967
borders. And we call for support to a Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is very concerned
about the suffering of children in Syria. We condemn
the daily attacks by Syrian forces in which children
are killed or disfigured and their homes are destroyed.
The air raids continue. In fact, they are intensifying.
We see the continued use of barrel bombs and the
deliberate targeting of schools, hospitals and medical
personnel. My delegation resolutely condemns the
practices by Iranian Basiji forces, which are organizing
campaigns to conscript children to fight in Syria.
We also condemn the strengthening of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guards in Syria, as well as activities by
Hizbullah and other religious militias. They all commit
crimes against children in Syria.
We also condemn the detention of children by
security forces. Often children are tortured, resulting
in their death.
Syrian authorities are using siege as a weapon of
war. Aleppo today is being threatened with massacre
and ethnic cleansing. Children are imprisoned under
the rubble of their homes because the international
community is ignoring them and failing to protect
them — in fact, it is exposing them to death. Children,
women and the elderly in Aleppo are calling out for
help. Aleppo has experienced many massacres. If this is
not addressed, it will be a stain on the Security Council
and on the conscience of the international community.
We encourage the Council to immediately provide
protection for the children in Aleppo and in all Syrian
cities. We call on the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to play its role to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the people who need
it in Syria.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has responded to
the call for help from the President and the people of
Yemen following the coup d’état by the militia against
former president Saleh. In line with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, a coalition was
32/88

02/08/2016

established in Yemen, with all the necessary resources
deployed to ensure that we achieve the coalition’s goals,
including protecting children, women and the elderly.
There is also a provision for a transition, in accordance
with the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative.
We have also supported the mediation efforts of
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen. While the mediation
has led to results, the opposition continues to dig in its
heels. The Security Council should condemn that stance
by the rebels, including ensuring that they comply with
the provisions of resolution 2216 (2015), as well as the
provisions of the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative
and the outcome of the National Dialogue.
When we talk about civilian victims in Yemen we
must also recall that the Houthi militia has committed
many crimes, including using hospitals and schools
as barracks. They are responsible for the deaths of
thousands of civilians, including children. This militia
has also committed attacks against my country at
its borders, causing almost 500 civilian deaths, the
displacement of thousands of our citizens and the
destruction of buildings and infrastructure — 1,700
houses and 75 Government buildings destroyed,
including hospitals and other medical facilities. Those
attacks led to the closure of schools, disrupting the
education of thousands of children. Since the end of
the fighting on 10 April, the Houthi militias and their
allies have committed nearly 1,700 incursions into
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, including the use of 20
missiles, resulting in many civilian deaths.
My delegation condemns in the strongest term
the conscription of children by the Houthi militia.
Coalition forces have handed over such children to
the Yemeni authorities to be returned to their families
after they are given assistance, including financial aid,
in cooperation and coordination with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and UNICEF. I am here to
say that the coalition forces are holding no children in
Yemen. They have all been released.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the coalition
forces are committed to abiding by international law
and international humanitarian law. The Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia recently endorsed resolution 2286 (2016),
which calls for those who perpetrate crimes against
civilians and children or attack hospitals and other
medical facilities to be brought to justice. In that regard,
we have adopted clear rules of engagement to protect
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

civilians, adhering to the principles of proportionately
and discriminate targeting. The use of weapons against
civilians is prohibited, and civilians are protected until
they can be evacuated from conflict zones. Operations
in Yemen are subject to periodic comprehensive review
to prevent harm to civilians.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia makes children its
absolute priority and firmly believes that they should
always come first. There is no reason to target civilians
in conflict, especially children. Children should be in
school and not fighting on the front lines. Children
have the absolute right to life and education and to play
far from flying bombs and bullets. The Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia is unequivocally committed to protecting
children and civilians and attaches the utmost
importance to any allegation concerning violations
of the rights of civilians by the Kingdom or coalition
forces. We have established a task force to investigate
such incidents and allegations of attacks on civilians,
and shall submit our findings to the United Nations as
soon as possible.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was among the first
countries to participate in the reconstruction efforts
in Yemen. Between 2010 and 2015, we contributed
$3.25 billion, of which $1.2 billion went to economic
development and strengthening the health sector.
We have been the principal donors of humanitarian
assistance in Yemen since 2015. Over the past year,
the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre
has distributed more than $440 million throughout
Yemen. We are also providing humanitarian assistance
to Yemeni refugees in Jordan and the Sudan. We have
hosted more than 1 million refugees, and all Yemeni
children are allowed to enrol in our schools and
universities. We have provided medical facilities and
services to those who have been injured in Yemen or
are hosted in other countries, as well as psychosocial
support for the victims of landmines, including children.
In conclusion, I wish to stress the following points.
We welcome the role of the United Nations and its
agencies, and their efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict, especially children. It is also our view that the
United Nations should be able to complete its missions
successfully without its decisions being subject to undue
influence. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will always be
among the first to offer assistance to the United Nations
system, but we also believe that the Organization must
fulfil its duties neutrally and transparently. It must make
special efforts to secure reliable information and not

S/PV.7753

depend on unreliable sources when draftings its reports
and other documents, which should seek to improve the
living conditions of children in armed conflict.
We regret the lack of accurate information in the
current report that led to the inclusion of the coalition
on the list of entities violating the rights of civilians,
without valid cause. We were not given an opportunity
to provide any advance feedback, and we welcome the
Secretary-General’s courageous decision to remove the
coalition from the list. I recall that we invited the United
Nations to dispatch its officials to Riyadh to discuss the
situation with us. That invitation remains open.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let me
thank you, Madame, for convening today’s important
debate, and all those who have spoken.
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union,
and that of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict.
Twenty years ago, in August 1996, Graça Machel
published her report on the impact of armed conflict on
children (see A/51/306). Since then, we have collectively
developed, step by step, a child protection mechanism
that is among the unquestionable successes of the United
Nations. We have done so in consensus, united in the
conviction that children represent that which is most
sacred to each nation. Through this mechanism, with
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the monitoring and reporting mechanism at its
core, tens of thousands of children have been rescued,
freed from armed ranks, reintegrated into their families
and returned to school.
All countries whose national security forces are
listed in the annexes the Secretary-General’s annual
reports have now signed an action plan with the United
Nations to end grave violations against children.
This owes much to the increased mobilization for
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF in 2014. We
welcome the fact that the Sudan made that commitment
by signing an action plan on 27 March, in the presence
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui. It is now time to build on that
political resolve to arrive at the full implementation of
the action plan as soon as possible.

16-2443733/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

In addition to the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
other progress made over the course of the past year
should be noted, such as the intensification of dialogue
between the Special Representative and non-State
armed groups, which, as we know, constitute the
majority of parties to conflict mentioned in the
annexes to the reports of the Secretary-General. That
has already produced results for Colombia. We also
welcome the decision by the Secretary-General to
suspend all participation in peace operations of troopor police-police contributing countries that are listed in
the annexes to his annual reports.
While progress has been made, however, much
remains to be done. The annual report of the SecretaryGeneral indeed paints a bleak picture of the situation
in 2015.
In Afghanistan, children are disproportionately
affected by the upsurge in attacks. Last year, one in
four civilian casualties was a child. In Syria, the mass
recruitment and use of children by Da’esh continued,
as did attacks carried out by the Government against
schools and hospitals, owing in large part to the
increased use of air strikes and explosive weapons in
populated areas. Cases of child abduction remain all
too common in Iraq, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, where they have increased yet again. In
Yemen, the number of children killed or maimed during
the year 2015 increased six-fold.
Given that, we reiterate our unequivocal support
for the mandate of the Special Representative, who
is working tirelessly to protect children in armed
conflict. The independence of her work should not
be questioned. We count on everyone to respect it.
We reaffirm our unwavering confidence in protection
instruments, including the monitoring and reporting
mechanism set up by the Council to verify the accuracy
of all information included in the annual reports and
their annexes. The report is the result of extensive
consultations among the concerned Member States
within the United Nations system — at Headquarters
and on the ground.
We reiterate our desire to see child protection
advisers continue to exercise their specific mandate
in the missions concerned. That is why we continue
as well to concretely support the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Similarly, we
have decided to support a research project of the United
34/88

02/08/2016

Nations University being carried out in partnership
with UNICEF, which must help develop tools to better
guide the work of United Nations personnel on the
ground to prevent children from coming into harm’s
way and protect and extract them from situations of
extreme violence.
While this year marks the twentieth anniversary
of the children and armed conflict agenda, we must
redouble our efforts to strengthen the protection of
children. If determination falters, we will be judged
harshly by history.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me start by thanking
the Presisdent for convening this debate. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui and Executive Director Anthony Lake
for their comprehensive and very insightful briefings.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union and with the
statement by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
Twenty years ago, in August 1996, Graça Machel
presented her seminal report (see A/51/306) to the
General Assembly on the impact of armed conflict
on children. The normative framework that we have
developed since then has contributed to some major
successes. Some 150,000 child soldiers have been freed.
Nine parties to conflict have successfully implemented
action plans to end and prevent the recruitment of
children, and were subsequently removed from the
annex to the Secretary-General’s reports. As former
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, Germany is proud to have contributed to
the development of this indispensable framework. Yet
in spite of those achievements, children, along with
other civilians, are increasingly and deliberately under
attack, leaving them vulnerable to violence, exploitation
and abuse. Germany remains particularly concerned
about the increase in grave violations recorded by the
Secretary-General in Afghanistan, Somalia, South
Sudan, Syria and Yemen.
The children and armed conflict agenda remains
more relevant than ever. It is both a matter of urgency
and a key priority to further strengthen the United
Nations mechanisms for the protection of children and
implement them impartially and objectively. There
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

are numerous examples for how those mechanisms
have very tangibly improved the lives of thousands of
children on the ground. Notably, all eight Government
armed forces listed in the Secretary-General’s annexes
have now signed national action plans and committed
themselves to specific steps to end the victimization of
children. We welcome the most recent adoption of such
an action plan by the Sudan, and expect that it will now
be swiftly implemented.
Germany commends the work of the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict and fully
supports her mandate. Through her campaign Children,
Not Soldiers, Special Representative Zerrougui has
tirelessly spread a key message: children are victims,
not perpetrators, and must be treated accordingly. We
would also like to applaud the United Nations field
missions for their day-to-day work in implementing
the monitoring and reporting mechanism — the key
element of success of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We need to ensure that United Nations missions
continue to receive dedicated and appropriate resources
for their child-protection work.
The discussion on how to advance the children and
armed conflict agenda is still overly New York-centred.
But New York can only develop guidelines. The
implementation needs to happen elsewhere. Germany
is therefore committed to raising awareness for the
protection of children on the ground. Child protection
and the re-integration of former child soldiers into their
respective societies remain an important element of our
bilateral discussions with partners. We will continue
to support the formation of local groups of friends on
children and armed conflict. The recent formation of
the Group of Friends in Afghanistan is such an example,
and Germany is proud to take over the chairmanship of
that group.
Finally, the discussion on children and armed
conflict in the Security Council must not be limited
to this type of thematic debate. We need to further
strengthen the operative language on child protection
in the country-specific resolutions of the Council. It
therefore comes as very welcome news that the renewed
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq now contains a stand-alone paragraph on the
protection of children in Iraq. Germany applauds the
tireless efforts exerted by Malaysia to mainstream the
children and armed conflict agenda throughout the
work of the Council.

S/PV.7753

As we now stand, 20 years after the presentation
of the Machel report and five years after the adoption
of resolution 1998 (2011), on attacks against schools
and hospitals during the last German presidency
of the Council, let me conclude by reaffirming
Germany’s unfailing commitment to the protection
of children victimized by armed conflicts and to
Special Representative Zerrougui and her team. The
implementation of the children and armed conflict
agenda is more urgent than ever and will remain one of
our top priorities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to commend the Malaysian presidency for organizing
this debate and to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict Zerrougui and UNICEF Executive
Director Lake for their briefings and for their work in
identifying ways that will help us in better preventing
and responding to the scourges that continue to affect
children in armed conflict.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union and with the
statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. I wish to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
The celebration this year of the twentieth anniversary
of the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict, which
we strongly support, represent an invaluable occasion
to assess the developments and the failures made by
the international community in this area. During
this period, remarkable progress has been registered
in the demobilization of child soldiers and in their
reintegration into their communities of origin. Most of
all, 20 years on, we particularly welcome the evolution
of a stronger normative and institutional framework for
the protection of children in armed conflicts, mainly
through the institution of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism established by resolution 1612 (2005).
Last year, two more remarkable steps were taken:
the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which recognizes
abduction in armed conflict as a listing criterion in the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual reports,
and the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in

16-2443735/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

which Member States committed themselves to take
immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced
labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and
secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst
forms of child labour, including the recruitment and
use of child soldiers. But much more relevant than
those documents and resolutions is their concrete
implementation. In that regard, Italy’s contribution to
that very sensitive issue is multifaceted.
First, as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council during the period 2007-2008, we strongly
supported the inclusion of specific provisions on the
protection of children in the mandates of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which is now the
standard practice of the Council, and we actively
participated in the drafting of resolution 1820 (2008),
on sexual violence and armed conflict, which was the
first resolution to openly recognize that sexual violence,
when used as a tactic of war, may exacerbate conflicts
and impede the restoration of peace and security. We
stand ready to do our part again as member of the
Security Council next year.
Secondly, we continue to be engaged through our
training centres. The oeace operations review provided
useful recommendations on how this important
topic can be considered in planning and conducting
peacekeeping operations. We believe that the targeted
training of United Nations personnel on children’s
rights has to remain paramount to ensuring effective
peacekeeping on the ground.
Thirdly, we renewed our political commitment to
humanitarian law, being threatened by the involvement
of non-State actors in conflicts. In this spirit, Italy
joined the Safe Schools Declaration, which supports
the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, promoted
by a coalition of countries, United Nations actors
and non-governmental organizations. In line with
our commitment, we also support campaigns such as
Children, Not Soldiers, launched in 2014 by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. Campaigns like
this are an essential instrument for guiding the action
of the international community in bringing an end to
violations against children.
Fourthly, given the growing trend of abuses
and violence committed against children in current
crises, we are promoting and implementing long-term
36/88

02/08/2016

initiatives for the recovery and social integration of
former child soldiers and victims of conflicts through
our development cooperation programmes, in particular
in the Middle East and in Africa.
Finally, given the unprecedented and steady
rise in mixed migration flows on the Mediterranean
central route, we are putting in place a new ad hoc
legal framework in order to better assist and receive
minors coming from conflict areas, thus strengthening
the implementation of their rights. In particular, after
having increased the financial resources dedicated to
unaccompanied minors from €90 million in 2015 to
€170 million in 2016, Italy is committed to taking in
more unaccompanied minors and being better equipped
to receive them: 2,000 more reception centres will be
available by the end of 2018, and highly specialized
services will be provided, based on the principle of the
best interest of the child.
Let me conclude by saying that all these
commitments and measures cannot be decoupled from
the need to bring perpetrators to justice. Accountability
at national and international levels is key to ensure that
no more children are involved or used as soldiers in
armed conflicts. With the Sustainable Development
Goals, we committed ourselves to end recruitment and
use of child soldiers by 2030. Let us work together to
transform this promise into a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country, Thailand.
At the outset, I wish to congratulate Malaysia, a
fellow ASEAN country, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
on its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. We also commend the initiative
to hold this annual open debate. Let me also express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
opening remarks, as well as for the briefings provided
by the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and by the Executive Director of UNICEF.
We recognize the contribution of the Graça Machel
report (see A/51/306) published 20 years ago, which
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

called the international community to action to address
the effects of armed conflict on children. Since then,
the international community and the United Nations
have taken up this issue seriously and have made great
strides in reducing the suffering of children in armed
conflicts. Awareness has been raised, institutions
have been established, criteria has been put forth and
initiatives have been launched and implemented. Since
then, many children have been released from armed
forces. The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has
gained momentum and many, if not all, Governments
are now engaged in ending violations against children.
Yet children continue to face growing threats from new
conflicts and the urgent rise of violent extremism.
We share the view that a comprehensive approach
is needed to protect children in armed conflicts. While
stressing the primary responsibility and authority of
States, we once again emphasize the need to address the
root causes of hardship that children bear. It is just as
important that the Security Council and the international
community continue their efforts to address the impact
of armed conflict on children, including through the
formulation of a long-term strategic plan for their
reintegration and rehabilitation.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism
established in accordance with resolutions 1612
(2005), 1882 (2008), 1998 (2011) and 2225 (2015)
is a key instrument of the United Nations childprotection mandate. The integrity and credibility of the
mechanism and the work of the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict should be supported
by constructive engagement with Member States and
the use of accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable
information in reporting.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2016/360)
plays an important role in guiding Member States in
their efforts to strengthen child protection in armed
conflicts. All listing efforts should be objective and
comprehensive, based on credible and impartial
information, must take into account efforts made by
Member States and must be in line with the principle of
the responsibility and authority of States. Furthermore,
in implementing the mechanisms and action plans
already in place, it is important that all the relevant
actors be properly informed and coordinated. The
Council should continue to take a cooperative approach
and provide necessary assistance to the relevant parties
that cooperate with the United Nations.

S/PV.7753

At the regional level, ASEAN member States have
been stepping up efforts to tackle issues that children
face, both at national and regional levels, as well as in
institutional and practical areas. In November 2015, our
leaders adopted the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action
on Elimination of Violence against Children, which
provides a comprehensive framework for regional
action for a period of 10 years from 2016 to 2025,
ranging from prevention to monitoring and evaluation.
ASEAN also closely cooperates with United Nations
agencies and their mechanisms.
ASEAN Member States remain strongly committed
to combating violations of children’s rights, anywhere,
and by any one. Let us work closely together to ensure
the betterment of our children’s lives, because they are
also our common future.
In my national capacity, allow me to briefly share
a few points.
Thailand would also like to align its national
statement with the statement to be delivered by Slovenia
on behalf of the Members of the Human Security
Network.
Thailand is of the view that efforts through national
strategies to promote the rule of law and quality
education and improve socioeconomic conditions
can contribute to the promotion and protection of
children’s rights. We also welcome the efforts of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in its endeavours to end all violations against
children by engaging constructively with Member
States and all stakeholders. Lastly, Thailand remains
committed to fulfilling its international obligations
under the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols to ensure the protection of our
children in all instances. We would like to echo the call
for the universal ratification of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Malaysia presidency for the
organization of this open debate, as well as the briefers
for their instructive briefings.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Graça Machel report (see A/51/306), which described
the impact of armed conflict on children and alerted the

16-2443737/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

international community about the devastating effects
of war on girls and boys. It is largely due to the report
that the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
could be created. During the past 20 years, we have
seen many positive developments with regard to the fate
of children in armed conflict; for example, the release
of more than 115,000 children from armed forces and
armed groups since 2000 and the signing of 25 action
plans with parties to conflict towards halting violations
against children.
However, as we have heard from the briefers and
previous speakers, there is little cause for celebration
on this anniversary. The latest briefing of the Special
Representative Secretary-General outlined worrying
trends affecting children in armed conflict around the
world. That is why the time has come to discuss the key
issues raised by the Malaysian presidency.
With regard to the international collaborations
that have been successful in enhancing the protection
of children in armed conflict, including the fight
against impunity for serious violations, Switzerland
wishes to mention its support for the international
non-governmental organization Women’s Initiatives
for Gender Justice. This initiative has contributed in
northern Uganda to rehabilitating and reintegrating
former female Lord’s Resistance Army soldiers into
their families and communities, while also advocating
that crimes sexual violence be brought before the
International Criminal Court (ICC). States must conduct
investigations and bring to justice the perpetrators of
these crimes in order to render justice for the victims
as well as to prevent further violations. When States
are unable or unwilling to do so, the International
Criminal Court can play a decisive role. In that regard,
we welcome the initiative of the Prosecutor of the ICC,
who is implementing a specific policy for children.
With regard to the recommendations on how to
address the persistent risks faced by children in armed
conflicts, Switzerland believes that counter-terrorism
measures are necessary and can contribute to helping
children. However, we must ensure that such measures
do not impede humanitarian efforts. My country pays
particular attention to the importance of engaging in
dialogue with all parties to armed conflicts on the
matter of the protection of children, especially in areas
controlled by armed groups. In addition, we believe it
is particularly important to ensure the protection of
38/88

02/08/2016

children who are detained because of their suspected or
actual links to armed groups.
With regard to concrete proposals to improve the
protection of children, Switzerland encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to include information
on the specific impact on children of attacks against
schools, hospitals and their staff in his reports to
the Council. We also call for the full and immediate
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). Furthermore,
my country calls for a vigorous response to the allegations
of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse committed by
United Nations personnel, notably involving the ban
for the Government armed forces mentioned in the
annexes to the reports on children in armed conflicts
from contributing troops for peacekeeping operations.
Finally, allow me to remind States that we, as States,
established the mandate for the protection of children
in armed conflicts through resolution 1612 (2005).
Therefore, it is also our responsibility to safeguard the
integrity and credibility of the mandate. Switzerland
also wishes to express its unqualified support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
who has done outstanding work to ensure the protection
of children in armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Charles
Whiteley, Chargé d’affaires of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Whiteley: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I wish to warmly thank today’s briefers, and in
particular Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui, to whom we lend our full support.
We also want to thank the Malaysian presidency of the
Security Council for organizing today’s debate.
Serious challenges for the protection of children
affected by armed conflict remain. Protracted conflicts
and humanitarian crises have severe impacts on
many children and leave them exposed, inter alia to
the threats of violent extremism and displacement,
which the Secretary-General rightly highlights in his
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

report (S/2016/360). Violent extremism is significantly
affecting children, who often are direct targets,
including the abhorrent practice of using children as
suicide bombers. Approaches to fighting and preventing
violent extremism need to be comprehensive and to
address the root causes, such as protracted conflict, but
also the lack of good governance, the rule of law or
education.
We note with growing concern the prevalence of
attacks on and the use of schools and hospitals for
military purposes. Governments and all other actors
must protect schools and hospitals by upholding the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
We also see forced displacement as a particular
challenge, with an ever-growing number of children
fleeing in search of protection, making them
particularly vulnerable to crime, such as abduction and
sexual violence. Governments must also take urgent
action to protect the rights of these children.
This year’s report is an acute reminder of the vital
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Children and Armed Conflict and of United
Nations agencies, in particular by providing objective
and impartial information as the basis for the report. The
lists in the annexes to the report are an essential tool in
holding the relevant conflict parties accountable for the
grave crimes committed against children. It is therefore
of the utmost importance to protect the integrity and
impartiality of the report, including the listings in its
annexes and the children and armed conflict agenda
of the Security Council. Ending violations against
children and implementing action plans, rather than
political or financial pressure, should be the only route
to delisting. All parties to a conflict need to be held to
the same standards when applying the listing criteria.
We fully support the call of the Secretary-General on
all parties identified in his report to work with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
protect children in conflicts.
Last year was marked by very disturbing cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse, including by United
Nations peacekeepers, other international forces and
civilians. In addition to the need for ensuring full
accountability, one crucial measure would be mandatory
and comprehensive predeployment training on child
protection to ensure the effective protection of children
on the ground. But there is also progress that can be

S/PV.7753

achieved on this agenda. Colombia is a good example
in that regard, with substantial progress achieved in the
peace talks and the agreement on the release of children
by Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia.
The EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy
for the period 2015-2019 ensures a comprehensive
human rights approach to conflicts and crises. The
issue of children and armed conflict is mainstreamed
in our common security and defence policy, missions
and operations. Child protection considerations are
addressed during the planning process in new missions
and operations, in our predeployment training and in
our reporting and review documents.
EU development aid supports several projects for
child victims of armed conflicts by promoting their
safe access to basic services, protecting them from all
forms of violence and ensuring their reintegration into
societies. Specific projects in this field are supported
under the European Instrument for Democracy and
Human Rights, the Instrument contributing to stability
and peace and the European Neighbourhood and
Partnership Instrument — for example, in Colombia,
Yemen, Ukraine and Syria.
In 2015, EU humanitarian aid dedicated over
€11.5 million to specific child-protection activities,
including psycho-social support, mine-risk education
and actions against the recruitment of child soldiers,
as well as their reintegration — for example, in the
Syria crisis, in South Sudan, in Ethiopia and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2016, the EU is
quadrupling its humanitarian assistance to education in
emergencies. The humanitarian projects selected under
the €52 million package for education in emergencies
will enable safe access to quality education. Recently,
the EU also decided to update the list of priority
countries on children and armed conflict to align it
with the Secretary-General’s report.
Furthermore, the EU and its member States
continue to be strong supporters of the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, and we welcome the significant
progress that has been made. The focus in the remaining
months of the campaign will be on the implementation
of the action plans. The EU stands ready to support
Governments in this phase, together with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF.
In concluding, let me underline that the United
Nations and its member States should ensure that
everything is done to effectively protect children

16-2443739/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

affected by armed conflict and provide them with better
prospects for the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): We meet here to discuss the
impact of war and conflict on our most valuable and
precious resource: our children. We are at a time when
the plight of these children is more desperate than ever.
Approximately 250 million children, one out of every
nine boys and girls on the planet, are forced to grow up
in a war zone. In 2015, when the number of displaced
persons worldwide reached an all-time high, 50 per
cent were under the age of 18.
The ongoing violence in so many parts of the
world has destroyed families, leaving the youngest to
struggle to escape the devastation of war on their own.
Nearly 100,000 asylum-seekers across 78 countries
are unaccompanied or separated minors, facing their
difficult fates vulnerable and alone — 100,000.
The stories emerging from those who managed
to escape are horrifying and alarming. These figures
are staggering, but we must not allow ourselves to be
overwhelmed by the enormity of the challenges before
us. Each and every child deserves a future free of war
and violence.
All the trend lines show an increase in the most
horrific forms of violence and oppression, directed
at the most helpless among us. Children are used as
suicide bombers and exploited as sex slaves, and girls
and boys not old enough to drive a car are being forced
to operate weapons of war.
It is difficult to find the words to describe the
scale of the atrocities we have seen in the past few
years — acts of sustained barbarism and cruelty that
shock the conscience of the civilized world. Thousands
and thousands of children have been killed in Al-Assad’s
brutal campaign against the people of Syria, while tens
of thousands live in constant fear for their lives. Torture
in State prisons, barrel bombs exploding in the streets
and shells landing in their homes: the worst atrocities
have not spared the children of Syria.
In Yemen, widespread and systematic attacks by
the Saudi-led coalition against civilian targets such
as hospitals, schools, and mosques continue. Almost
2,000 children were killed or maimed last year. The
Saudi-led coalition alone is responsible for the deaths
of and injuries to about 1,200 children.
40/88

02/08/2016

Across West Africa, 44 suicide bombings were
carried out by children in 2015, three quarters of them
by young girls. This is the devastating reality of child
sacrifice in the twenty-first century. And these are the
unimaginable circumstances faced by young girls like
Fati, one of the hundreds of young girls kidnapped,
imprisoned and forcibly married by Boko Haram. Fati
described how the captive girls would volunteer as
suicide bombers, offering to strap bombs to themselves,
in the desperate hope of escaping from a life filled with
constant fear, terrible hunger and daily sexual violence.
Fati escaped with her life, but an untold number of
children still live this daily nightmare. Such brutality
and cruelty against children not only tear at our hearts;
they unravel entire communities and destroy the fabric
of a society.
In Israel, we know all too well what it means to
face enemies who systematically exploit children
as weapons of war. In the north, the internationally
recognized terrorist group Hizbullah has transformed
the villages of southern Lebanon into terror outposts.
They place rocket launchers next to kindergartens where
youngsters play and store missiles under the homes to
which children return after school. For years, Israel
has warned the Council of the dangers of the illegal
smuggling and the continued build-up in southern
Lebanon, but our warnings have fallen on deaf ears.
In Gaza, the terrorist group Hamas uses young
boys to dig their terror tunnels and uses children
of all ages, along with their mothers and fathers and
brothers and sisters, to serve as human shields. Hamas
deliberately embeds their terror infrastructure in the
schools, hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods of
Gaza, knowingly placing their own children in harm’s
way. No child should play in a schoolyard that doubles
as a rocket-launching site, and no child should spend
his or her summer being drilled on how to make and
engage in war.
Contrary to all of the basic international legal
rights of children, Hamas conducts annual military
camps and recruits thousands of children. Instead of
learning how to swim or play soccer there, the children
of Gaza are taught how to assemble automatic weapons
and operate shoulder-fired missiles. But Hamas is not
only exploiting their own children, it is also teaching
them to see every Israeli child as a potential target. We
were reminded of this all too clearly when, just last
month, a rocket fired from Gaza hit a preschool in the
Israeli town of Sderot. Fortunately, this time no one
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

was hurt, as the rocket exploded just a short time after
the schoolchildren had left the building. Unfortunately,
we know that Hamas will continue to target our homes
and schools, to make our children live in constant fear
of the next attack.
It is the responsibility of leaders everywhere to
protect children at all costs from the ravages of war and
to shelter them in a protective environment where they
can thrive. Unfortunately, the Palestinians are failing at
this most critical responsibility. Instead of nourishing
their youth with the dreams of a bright future,
Palestinian children are fed a steady diet of hatred for
Israel and glorification of violence in the lessons they
learn in school, in the sermons they hear in the mosque,
and in streets that are named after terrorists.
As the recently published Quartet report states,
“Palestinians who commit terrorist attacks
are often glorified publicly as ‘heroic martyrs’.
Many widely circulated images depict individuals
committing terrorist acts with slogans encouraging
violence ... and [this] is particularly affecting young
people.” (S/2016/595, annex, p. 4)
We are paying the price of this glorification of terror
on the streets of Israel today. Since October, Israel has
faced a tide of terror. Forty people have been killed and
more than 500 injured as Israelis continue to endure
attack after attack, day after day, week after week, and
month after month. In this wave of ongoing violence,
47 of those acts of terror — stabbings, shootings and
car rammings — have been carried out by Palestinian
youth under the age of 18. They have attacked, injured
and killed men and women of all ages, including 22
Israeli children.
Just last month, a 17-year-old Palestinian stabbed a
13-year-old Israeli girl to death, in her bed, as she slept,
in her family’s home. Imagine a young girl sleeping
comfortably in her bed stabbed over and over in cold
blood by a child just a few years older than she is.
Children killing children: this is the direct result of the
venomous hatred preached to children in Palestinian
society. For the sake of peace, for the sake of the children
on both sides, the international community must send
a clear message to the Palestinian leadership. Children
are our most precious gift. They deserve to grow up in
a society that fosters a vision of hope and promotes an
education that preaches peace instead of hate, tolerance
instead of violence and mutual understanding instead
of martyrdom.

S/PV.7753

Before concluding, let me say that earlier this
month, the world lost a true man of conscience and
a voice for humanity. Elie Wiesel lived through the
horrors of the Holocaust as a child, and throughout his
adult life he warned of the dangers of failing to stand
up to evil. Wiesel famously said, “The opposite of love
is not hate. It is indifference”.
The voices of children around the world are crying
out to us for a sign that they have not been forgotten.
We dare not be indifferent to these cries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation wishes to thank the Malaysian
presidency for having convened this important meeting
on children and armed conflict and conveys to Malaysia
its appreciation for all that it has done and will continue
to do as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict.
The year 2014 was described as one of the worst
years for children affected by armed conflict. But as
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict (S/2016/360) for 2015 illustrates, the 2014
horror list has been surpassed by the number of children
caught up in armed conflicts and the scale and severity
of violations in 2015. As the Secretary-General states in
paragraph 4 of the report,
“The impact on children of our collective failure
to prevent and end conflict is severe, and the
present report highlights the increased intensity
of grave violations in a number of situations of
armed conflict”. No one can ignore this damning
observation. Never in recent memory have so many
children been subjected to such violent brutality:
children used as soldiers, suicide bombers, sex
slaves and disposable intelligence-gatherers in the
most dangerous military operations. The deliberate
destruction of their schools and hospitals, in total
disregard of international humanitarian law has,
become a strategy of war. My delegation fully
agrees with the report that the use of air strikes
and explosive weapons with wide-area effects in
populated areas exacerbates the dangers to which
children caught up in armed conflict are exposed.
These crimes must be condemned in the strongest
possible terms.

16-2443741/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

The Holy See has been a constant partner of the
United Nations in opposing not only the use of children
as combatants, but the many other forms of violence
against children caught up in armed conflict. Through
its various structures operating in most of the conflict
zones, the Catholic Church is actively engaged in taking
care of the victims of such violence. Over the years,
Holy See structures and numerous Catholic institutions
have collaborated with United Nations peacekeeping
missions and agencies to help alleviate the sufferings
of children in armed conflict and to share best practices
to address this ongoing scourge. While expressing deep
appreciation for all those who work in this area, the
Holy See hopes that the plight of children caught up
in armed conflict will awaken consciences, lead to a
change of heart and inspire all parties to lay down their
arms and take up the path of dialogue.
Moreover, while the international community
plays an important role in supporting States in their
primary responsibility to protect their citizens, it must
also interact with the local communities affected by
violence against children in armed conflict so that
solutions and programmes can emerge organically and
at the same time foster local ownership. A solution
to the plight of children caught up in armed conflict,
in particular of child soldiers, requires sensitivity to
finding ways to reintegrate these children back into
their own communities.
While we witness barbaric acts beyond anyone’s
imagination committed also by child soldiers, we
must remember that these children are exploited and
manipulated into what they have become. Therefore,
while their reintegration into society requires that we
recognize the atrocities they may have committed,
we must also build pathways for counselling and
reconciliation, and do that with a view to accomplishing
fully the reintegration we seek.
The obligation to put an end to barbaric acts against
children caught up in armed conflict is incumbent upon
every one of us. More specifically, it is incumbent
upon the Council as it calls on all States to put in place
and implement stronger measures for the protection of
children in armed conflict and as it ensures that United
Nations peacekeeping operations strictly adhere to all
laws and measures in this regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
42/88

02/08/2016

Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Malaysian delegation for
organizing this open debate and for its concept note
(S/2016/662, annex), which contains useful guidelines
for focusing our discussion. We are also grateful to the
presenters this morning for their valuable briefings.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.
This debate is an ideal opportunity to, on the one
hand, commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
Graça Machel report (see A/51/306) and the consequent
development of monitoring and reporting mechanisms
and, on the other, to consider impartially how much
needs to be done to prevent egregious violations from
being committed against children, as they are an affront
to our humanity, deprive our children of a better world
and have devastating consequences for the victims,
their families and the communities where they reside.
We recognize the valuable contribution being
made by the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in condemning the six serious
violations committed against children in situations
of armed conflict. We stress that it is imperative
for the proper implementation of her mandate to
systematically gather accurate, impartial and timely
information on serious violations committed and to
provide the resources and leadership required so that
data can be collected in the field, in particular through
peacekeeping operations and the respective United
Nations agencies.
It is worth emphasizing that the monitoring
and reporting mechanisms should contribute to
accountability and to ensuring strict compliance with
international legal standards, in cooperation with
national Governments. They must be based on facts
and not be exposed to political pressures. As the
Secretary-General indicated today, the focus should be
on protecting children.
We condemn the arrests, mass abductions and
deaths of children in counter-terrorism operations. We
underscore that the detention of children without charges
must be ended. Security forces must hand over children
associated with armed groups to child protection
authorities and facilitate their proper rehabilitation
through education and vocational training programmes.
We must also address the trauma caused so as to break
the cycle of conflict, ensure the best interests of the
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

child and respect the child’s fundamental condition as
a victim. In that regard, we urge Governments and the
international community to ensure that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes receive
the resources necessary to operate effectively.
We welcome the establishment of initiatives
that strengthen the international condemnation of
violations perpetrated against children. We believe the
achievements of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign
have been a success, and we encourage States to
redouble their efforts to fully implement their action
plans next year, as the Secretary-General indicated.
Furthermore, we recognize the growing support for the
Safe Schools Declaration and its Guidelines. Guatemala
is in the process of confirming its endorsement of
the Guidelines.
Accountability is key to preventing serious
violations and should be at the core of national and
international responses. Political and financial support
by regional organizations and the international
community will be necessary to ensure the institutional
framework and that the progress achieved is sustainable.
This accountability is extended to the Blue Helmets
deployed in the field. Guatemala reiterates its full
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy. The Council
must ensure that those responsible are prosecuted
and are included in sanctions regimes, and it must
redouble its efforts to strengthen national capacity in
the judiciary and strengthen the international legal
framework. Among other things, we must also ensure
that perpetrators are handed over to the International
Criminal Court. We are in favour of strengthening the
dialogue with the Court and its mandate on this issue.

S/PV.7753

holistic approach to human security to complement
the more traditional understanding of national and
international security.
I would like to thank today’s briefers for their
briefings, and the Malaysian presidency for convening
today’s open debate on children and armed conflict, an
issue that has long been a priority for the Network.
Twenty years after Graça Michel presented her
report (see A/51/306) on the impact of armed conflict
on children, the Human Security Network observes
with growing concern the increasing numbers of
children that are negatively affected by situations of
armed conflict and other situations as referenced in
the latest report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/360) and in today’s briefings.
Millions of children continue to be caught in the
middle of armed conflicts, not only as bystanders but as
recruits or as targets of multiple acts of violence, such
as attacks against schools and hospitals, abduction,
mutilation and sexual abuse, as well as the use of
hunger, disease and exploitation as tools of war. We also
note with concern that, according to the latest report of
the Secretary General, attacks on schools and hospitals
and related personnel were prevalent in 2015, which
demands our immediate and collective attention. In
that regard, we call for the implementation of resolution
2143 (2014), which contains important provisions to
ensure and protect the right of education for children.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.

Child protection in all situations remains the
responsibility of every State in accordance with
obligations under international law. It is essential that
national accountability mechanisms be strengthened in
order to ensure that perpetrators, including members
of non-State armed groups, members of national armed
forces and peacekeepers, who commit grave violations
against children are brought to justice. It is the
responsibility of all States to investigate and prosecute
those responsible for violations against children, put
pressure on the perpetrators and support the necessary
measures to address these violations.

Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network (HSN), a cross-regional network made up of
Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland, Thailand, my own
country, Slovenia, and South Africa, which is an HSN
observer. The Human Security Network is an informal
group of States that advocates a people-centred,

It is necessary for the United Nations to work in
close cooperation with the Governments concerned. In
many armed conflicts where non-State actors commit
horrific crimes against children, the United Nations
must be fully aware of the sensitivities on the ground
and needs to work closely with those Governments to
address the situation and provide assistance to children
and their families.

Finally, we would like to welcome the recent
ratification by Uganda of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. We urge all Member States that have not
yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols.

16-2443743/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

The International Criminal Court (ICC) may also
have an important role to play in this regard. The
existence of grave violations against children in armed
conflict must be determined impartially and objectively
based on facts on the ground. Convictions and sentencing
by the ICC have marked a critical turning point for all
children victims of rape and murder in armed conflict,
as the Court acknowledges rape as a weapon of war and
the concept of command responsibility.
Monitoring and accurate and timely reporting
are crucial to ensuring that perpetrators are held
accountable for violations. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism established in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions is a key mechanism of the
United Nations child-protection mandate. The integrity
and credibility of the mechanism and the authority of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict must be strengthened and supported, especially
by engaging with Member States and using accurate,
objective, reliable and verifiable information, thereby
ensuring the impartial and evidence-based listing of
perpetrators.
The Human Security Network furthermore
highlights the importance of focusing on the prevention
of future violations and rehabilitating and reintegrating
those who have been affected by conflict through
medical and psychosocial care.
Reiterating the call of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict in May 2016, we would like to see the universal
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. We remain deeply concerned about the
safety of children in all armed conflicts, and therefore
urge all Member States to keep the concerns of children
and their well-being high on the international agenda.
Allow me now to add few words in my national
capacity as representative of Slovenia.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada, who spoke on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.
Slovenia has been concerned by the attacks against
schools and hospitals. In April 2016, we expressed
support for the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration and
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
44/88

02/08/2016

We encourage other countries that have not yet done so
to support and implement the Guidelines.
We believe that education presents an important
element of the psychosocial rehabilitation of children
affected by armed conflict. We therefore support
several projects being carried out by a Slovenian
humanitarian non-profit organization, the International
Trust Fund Enhancing Human Security, and other
Slovenian non-governmental organizations, aimed at
addressing the needs of children in Lebanon, Palestine
and Ukraine.
Last autumn, many people, including children,
sought refuge in Slovenia. We highly value the
cooperation with UNICEF, which offers psychosocial
and other assistance to these children.
The latest annual report of the Secretary-General
reminds us that we have not yet succeeded in protecting
children from grave violations committed against them
in conflicts. We are appalled that in many of the 20
countries addressed in the report the situation has
actually deteriorated. We call for a scaling up of efforts
to protect the most vulnerable — the youngest among
us — and with them our future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Nielsen (Denmark): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries — Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and my own country,
Denmark.
We would like to express our gratitude to the
Malaysian presidency for holding this open debate at
such a critical time for children around the world. We
thank the Secretary-General for his opening remarks,
and we acknowledge the Special Representative for her
tireless efforts and the critical work she has done on
behalf of children, as well as UNICEF for the equally
important work it has done.
Children should not be exposed to war, not as
victims or witnesses, nor as soldiers. Therefore, our
efforts continue in order to prevent children from
ending up in the crossfire, as well as in armed groups
or forces. In the 2015 annual report (S/2016/360) of
the Secretary-General there is a glimmer of hope.
Last year, strong engagement with non-State armed
groups led to the release of over 8,000 children. With
the Sudan coming on board, we welcome the fact that
all the Governments identified for recruitment and use
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

of children in their security forces are now engaged in
the action plan process. We look forward to working
closely with the Sudanese Government to help in the
implementation of the action plan, including through
the local group of friends led by Sweden and Canada.
In Colombia, we are heartened by both the Colombian
Government and the readiness of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo
to include the protection of children in peace talks.
Also, the progress in Government commitment to the
protection of children during conflict in Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Myanmar,
as stated in the report, is an indication that things
might change.
However, much of the report is heartbreaking to
read. There are still far too many parties to conflicts
listed for grave violations against children. Thousands
of children have been killed during over five years of
war in Syria. The highest number of child deaths and
injuries last year were recorded in Afghanistan. Somali
children face an unbearable situation. In Yemen, the
escalating conflict has had a devastating impact on
children, and grave violations against children have
increased dramatically.
Let me be very clear: all parties must respect their
international legal obligations to protect civilians. Child
protection concerns must be included in all negotiations
to end conflicts. Given that armed non-State
actors — such as Da’esh, Al-Shabaab and Boko
Haram — account for the vast majority of violations,
further reflection on new forms of engagement is
needed. I would like to emphasize three points that are
particularly important for the Nordic countries.
First, protecting the integrity and credibility of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as the
Office of the Special Representative and the Children
and Armed Conflict agenda itself, is imperative. It is
essential that the verification of grave violations against
children in armed conflict is determined impartially
and objectively. The issue of listing and delisting of
parties must be based on factual findings on the ground.
Secondly, children’s access — in particular girls’
access — to quality education in war and disasters
must be ensured. Education is a vital part of protecting
children during conflict. Attending school can create
a sense of normality and a vision for a better future
in an otherwise chaotic situation. There were attacks
on education in at least 70 countries between 2009 and

S/PV.7753

2013. Since then, such attacks have escalated further.
We must increase our efforts to uphold the right to
education, even in conflict situations. By making
schools safer for children today, we are protecting
the future.
Finally, as our third point, training in child protection
for civilian and military personnel is key, particularly
to avoid any incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse
against children. We believe that predeployment
training within these areas should be mandatory for
United Nations personnel. The Swedish Armed Forces
International Centre offers a child-protection course
based on United Nations child-protection curriculums.
Also, we need to protect child-protection advisers in
United Nations missions in order to properly document
and verify child rights violations.
We need to let children be children. The challenges
we face are a call to action. In that regard, we reiterate
our full support for the Special Representative and
her Office, as well as the crucial work by UNICEF,
other United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations in the field. We wholeheartedly support
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, which has led to
tangible progress since it was launched. Moreover, it
is time that we pay more attention to child protection
as a part of peace negotiations. Regrettably, as today’s
debate shows, we have a lot of work ahead of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Estonia, Latvia and my own country,
Lithuania. Our delegations associate themselves with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union. I
will deliver an abridged version of our statement. The
full text will be available on our Missions’ websites.
Let me start by thanking Malaysia for convening this
open debate, and all the briefers for their presentations.
We would also like to express our appreciation for
the dedicated and passionate work of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and UNICEF in that regard.
Twenty years after the ground-breaking Graça
Machel report (see A/51/306), important advances to
protect children in armed conflict have been made.
Despite the progress, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/360) depicts a distressing situation for children
in armed conflict. Countless children across the Middle

16-2443745/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

02/08/2016

East and Africa, as well as Europe, continue to suffer
from conflict-related violence.

done to ensure that there is no room in peacekeeping
missions for those who prey on the most vulnerable.

In recent years, extremist groups have inflicted
direct violence against children, including killing
and maiming, abductions, torture and brutal sexual
violence. Besides being victims of extremist violence,
children are also used to perpetrate acts of terrorism,
war crimes or crimes against humanity.

In conclusion, protecting children from serious
crimes and preventing such crimes go hand in hand with
tackling impunity and ensuring that perpetrators are
held to account. While the perpetrators are too many,
the cases and judgments against them remain too few.
We have to ensure that those responsible are brought
to justice by redoubling our own efforts to enhance
national judicial capacities and by strengthening the
international justice framework, including through the
work of the International Criminal Court.

In many conflict situations, schools remain under
attack or are used for military purposes as barracks,
detention facilities and weapons storage facilities.
All Member States must fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure the
protection of schools. Targeting schools or using them
for military purposes gravely endangers the lives of
children and denies their access to education.
Children involved in armed conflict first and
foremost are victims. No matter their role, they are
exposed to acute levels of violence — as witnesses,
victims of various abuses and as forced participants.
Administrative detentions and prosecution for their
alleged association with armed groups are unacceptable.
Children affected by conflicts face difficulties
in finding their place in society; even their local
communities tend to stigmatize and reject them. Proper
long-term and comprehensive programmes for the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children affected
by armed conflict should be put in place. It is crucial
to provide necessary psychological, medical and legal
assistance for children and their families to ensure their
successful reintegration into daily life. We have to use
all available tools to empower children to participate
in political processes and ensure their social inclusion.
Child protection work in United Nations
peacekeeping operations must be prioritized with
further deployment of child-protection advisers and
targeted training for all contingents and United Nations
personnel on children rights. The role of a mission’s
leadership is crucial in ensuring that child protection is
considered a priority by all components of the mission.
Adequate resources should be allocated to ensure
successful mandate implementation.
We are concerned that despite the zero-tolerance
policy towards all forms of sexual exploitation and
abuse by the United Nations and related personnel,
sexual abuse by peacekeepers remains a systemic
challenge. Despite the progress made, a lot needs to be
46/88

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
today’s open debate. I wish to convey my delegation’s
thanks to the Secretary-General and to Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, for their
briefings. I also thank Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF. My delegation appreciates the
opportunity provided today to take the floor before
the Council.
Over the past 18 months, Yemen has experienced
the worst time in its modern history, following the coup
that was organized by the Houthi militia, in cooperation
with the former President. That period has been the
worst time for Yemeni children and their families. The
putsch forces have committed the worst crimes against
children and against humanity. Hundreds of children
have lost their lives as the result of attacks intentionally
targeting populated areas and due to attacks by snipers.
Many civilians have also been wounded. Moreover,
many people have become disabled as a result of the
attacks. Furthermore, those armed forces have targeted
children, as well as schools and hospitals and other
civilian infrastructure. We can still hear the cries of the
martyred children through the voice of Farid Shawki,
who cried out “Do not bury me!”, as he was terrified
of death.
The military forces of the Houthi militias and
the republican guard forces of former President Saleh
have targeted many schools in Aden and other areas.
They are the enemies of education and science. Those
militaries have occupied the university, transformed it
into a barracks and planted landmines on the university
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

campus as a form of reprisal against the students, who
represent the future of Yemen. Leaders of the militias
continue to visit schools and universities to recruit
children to serve in combat. Children therefore make
up the largest number of Houthi recruits — not only
since the start of the war and the attempted coup, but
since the creation of that militia.
The letter that we sent to the Secretary-General in
response to his report (S/2016/360) reiterated that we
are ready to cooperate with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We expressed our comments on
the report, including regarding certain information
that it contained about Yemen. We believe that those
paragraphs do not go into sufficient detail, and we are
curious as to the methodology used to verify cases
included in the report. According to paragraph 2, the
report was drawn up as a result of broad consultations
among Member States. That is not the case with regard
to Yemen. We received no request to discuss the contents
of the report before its publication, in particular with
regard to the sections pertaining to Yemen. That is not
in conformity with procedures adopted by the United
Nations, in particular in connection with this type
of report.
In paragraph 165, it is stated that it was difficult
to verify information owing to the security situation
and restricted access. In that regard, I would draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that — as many speakers
have noted — the accuracy of the information in the
report was not verified. It is necessary to be objective
and impartial when it is a question of numbers and
figures. The report is therefore not credible. The authors
of the report did not adopt an impartial methodology.
In paragraph 166, the report states that 183 boys
were deprived of liberty by popular committees. The
popular committees are fighting for the liberation of
Yemen. The 183 boys in question were Houthis, and
we detained them because they were combatants on
the front lines. The report states that we detained those
boys and have not freed them. Today, we reaffirm — as
we have already told the Special Representative — that
the legitimate Government is not holding any children.
We have provided statistics to the United Nations, and
we have released all the children. Furthermore, we
released all other boys who had been transferred to us
by the coalition. We are of course ready to cooperate
with the United Nations on that matter.

S/PV.7753

The Government authorities provided a secure
environment for those children in order to reintegrate
them into society following the prisoner exchange.
Unfortunately, the children were once again forced to
fight on the front lines. In that regard, I note that the
report makes no reference to the many regions and cities
that are under the control of the militias. Those cities
are nearly empty of children. That is a very foreboding
indication. It must be said that there are cities that
are empty of children, who have been recruited and
are combatants.
The authors of the report have acknowledged that
it was difficult to verify some cases, but the tone of the
report is very firm in making its arbitrary accusations,
the majority of which single out the Arab coalition.
In that light, I commend the cooperation between the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the legitimate Government of Yemen.
In paragraph 175, the authors of the report do not
say why there was no coordination with the Yemeni
Government and its representatives to find the best
ways to implement the action plan that we had adopted
together with UNICEF in May 2014. We need to work
in line with that plan.
In annex I of the report, which lists parties that
recruit children, kill or maim children, there is an
error in the part concerning Yemen with regard to
the third point, according to which Government
forces recruit children. We know, however, that the
majority of Republican Guards brigades and the special
security forces defied the legitimate Government and
supported the leaders of the putsch. They are therefore
accomplices in all the crimes that have been perpetrated
against children. Moreover, the report mentions the
First Armoured Division, but that Division no longer
exits. It was dismantled in 2014. Unfortunately, this
year’s report of the Secretary-General on children in
armed conflict has been politicized. Given the very
clear evidence, the report is not objective.
To conclude, I want to reiterate that we in the
Government will work with the United Nations
through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign and
non-governmental organizations to stop the violations
committed by the putschists and armed groups and to
protect children from those criminal groups, which do
respect no national or international law. These criminal
gangs do not respect international law. The Government
has an ethical, legal and constitutional duty to

16-2443747/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

implement a strategic plan to address the psychological
impact of war on our children. Our children are the
future of our country. We in the Government therefore
are working to alleviate the suffering of children and
end those violations. We will establish a centre for the
rehabilitation of children who were recruited, forced to
fight and then released by the fascist putschist factions.
That is part of the Government’s efforts to rebuild the
country and reintegrate children into a normal life and
allow them to resume their education.
Furthermore, we provide special support for
children with disabilities, and we call upon everyone to
work together to ensure that all entities that recruited
children are held accountable for their actions. Having
signed the peace plan in Kuwait on 30 June, Yemen
hopes that the international community, in particular
the Council, will play a more active role in pressuring
the putschists to accept and sign the Kuwait agreement,
lay down their arms and recognize the legitimate
Government. We hope for peace, whereas the militias
brandish slogans of death. They desire death for
everyone, whereas we fight for life. The Government
wants to strengthen peace and tolerance, while those
responsible for the putsch favour violence. Tolerance
will prevail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Nardi (Liechtenstein): The annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/360) illustrates that
the suffering of children in times of armed conflict
continues, including forced abduction and sexual
abuse, with very few truly positive developments
to report. Accountability for perpetrators and the
listing mechanism established under the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s mandate have
continued relevance and importance. The monitoring
and reporting mechanism established in resolution 1612
(2005) to document grave violations against children is
a key element of the United Nations effort to protect the
rights of children. The documentation used is based on
information vetted for accuracy, leading to credible and
evidence-based listing for perpetrators.
Like many others, we are deeply concerned about
the pressure put upon the Secretary-General to redact
the report produced by the Special Representative. Such
pressure seriously jeopardizes the integrity not only
of the mechanism, but also of others that the United
Nations has put in place. It also offers a welcome
48/88

02/08/2016

pretext for other offenders to dismiss the credibility
of monitoring and reporting. Such interference can
undermine progress made by the mandate, in particular
with regard to all the perpetrators. It also creates the
impression that accountability is only asked of those
who are not in a position of power vis-à-vis the United
Nations system. We wish to express our strong support
for the mandate of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict and its independence.
The report of the Secretary-General illustrates the
complex relationship between violent extremism and
children in armed conflict. On the one hand, children
fall victim to acts of terror intended to inflict maximum
civilian casualties. On the other hand, extremist groups
have exploited the vulnerability of children and used
them by enlisting them to carry out acts of violence.
In many of those cases, the decision to join violent
extremist groups is made out of a sense of exclusion
and hopelessness. The key challenge therefore lies in
reducing the incentive to join terrorist organizations in
the first place.
A preventive approach that fosters more inclusive
societies for children through measures such as youth
outreach programs and community-based projects can
go a long way in that respect. A solely military and
security approach will fail to address the underlying
factors driving violent extremism. Instead, we must
focus on tackling the root causes of conflicts and
crises: lack of good governance, poverty and the
absence of socioeconomic prospects. Doing so will
help address the pull factors for the radicalization
of children. Following the cessation of conflict, the
reintegration and rehabilitation of these children should
be prioritized. Psychological support and educational
programmes are helpful tools in that respect. It is of the
utmost importance to always respect the human rights
of children, in particular when States treat children
associated with violent extremism as security threats.
The Secretary-General’s report reflects the
troublesome number of sexual violence and abuse
cases perpetrated against children this past year. We
are concerned by the deteriorating situation in South
Sudan, in particular the recent reports that United
Nations peacekeepers took no action to prevent sexual
violence perpetrated against women and girls directly
outside of a United Nations camp. We welcome steps
taken by the Council in resolution 2272 (2016) to
repatriate units whose members have perpetrated such
crimes. That was a much-needed step, but still fell short
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

of the need for full accountability and an effective end
to impunity.
Much of the suffering of children in times of armed
conflict is due to the alarming erosion of respect for
international humanitarian law. A consistent political
commitment on the part of the Council to ensure
such respect, as well as our joint efforts to enhance
compliance, can go a long way towards addressing
this crisis of international humanitarian law. Along the
same lines, it is vital that we make firm commitments
to guaranteeing the human rights and safety of refugee
and migrant children, while also providing them with
livelihoods and income opportunities. As such, we are
strongly committed to the preparations for the highlevel plenary meeting on addressing large movements
of refugees and migrants on 19 September.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Medan (Croatia): Allow me at the outset
to thank the Malaysian presidency of the Council
for convening this debate. Croatia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union, and with that to be delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. I would like
to make several remarks in my national capacity.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their unwavering
efforts in pushing this agenda forward, and in particular
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, who intensely and tirelessly advocates for
the rights and well-being of children affected by armed
conflict across the globe. Her active engagement in a
case-by-case approach has significantly contributed
to the integration of child protection into a number
of peacemaking activities. In our view, her role is
indisputable and its independence, authority and
impartiality have to be fully supported.
Violations committed against children during
armed conflict are today, more than ever, part of the
changing nature of the armed conflict landscape. We
are witnessing the practice of using children as suicide
bombers, and a rise in attacks on schools and hospitals.
All those acts represent grave violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law. It is
especially worrying that millions of children worldwide
are being displaced by armed conflict, many of them
unaccompanied or separated from their families, which

S/PV.7753

only further heightens the risk of their being exposed to
a number of grave violations, including abduction and
sexual violence, ill treatment and abuse.
While it is crucial to invest all possible efforts in
preventing the recruitment of children and securing
their release from armed groups, we must focus the
same attention on the effective implementation of
policies for the successful reintegration of former
child soldiers and for addressing their long-term
psychological and social needs. We should also provide
all necessary support services to refugee and displaced
children. Our involvement needs to have a special
focus on the protection of girls, who are particularly
vulnerable in armed conflicts as potential victims of
rape, sexual violence, sexual exploitation, and early and
forced marriage.
Member States must ensure that their military
and police personnel uphold the highest human rights
values and receive predeployment training in line
with the United Nations standards, with a special
focus on child protection work. In that vein, we should
strengthen our responses to sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations missions and demand full
accountability at all levels. We absolutely cannot
tolerate the fact that some of those who come to protect
become perpetrators themselves.
Croatia fully supports the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign and its aim to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children by Government armed forces
in conflict by the end of this year. We particularly
welcome the fact that all Governments identified by
the Secretary-General for their recruitment and use of
children in their security forces are now engaged in
an action plan process. We also take this opportunity
to once again call on all countries to become parties
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict.
We wish to once again reiterate our strong support
for the children and armed conflict agenda, and for the
objectivity and impartiality of the tools established
to monitor and hold parties accountable for grave
violations of children’s rights.
In light of the twentieth anniversary of the
creation of the children and armed conflict mandate
by the General Assembly, we have to take pride in
the development of a solid normative and institutional
framework on that matter. But we also have to chart

16-2443749/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

a new way forward in ending the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict and addressing all grave
violations committed against them.
In that regard, we view it as essential that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, established under
resolution 1612 (2005), maintain its impartiality and
objectivity and continue to document the existence of
grave violations against children based on facts on the
ground. In that way, we will strengthen accountability,
ensure compliance with international legal standards,
and add to the further success of the children and armed
conflict agenda.
To that end, we pledge here today our full and
unequivocal support to finally bridging the gap between
commitments and the actual practice towards ensuring
a childhood free from fear and violence for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating Malaysia on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and by thanking you for your efforts in
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General;
his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and the Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings. We would
also like to express our gratitude to the United Nations
for its efforts in addressing this problem, which is a
tremendous challenge for the international community.
We are seeing a growing and alarming increase
in the suffering of civilians in armed conflict. We see
children deprived of their innocence and their right
to a dignified life. The Government of Kuwait is very
concerned about the practices of armed groups that
abuse, exploit and abduct children and subject them
to sexual violence and exploitation. The international
community must ensure that it addresses these dangers
and that these groups abide by international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
Whenever we take up the issue of children in armed
conflict, we must consider in particular the situation of
children in Palestine, where Israel’s violations persist.
Israel has been destroying schools and recreation
centres, and imposed constraints such as checkpoints
and the separation wall. We see how these measures
50/88

02/08/2016

are exacerbating the humanitarian situation there and
deprive Palestinian children of their rights.
In that context, we must call on the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility to address these violations
and to ensure that these children are in a position to
hope that their legitimate rights will be defended.
Recently, during the twenty-seventh Summit of the
League of Arab States, His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah announced Kuwait’s
intention of hosting an international conference to
address the issue of the suffering Palestinian children
face and Israeli practices, which are in breach of all
international conventions.
I should now like to turn to the crisis in Yemen. We
commend the Secretary-General’s decision to remove
the Saudi Arabia-led coalition from the list of countries
that have committed violations. We are a member of
that coalition, and we support that decision because the
coalition seeks to restore the legitimate institutions of
Yemen and has been in compliance with international
law and international humanitarian law. We reiterate
our call on the United Nations to send a delegation to
Riyadh to familiarize itself with the measures that we
have taken to protect civilians and children.
We are devoted to the restoration of the peace,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen and
support the political process under way, in line with
resolution 2216 (2015). As the Council is aware, since
2016 Kuwait has served as the host for the peace talks
on Yemen. It is our hope that the parties will reach an
agreement that can restore peace and security in that
brother country so that it can redevelop and rebuild.
We see the situation in Syria deteriorating on a
daily basis. We deplore the number of victims in Syria,
where we note that more than 250,000 people, including
20,000 children, have died despite international efforts
to alleviate the suffering of civilians. I note that we
have hosted three donor pledging conferences. One
was also held in London in February. Despite all those
efforts, the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/360)
notes the indiscriminate targeting of residential areas
and air strikes that have led to the deaths of children.
Given this humanitarian disaster, the Security Council
must identify a solution that can put an end to these
serious violations of international law and international
humanitarian law.
In conclusion, I recall that wars and conflicts affect
all sectors of the population, but that children are the
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

most vulnerable and exposed and need our protection
most. We must not frustrate their hope.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Krzywosądzki (Poland): Poland aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer
of the European Union and that to be delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. I would like
to add a few comments in my national capacity.
First, I would like to thank the Malaysian
presidency for convening this timely and important
debate. It has been 20 years since the publication of the
Graça Machel report (see A/59/306), which triggered
the international community’s actions to address the
rights and needs of children in armed conflict. A lot
has been done since then, but in many parts of the world
tens of thousands of children continue to be deprived
of their basic rights and a happy childhood because of
ongoing armed conflicts.
In that context, Poland is deeply concerned about
the increase in violence against educational facilities,
students and teachers during armed conflicts. We
welcome and support initiatives aimed at putting an
end to the use of schools and universities for military
purposes. The Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools
and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict, which were finalized in December 2014 under
the leadership of Norway and Argentina, are a good
example in that regard. To confirm our commitment to
effective implementation the Guidelines, Poland signed
the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration. We believe that
this initiative constitutes an important step towards
the protection and promotion of the rights of the child,
especially in conflict situations.
Poland is deeply concerned by the outrageous
phenomenon of child recruitment by armed forces
or armed groups. In that regard, we recognize the
importance of such efforts as the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign. We also appreciate the decision of
the Government of the Sudan to sign the action plan to
protect children from violations in armed conflict. We
take note of the commitments made by the Governments
identified by the Secretary-General in his recent report
(S/2016/360) on the recruitment of children, as well
as the notable progress achieved in Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Myanmar.

S/PV.7753

As a country that initiated the negotiations for
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Poland
has actively contributed to the implementation of
its objectives since its adoption in 1989. Recently, to
reaffirm our dedication to those issues, Poland joined
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We pledge to actively engage in the work of that
important body.
Let me conclude by stating the simple truth that
children do not start wars, but wars affect children’s
lives forever. It is the moral obligation of the entire
international community, including the United Nations,
Member States and civil society, to spare no effort to
better protect all children from the effects of violence
caused by adults.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We have closely reviewed the fifteenth report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/360), which was prepared
by Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
In that regard, we would like to acknowledge that, at
long last and with some reluctance, Ms. Zerrougui
has focused on a small number of facts related to the
recruitment of children by the terrorists of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups that have killed, slaughtered
and dismembered children in the Syrian Arab Republic
for more than five years now. In order to set the record
straight, we would like to make the following remarks.
First, the report does not reveal, in its research and
narrative, the main reason for the suffering of children
and girls in my country, which is largely due to the
systematic spread of the extremist Wahhabi Saudi
ideology, consolidated by the House of Saud when, in
the eighteenth century, it adopted the practices of the
pervert Muhammad ibn Abd Al-Wahhab in killing,
slaughtering and invading and in enslaving women.
These perverted practices of Muhammad ibn Abd
Al-Wahhab has have now reached the gates of Muscat
and Karbala.
The whole world was shocked by the video of the
horrendous slaughter of a Palestinian child, Abdullah
Issa, who sat wounded and dazed while surrounded
by human beasts belonging to a genetically modified
opposition group some people consider to be moderate.
The child was slaughtered in accordance with the

16-2443751/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

Wahhabi ISIL sense of legitimacy that allowed them to
commit this disgusting crime.
But this crime is a genetically modified crime.
The Nour Al-Din Al-Zenki group, a group of moderate
thieves originating from Turkey that was described by
the United States Ambassador at a previous meeting as
consisting of “rebel fighters”, as the Council will recall,
is a terrorist group that follows the perverted Wahhabi
intellectual way of thinking and receives financial
and arms support from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Western
Powers and the Erdoğan regime; it is this group that
committed this “moderate” criminal act.
The conscience of the world has come to recognize
how these Wahhabi regimes facilitated the murder
of the innocent children killed in cold blood in the
Al-Zara massacre, which was carried out by armed
groups in a village in the rural area of Hama a few
months ago, as well as other massacres perpetrated
in Syria. These regimes had a contract with the Devil
himself to implement a bloody programme that has
killed innocent children in Syria and Iraq in front of
schools and hospitals. These regimes were responsible
for the drowning of the Syrian child Aylan on the
Turkish coast of the Mediterranean, and for the deaths
of hundreds of children following the aerial bombing
by the international alliance led by the United States of
America in the city of Manbij, in a rural area of Aleppo.
The Military Operations Centre in Amman, which
includes intelligence services representing the United
States of America, France, Turkey, Qatar, Jordan, Israel
and Saudi Arabia, has now mobilized some 7,000 to
9,000 fighters on our borders inside Jordan. They intend
to launch this barbarous moderate opposition on our
southern border with Jordan in order for it to commit
crimes against our children, destroy our infrastructure
and attack the Syrian army. If this were taking place
in any other State, would the Council have called these
demagogues “the moderate armed opposition”, or
would they have dealt with them as thugs?
Secondly, the report fails to refer to the suffering
of children in refugee camps in neighbouring countries,
which is a critical issue. In this regard, we cannot
but express our deep concern at the ongoing rape of
children and the emergence of the phenomenon of the
human slave trade in camps in Turkey and Lebanon.
We are also deeply saddened at the new phenomenon
of the trade in the human organs of these children, not
to mention the rape and sexual harassment of Syrian
52/88

02/08/2016

children and women. The trade in organs in Turkish
refugee camps such as the Nizip camp was reported by
the Turkish mass media.
The Turkish newspaper BirGün published a story
about the rape of 30 Syrian children ranging in age
between 8 and 12. In addition, youth and children
are recruited to join terrorist groups. On 5 June 2016,
The New York Times published an article entitled “In
Turkey, a Syrian child ‘has to work to survive’”. Instead
of receiving education in a classroom, such children
work hard all day long in textile mills. More than
1 million Syrian children live in Turkey, and thousands
of them, unable to read or write, work in sweatshops
and factories.
A few days ago, in the Rukban refugee camp in
Jordan, two children died because of the difficult
conditions there, including lack of health care and
polluted water. The cause of death of one of them, who
was 10 months old, was yellow fever, as a result of
polluted water.
Thirdly, we stress the demand that Ms. Zerrougui’s
team investigate the fate of the hundreds of children
abducted by elements of the terrorist Army of Islam,
Liwa’ al-Tawhid units and the Free Syrian Army
in the areas of Damascus, Aleppo and Latakia. We
reiterate the appeal made to the Security Council and
Ms. Zerrougui’s Office to determine the whereabouts
of those children. We provided Ms. Zerrougui with
electronic sites documenting cases of the recruitment
of children by what is known as the Al-Nusra Front and
the Saudi terrorist Abdullah Al-Muhaysini, and a tweet
by the Saudi terrorist ideologue Mohammed Al-Arifi in
which he addressed the moderate opposition. We also
call on the Office of Ms. Zerrougui to provide us with
the names of the five Syrian children who, according to
the report, were recruited by Government forces into
popular committees. So far we have not received any
information in this regard.
We reiterate the same question to Ms. Zerrougui’s
team: why did the authors of the report fail to refer to
the forced economic measures imposed on the Syrian
people, further tightening the noose that is suffocating
children in Syria?
Fourthly, the report totally ignores the suffering,
anxiety and terror of Syrian children in the occupied
Syrian Golan as a result of the occupation force’s
practices, such as the siege and torture of the Syrian
population and its consequent ill effects on children.
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

The Israeli occupation forces put an infant under
house arrest in the occupied city of Majdal Shams.
His father was a student at Damascus University,
and his wife, from the Golan, gave birth to her child
in Damascus. When both of them returned after the
husband graduated from Damascus University, the
Israeli occupation forces arrested the infant, who was
only a year and three months old at the time, and put
him under house arrest for two years. This story has not
been heard by Ms. Zerrougui.
Furthermore, the Israeli curriculum is imposed on
Syrian children in the occupied Golan; they are being
exploited economically, which affects their growth
and overall health. In addition, 50 children in the
occupied Syrian Golan have fallen victim to the more
than 2 million mines planted by the Israeli occupation
forces. Again, Ms. Zerrougui failed to hear this story.
Nor can we ignore the moral scandal represented
by the failure of the Secretary-General to include
the facts in Ms. Zerrougui’s report with regard to the
crimes committed by Saudi Arabia against the children
of Yemen. Over 953 children were killed and over 1,168
children were injured before the report was published.
Representatives are undoubtedly familiar with the
political exploitation practiced by the Saudi delegation
when they threatened the Secretary-General with using
financial pressure and withholding financial assistance
to United Nations specialized agencies.
All those who have shed tears before you,
Mr. President, today over the plight of the Syrian
children play a major part in the killing of Syrian
children, adults and civilians. Many who spoke about
my country in their statements are actually primary
partners in killing our population. They shed tears for
Aleppo, Idlib and are partners in those crimes. Now
they are fanning the flames of action against Syria from
the borders of Jordan. This is a crime par excellence.
The President: As we still have a long list of
speakers, I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
and congratulate you on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. Our statement will be within the
four-minute limit.

S/PV.7753

We appreciate the remarks of the SecretaryGeneral and the focused briefings provided by his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and Executive Director
of UNICEF Anthony Lake. We also commend the
Special Representative for her determined efforts to
protect and advance the rights of children trapped in
armed conflicts.
As the Secretary-General said this morning,
children are one of the primary victims of armed
conflicts. Ominously, this disturbing trend shows
no sign of abatement. Children continue to be killed,
maimed, abducted and subjected to sexual violence as
a consequence of conflict situations, neither of their
making nor choosing. In the wanton destruction of
conflict, countless childhoods have been lost, dreams
shattered and hopes vanquished. Children also pay the
heaviest price in forced migration of people as a result of
conflict. These practices present formidable obstacles
to the normative frameworks of humanitarian and
human rights laws, in particular the rights of children.
We acknowledge the progress achieved during the
last 20 years. Children, Not Soldiers is an innovative
campaign that assures progress by laying emphasis on
priority activities, road maps, benchmarks, deadlines
and reviews, as well as active participation by listed
countries. The theme of children and armed conflict has
also effectively been mainstreamed into the Council’s
work. These efforts have contributed to the emergence
of a global consensus that no circumstances justify
recruitment and the use of children in conflict. The
signing of multiple action plans to stop the recruitment
and use of children and the various successful
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes to help children become productive
members of the society are tangible manifestations of
this consensus. Yet a lot more needs to be done.
Strengthening the compliance and accountability
mechanisms applied to all parties — conflict States
and non-State armed groups — is essential to stopping
violations of children’s rights and preventing recurrence.
Perpetrators of violence against children need to be
identified and brought to justice through national
judicial systems, and where applicable, through the use
of international justice mechanisms. The establishment
of appropriate legal frameworks with investigative and
prosecution capacities remain central to this purpose.
Above all, the goal of protecting lives is intrinsically
linked to the goal of preventing conflict. It is therefore

16-2443753/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

essential that the root causes of such conflicts are
addressed and inclusive political solutions found.
Pakistan attaches great importance to the
protection and promotion of the rights of children. We
are proud to be one of the six co-initiators of the 1990
World Summit for Children, which provided a fillip to
the accelerated ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of Child. We are also in the process of ratifying
the Convention’s Optional Protocol on Children and
Armed Conflict. Pakistan, as one of the world’s largest
troop contributing countries, has a proud history of
conscientiously undertaking the task of protecting
civilian lives, including those of children.
Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We, however, believe that this
mandate cannot afford accretion. The legal parameters
of the mandate, as provided by Security Council
resolutions, must be respected. In this context, we want
to state for the record that references to Pakistan in the
Secretary-General’s report of 20 April 2016 (S/2016/360)
are not within the purview of the established mandate
of children and armed conflict. We hope this principle
will be kept in mind while preparing future reports.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to congratulate Malaysia for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
thank it for organizing this debate on children and
armed conflict, as well as its commitment and tireless
efforts in the framework of its chairmanship of the
Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF Mr. Anthony Lake for
their respective briefings and the details they provided.
Twenty years ago, the world committed itself to take
action to combat the use of children in armed conflict.
Indeed, the publication in 1996 of the pioneering Graça
Machel report (see A/51/306) on the impact of armed
conflict on children led to the establishment in 1997
of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Since then, the Secretary-General has submitted annual
54/88

02/08/2016

reports to the Security Council on this issue. Each
year, the publication of this report is an opportunity
to examine the situation of children in armed conflicts
and makes it possible to shed light on their sufferings
to the international community through the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council. This makes it possible to continue to consider
this issue as a matter of urgency and to empower States
to engage politically to resolve it.
Since the establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children
and Armed Conflict, thousands of boys and girls have
been released thanks to the implementation of action
plans mandated by the Security Council to put an end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children in conflicts.
Admittedly, the annual United Nations reports show
that tangible progress has been made in the protection
of children in armed conflict, notably with the adoption
of international standards for the protection of children
and the implementation of strategies and programmes
aimed at protecting children affected by war. However,
children remain the primary victims of conflicts.
Recent years have unfortunately been marked by an
alarming intensification and an agonizing recurrence of
conflicts, which have become increasingly complex and
destructive with unprecedented violence, devastating
effects and an increasingly terrifying involvement of
violent extremist groups.
This has highlighted the vulnerability of tens of
millions of children. Indeed, UNICEF estimates that
approximately 250 million children live in countries or
regions affected by armed conflicts. Over 20 million
children are refugees in neighbouring countries or
are internally displaced within their own country as
a result of a conflict or violations of human rights.
Millions of children have been seriously injured or
permanently disabled. Between January and July 2015,
nearly 133,000 children found refuge in some European
countries — an average of 19,000 children every
month — and one in four people in search of refuge is
a child, according to information provided by Eurostat.
Some reports state that there are 250,000 children in
the world today still directly or indirectly involved in
armed conflicts. The magnitude of these figures should
challenge the international community and encourage it
to review the international strategy for child protection.
Morocco is actively working to ensure that
children’s rights are effectively respected and promoted
both in Morocco and worldwide. At the legislative level,
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

Morocco has acceded to all international instruments
protecting and promoting the rights of the child. In
fact, Morocco was among the first countries to sign
and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict and the Paris commitments on this
issue. Morocco has also begun the process of ratifying
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child establishing a communications procedure.
In addition, Morocco’s legal arsenal regulates military
recruitment and enrolment and acts in compliance with
international law.
Morocco has become diligently engaged in
international efforts to end the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Similarly, Morocco has always
supported the idea that the efforts of the international
community to deal effectively with this problem would
benefit from being part of a multifaceted approach
that is at once comprehensive, through a thorough
understanding of underlying and structural causes of
these conflicts; strategic, dealing not only with current
conflicts but also focusing on aspects of prevention;
cross-cutting, involving all stakeholders; and flexible,
taking into account the diverse and changing nature of
armed conflicts and their particular features.
The situation of children in Yemen, mentioned in
the annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/360),
remains a very troubling for Morocco. Indeed, the
dangerous developments there, including the use of
force and violence by the Houthis and the persistent
efforts to torpedo the achievements of the Yemeni
national dialogue, challenge us all and require a swift
solution to this conflict.
Before these acts and the dangers they represent,
the Kingdom of Morocco, together with other countries,
has expressed its full solidarity with the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and its support for restoring legitimacy
to Yemen and has joined the Coalition in Yemen. This
Coalition was created in compliance with the rights
enshrined in the United Nations Charter to protect
civilians following the military escalation by the
Houthis, which has undermined the peace, stability and
security of Yemen.
Resolution 2216 (2015) reiterated its support for the
legitimacy of the President of Yemen, Mr. Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, and asked all parties and
Member States to refrain from any action likely to
undermine the unity, sovereignty, independence and

S/PV.7753

territorial integrity of Yemen, as well as the legitimacy
of the President of the country. The main objective
of the Coalition is to support the political transition
in Yemen, in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism
and the results of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference, pursuant to all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
Morocco joins the spirit of openness and cooperation
expressed by all members of the Coalition, which will
continue to work closely with all stakeholders to restore
peace and stability in Yemen and reach a political
solution to the conflict, in accordance with all relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, while ensuring the
protection of all civilians, particularly children.
Finally, Morocco reiterates its willingness to work
closely with all partners to develop a multifaceted
approach to the protection of children in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I would like to begin by
commending Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui and UNICEF for their tireless
efforts on behalf of children affected by armed conflict
around the world. That some 115,000 child soldiers
have been released since the beginning of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mandate is
testament to their efforts and those of their colleagues
in the field.
Despite these success stories, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/360) demonstrates that
armed conflict continues to take an unacceptably
high toll on children, so many of whom continue to
be recruited and used in hostilities, killed, injured,
raped, abducted and denied education and health care.
This demonstrates that, 20 years on, the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict is as important as
ever, which is why it continues to have Australia’s
full support.
Against the backdrop of the highly dismaying
information provided in today’s briefings, I would like to
focus on three issues: the need to implement action plans,
the need to address attacks on health-care personnel
and facilities, and the need for stronger protection of
children’s rights in peacekeeping operations.

16-2443755/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

First, in this, the final year of the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, there is a critical need for continued
efforts to implement the action plans in place with
national security forces to end the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict. The delisting of nine
parties that have fully implemented their action plans
demonstrates that this is an initiative that is capable of
making real change. As the majority of groups listed in
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict are non-State actors, Australia welcomes the
efforts taken to ensure that such groups also refrain from
grave violations against children, and we encourage
further efforts to that end.
Secondly, Australia is deeply concerned that
medical facilities continue to come under frequent
attack during conflict, in gross violation of international
humanitarian law. This has serious implications for
children. It is crucial that resolution 2286 (2016) is
fully implemented, including its demand that all parties
to armed conflict facilitate the unimpeded passage
of medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties.
Thirdly, every effort should be made to ensure
that those who have a mandate to protect do no harm
to children. We therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to banning from participating
in peacekeeping missions those Government forces
repeatedly listed in the annexes of the children and
armed conflict reports.
The Security Council has repeatedly called for
children to be shielded from the impact of conflict.
Despite this, too many continue to suffer. We must do
more to end grave violations against children suffered
in conflicts not of their making.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Malaysia for its initiative
to convene today’s open debate during its presidency
of the Security Council and for circulating the related
concept note (S/2016/662, annex). I also welcome the
statement by the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
as well as the briefings by his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake.
In the 20 years since the publication of the Machel
report (see A/51/306), the challenges in the protection of
56/88

02/08/2016

children in armed conflict persist, and its call to action
remains in force. The Machel report was a milestone in
the protection of children affected by armed conflict
and outlined elements that served as paths for building
regulatory frameworks and national policies. That
is why Colombia hopes that today’s open debate will
serve as a opportunity to reiterate the commitment to
the findings and recommendations of the report and to
making progress in building a safer world for children.
I also want to highlight the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign led by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
which is aimed at achieving the commitment of States
that still recruit boys and girls into their national
forces to eliminating this practice. We believe that the
commitment of the international community as a whole
is essential in order to achieve similar results in relation
to non-State groups.
Colombia rejects any kind of linkage between
children and armed conflict. Since 1999, this practice
has been completely banned in my country and is a crime
under Colombian criminal law. In 2007, the Colombian
Government established an intersectoral commission
at the highest level to prevent the recruitment and use
of children and adolescents in the conflict. It has been
working throughout the country, using the guarantee of
rights as a basic element of prevention.
In the framework of this debate, I wish to highlight
the effort the country has been making over the past
four years to find a negotiated settlement to the internal
armed conflict, keeping the victims at the centre of the
process. As a result, today we can present significant
advances for the children’s welfare, in particular — as
many prior speakers have mentioned — through the
agreement on the release of minors under 15 years of age
from the camps of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the
agreement on drafting a road map for the release of all
other minors and a special comprehensive programme
on their care that was introduced in May.
I also highlight the announcement of the
renunciation of recruitment by the FARC-EP and the
establishment of a technical committee headed by the
Ombudsman — an organ independent of the branches of
public power — and the presidential council for human
rights with a view to facilitating the release of the
children who are involved with the FARC and to ensuring
the full restoration of their rights. Throughout those
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

efforts, we have had the support of the United Nations,
particularly the Office of the Special Representative for
Children in Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
whose commitment we are grateful.
Colombia has a long tradition of measures to restore
the rights of children who are victims of conflict,
which we make available to countries in similar
situations, along with all of the expertise my country
has developed in this domain. From 1999 to date, more
than 6,000 children have received assistance by way of
the specialized programme for children demobilized
from the armed groups, led by Colombia’s family
welfare institute. So far we have progressed in building
a pathway that, taking the lessons learned from our
experience, establishes the best way to re-establish the
rights of children from the FARC camps and to ensure
that they have access to all State services, including
reparations. It is our hope that we can very soon
announce the release of all of those boys and girls.
The Colombian State considers it essential that
all States assume their primary responsibility in the
protection of the children within their borders. From
that perspective we recognize the need to durably
strengthen institutional capacities. In that regard, we
believe that the United Nations plays a central role, and
the report of the Secretary-General is undoubtedly a
fundamental tool. Council members may rest assured
that Colombia will continue furthering that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Malaysian delegation, through you, Sir, for the initiative
in convening this open debate and for the concept
note (S/2016/662, annex) circulated to inspire our
interventions. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake for their briefings. We
also thank the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for its work on the report of the
Secretary-General and its annexes (S/2016/360).
Argentina firmly supports the work of the Security
Council in preventing and putting an end to the gross
violations of children’s human rights in situations
of armed conflict. That commitment has been
demonstrated repeatedly, as we were one of the first
States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict, which entered into force

S/PV.7753

in 2002, and supported the adoption of resolution 1261
(1999) and subsequent resolutions.
Likewise, we highlight the progress made in
prevention and in the protection of the rights of
children through coordinated action among the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the tasks carried out by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in collaboration with UNICEF
and other United Nations organs. We firmly support the
need to agree on and implement measures to increase
pressure on State and non-State actors who persist in
committing violations and to pursue relationships with
non-State actors with a view to releasing, rehabilitating
and reintegrating the children associated with such
groups. On that last point, we welcome the progress
made during the past year in the framework of the
peace accords in Colombia. Furthermore, we welcome
the commitments made by various Governments in the
framework of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign and
call for the full implementation of the action plans in
accordance with those commitments.
The protection of children under a human rights
approach must remain our priority and should therefore
be taken into account when defining the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as well as in the Security Council’s peacebuilding
actions and the efforts to combat violent extremism.
In that connection, it is essential to maintain and
strengthen the capacity of peacekeeping operations to
document and verify violations of the rights of children.
With respect to the ongoing occurrence of
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse of children in
peacekeeping missions, we cannot fail to note that
the situation is serious and represents the ultimate
challenge for the future of the missions and the image
of the United Nations. Argentina continues to strongly
support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
in that regard and the various measures proposed in
the respective reports and those contained in resolution
2272 (2016), emphasizing the central importance of
prevention and protection efforts concerning victims.
We express our concern about and strongly
condemn the increasing use of schools for military
purposes and the increase in attacks on schools and
hospitals. We believe that the issue deserves particular
attention on the part of the international community in
that it radically affects the right to education and health
of thousands of children worldwide.

16-2443757/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

In that connection, we highlight the adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) as it concerns the protection of
hospitals from armed attacks. We reiterate our strong
support for the Safe Schools Declaration adopted in Oslo
in May 2015 and sponsored by Argentina and Norway.
It commits States to implementing the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict, thereby ensuring the right to
education and the protection of children and young
people in conflict situations. We urgently call upon
United Nations Member States, especially the members
of the Security Council, to endorse the Declaration, in
view of the celebration in Buenos Aires next March of
the second International Conference on Safe Schools.
In conclusion, we reiterate once again the need
to adopt an unequivocal approach that considers
children associated with armed groups, including
those associated with violent extremist groups, and
children displaced by armed conflict as victims and
not as perpetrators or security threats, since their
recruitment, kidnapping, displacement and other
causes of their alleged involvement in armed conflict
or violent extremism is of a forced manner. States must
endeavour to ensure the full protection of their human
rights and seek alternatives to detention to ensure their
effective rehabilitation and reintegration into society,
based on the principles of international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
refugee law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union and the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
The Netherlands wishes to address the following
three issues in our national statement: the twentieth
anniversary of the mandate, current trends, and
credibility issues.
The year 2016 marks the twentieth anniversary
of the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Netherlands commends the current Special
Representative, her predecessors and all who have
helped in implementing the mandate over the past
two decades. The Special Representative serves as the
leading United Nations advocate for the protection and
58/88

02/08/2016

well-being of children affected by armed conflict. We
can see, almost on a daily basis, the disproportionate
impact of war on children in Syria, Yemen and South
Sudan, to name but a few.
Too often, children are the primary victims in
conflict. Therefore, the work of Ms. Zerrougui is so
important to all of us. She helps the most vulnerable
in the most dire circumstances. We pay tribute to her
personal empathy, her efforts and her personal energy.
Important gains in the implementation of the mandate
of the Special Representative have been made, as
she had mentioned earlier. But this year’s report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/360) is another stark
reminder that there is no room for complacency.
That brings me to my second issue. We see
worrying trends: the increased number of abductions,
the effects of violent extremism and the growing
negative impact of forced displacement on children.
Those trends show the need for further action. As
rightly stated by the European Union delegation, our
approach to fighting and preventing violent extremism
needs to be comprehensive and should address its root
causes. To prevent displacement and its negative effects
on children, it is crucial that all parties to the conflict
respect international humanitarian law.
In that regard, let me draw attention to the
particularly distressing situation for citizens, including
and especially children, in Aleppo, Syria. Let me mention
the editorial opinion piece my Minister for Foreign
Affairs Albert Koenders wrote in The Independent
last weekend. The delivery of humanitarian assistance
in Aleppo should be beyond dispute, regardless of
whether people flee or decide to stay. The Government
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore calls
on the members of the Council to ensure agreement
on the proposal of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for opening regular 48-hour
humanitarian corridors.
The members of the Council should redouble their
efforts to reach a diplomatic solution in Syria. Global
efforts should be geared towards fighting terror and
leveraging a political solution. Humanitarian access,
restoration of a ceasefire and resumption of the peace
talks in Geneva are first priorities. The urgency of
the situation is underlined by today’s reports about a
horrific chlorine gas attack in Idlib province in which
mostly women and children are the victims.
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

I come to my third subject: credibility and
independence issues. For the international community
to take action and to hold parties in a conflict
accountable for grave violations against children, we
need a strong and credible monitoring and reporting
mechanism. Previous reports of the Secretary-General,
including their annexes, have proven of instrumental
value in that regard. But the Netherlands is concerned
about a recurring trend over the past years to alter the
content of the reports and to influence the listing of
perpetrators. That could lead to double standards and
could seriously undermine the credibility of the reports
and of the United Nations. It is of the utmost importance
that the integrity of the mandate on children and armed
conflict be respected by all of us.
The Netherlands fully supports the independent
mandate of Special Representative Zerrougui and
commends her for her work. The past 20 years have
shown us that under that mandate a lot can be achieved.
This year’s report (S/2016/360) underlines its continued
relevance. We urge all Member States to guarantee its
credibility and success for the coming 20 years.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands takes part in
efforts for peace, justice and development, and the
position and protection of children is key to all of
those dimensions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, let me thank
you, Sir, and the Malaysian presidency for organizing
today’s debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for
briefing the Council and for the prominence he attributes
to protecting children in armed conflict. He has our full
support in his efforts to ensure the accuracy of United
Nations reporting on grave violations committed
against children. We attach great importance to the
independence and integrity of his Office and regret any
interventions that may have been aimed at editing the
content of his annual report.
Despite all setbacks and grim cases of abuse we have
been reminded of today, the work of the United Nations
on children and armed conflict has made substantial
progress since Graça Machel’s report (see A/51/306) 20
years ago. This is also thanks to the leadership, energy
and perseverance of the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General. Let me take the opportunity to
thank Ms. Zerrougui for her admirable work.

S/PV.7753

“One has to do good in order for it to exist in the
world”, the nineteenth century Austrian author Marie
von Ebner-Eschenbach wrote. As every child subjected
to violence is potentially traumatized and thus may be a
source of future violence, naturally our work for a more
peaceful world has to start with our children. The issue
of children and armed conflict has therefore always
been a priority for Austria. As per the president’s
concept note (S/2016/662, annex) we want to highlight
some recent activities of Austria in that respect.
In the area of reducing the impact of violent
extremism on children, we engage in a multitude
of prevention projects, inter alia, awareness-raising
workshops for teachers and students on religious
and political radicalization, jihadism, antisemitism,
islamophobia and prevention strategies, but also on
peace education and tolerance towards religious and
ethnic diversity. Mothers’ schools empower Austrian
mothers with an immigration or refugee background
to work against potential radicalization of their
children by engaging in constructive communication
and thoughtful authority in their families. In assisting
children displaced by armed conflict, especially those
seeking refuge, Austria is engaging in early language
support groups to promote faster language-based
integration resulting in positive long-term effects.
Austria is also keen to support the United Nations
system in its efforts to address the plight of children
affected by armed conflict. I will provide just two
examples. We supported the Special Representative in
hosting talks at the Austrian Study Centre for Peace
and Conflict Resolution in May 2015, bringing together
three major rebel groups in the Darfur conflict. The
three non-State actors agreed on the need to exert
more efforts to protect children and to adhere to
existing international standards. We will continue
our assistance to the Special Representative in that
respect to advance the given commitments further.
The third international conference on Children and
War: Past and Present was recently held in Salzburg,
co-organized by the Universities of Salzburg and
Wolverhampton in association with the Office of the
Special Representative, bringing together scholars,
practitioners, representatives of governmental and
nongovernmental institutions and the media.
We also welcome the United Nations commitment
to improve training of peacekeeping and humanitarian
personnel to deal comprehensively with situations
involving children. We have been cooperating with the

16-2443759/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

Department of Peacekeeping Operations in developing
training materials on child protection for military
peacekeepers and in hosting train-the-trainer courses
for troop-contributing countries. Austria will continue
to offer her expertise and national infrastructure for
that purpose.
In conclusion I wish to renew Austria’s commitment
to actively pursuing the protection of children in armed
conflicts with all partners, for the good of our children
and the good of our planet. Let us always keep EbnerEschenbach’s words in our mind: “One has to do good
in order for it to exist in the world”. What could be more
rewarding than doing good for our children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Allow me to express
my congratulations to Malaysia for assuming the
presidency of the Council during the month of August
and to thank you, Sir, for organizing this highly
important debate. My delegation would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for preparing the annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2016/360) as
well as for his tireless efforts in working to improve
the situation of children worldwide. My appreciation
also goes to Ms. Leila Zerrouui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for their briefings on the situation on the
ground relating to children in armed conflict.
While associating itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, I wish to
speak in my national capacity as follows.
Cambodia shares the concerns expressed by
fellow delegations about the difficult plight of children
affected by armed conflict. Children are the hope of
the future, yet time and again children fall victim to
acts of violence committed by non-State armed groups.
Attacks against children are on the rise, and there
appears to be no safe haven for children to escape armed
violence. The Secretary-General clearly outlines in his
report that attacks on schools and hospitals continue
unabated, and that abductions of children by terrorist
organizations have increased considerably.
The international community cannot continue to
tolerate the impunity of non-State armed groups and
must respond swiftly and effectively. In this context, we
60/88

02/08/2016

must strengthen the existing legal instruments for the
protection of children in armed conflict. At the same
time, we must be careful to ensure that the international
response to non-State armed groups does not cause
further harm to children. We must be careful not to
inadvertently contribute to children’s suffering, and so
must ensure that the global response is fully compliant
with international law and emphasizes the protection of
civilian populations, particularly women and children.
The Royal Government of Cambodia is resolved
to protect children and their rights in situations of
armed conflict. As a State party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and a signatory to its Optional
Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict of 2000, Cambodia supports initiatives of the
United Nations aimed at protecting children in conflict.
Moreover, having endorsed the Paris Commitments,
the Royal Government of Cambodia is committed to
working with our global partners, Member States
and United Nations agencies in our efforts to end the
victimization of children by non-State armed groups.
Cambodia views with particular concern the
observations contained within the Secretary-General’s
report that children, in seeking safety and peace
at refugee camps, have been recruited to serve as
child solders, taken sexual advantage of, abducted
and otherwise victimized. This is a particularly
development, which negatively affects children’s
psyche, contributing to their radicalization.
In this context, it is important to make children’s
concerns part of any peace process negotiations.
Mr. President, in your concept note (see S/2016/662).
you rightly point out that engaging non-State armed
groups on child-protection issues may reap positive
benefits, as we have seen manifested in various parts
of the world. Cambodia welcomes these efforts and
supports the use of such an approach in the future.
The successful reintegration of children into society
is a crucial consideration in this respect. As important
as it is to prevent radicalization, it is also necessary
to create effective deradicalization programmes that
would address the re-entry of child solders or those
children affected by armed conflict into peaceful
society. This would require prioritizing reintegration
programmes focused on the education, health and
social welfare of children.
In this context, radicalization should be addressed
in schools and at home, where children are taught at an
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

early age about the dangers of joining, either voluntarily
or by force, non-State armed groups. Moreover, migrant
children should be effectively integrated within schools
in their respective host nations so as to feel accepted in
what is a new and foreign place to them.
Children are the hope of a better world and the
driving force for the successful implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). In this light, my delegation
would like to reiterate its deeply held belief that the use
of children in armed conflicts can be prevented only
through the establishment of adequate social, political
and economic conditions worldwide. To ensure a bright
future for children and young adults, we must build
inclusive societies marked by tolerance, mutual respect
and peaceful coexistence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for allowing my delegation to speak in this
debate. Belgium fully supports the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict, and should like make
the following observations in its to national capacities.
We welcome the publication of the new report of
the Secretary-General on the situation of children and
armed conflict (S/2016/360). Among the developments
noted, Belgium regrets the worsening impact of violent
extremism on children. We share the view of the
Secretary-General that this phenomenon is the result of
a context in which it is essential to understand the root
causes in order to combat it effectively. Our struggle
against violent extremism will be successful only if
we address its root causes, always in strict compliance
with human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Gravely concerned by the phenomenon of child
abductions in situations of armed conflict, my country
welcomes the addition of this phenomenon to the list
of violations involving inclusion in the lists annexed to
the annual reports. Belgium believes that these lists are
a valuable tool in the identification and prosecution of
perpetrators, and contribute thereby to efforts to stop
such violations.
Belgium also remains concerned about the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas and calls on all
parties involved in a conflict to renounce that practice,
of which children are the primary victims. My country

S/PV.7753

also urges States that have not yet ratified the relevant
international instruments, especially the conventions
banning landmines and cluster munitions, to do so as
soon as possible. My country encourages all Member
States to strengthen their efforts to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law.
Belgium also wishes to emphasize the importance
of the establishment of adequate reintegration and
rehabilitation mechanisms for children affected by
conflict. The extreme experiences of these children
often have a negative influence on their ability to
reintegrate, which can also harm term efforts to sustain
peace. It is therefore important to work together to
ensure that children affected by conflict can benefit
from appropriate long-term support. It is in that spirit
that Belgium organized last month in New York,
in the presence of Her Majesty Queen Mathilde, an
event promoting the sharing of best practices for the
psychosocial rehabilitation and social integration of
children in conflict.
Belgium reiterates its firm support for the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and notes with
appreciation the results of her Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, which has led all the Governments concerned
to sign action plans aimed at ending the recruitment and
use of children in national security forces. We strongly
support the efforts made to that end in the context of
peacekeeping operations, including the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in support of the capacities and
initiatives of the Governments concerned to prosecute
alleged recruiters of child soldiers.
In conclusion, we support the meticulous and
courageous work of the personnel of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict, as reflected by
the fact that Belgium is one of the main donors to that
UNICEF programme. We call on States Members to do
the same.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to Malaysia for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict.

16-2443761/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui and Mr. Anthony Lake for explaining the
situation of and the impact of conflicts on children,
as well as the implementation of several action plans
to eliminate violence against children, particularly in
armed conflict.
Indonesia has paid particular attention to the issue
of children in armed conflict, which has a grave impact
both on the involved parties and the victims, especially
on the growth, well-being and future of children.
We condemn any act of violence against children,
as defined by the United Nations in six categories of
violations against children that include the killing and
maiming of children, the recruitment or use of children
as soldiers, sexual violence against children, attacks on
schools or hospitals, the denial of humanitarian access
for children, and the abduction of children. We believe
that no child imagines itself being forced to become a
soldier; no child wants to be in conflict and no child
wants a war. But the reality is disastrously different
from our expectations.
It is already very disturbing that children are
forced into armed conflict as combatants. What is
equally disturbing is that they may be forced into
some type of strategic position, such as spies, couriers,
communications officers, logistics and other forms
of involvement that can harm children. In post-war
situations, the psychological condition of children
involved in armed conflict has become a central concern
of stakeholders that, if not carefully handled, could
raise the potential for spawning radical and extremist
movements in the future.
As the Graça Machel report (see A/51/306) reminds
us, children who cannot escape conflict do not have the
same chances for advancement enjoyed by children
growing up in peace. There are short- and long-term
implications that surely remain with children that have
experienced first-hand the horrors of conflict and
violence. In this regard, we highly value efforts that
have been undertaken by the Council in establishing
and implementing measures and resolutions, including
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict. We also appreciate the importance of various
engagements and initiatives of the Secretary-General,
62/88

02/08/2016

Member States and other stakeholders, which can
provide useful guidance on the practical steps taken
to ensure that children are able to grow up in a safe
environment and free from any form of violence.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), we have a common platform to advance peace
globally by arming all countries and people with
economic and social equality, which will enable all of
us to also exercise our abilities to protect the planet.
Through this framework, leaving no one behind and
achieving sustained peace for generations to come feels
more tangible.
When the international community addresses
conflict and violence, the greater hope is that there will
be stronger strategic emphasis on prevention. First and
foremost, one important measure that should be taken is
to protect the minds and spirits of children from being
contaminated by the violence of conflict. Moreover, one
part of preventive measures is understanding the root
causes and catalysts of conflicts, which are often linked
to poverty, marginalization and lack of opportunities
for the young population to advance themselves.
Violence against children cannot therefore be
ended with silo or sporadic approaches. Purely military
and security approaches have not proved effective. It is
imperative for us to adopt a comprehensive approach to
identifying real actions to address the impact of armed
conflict on children, including through social, economic
and political approaches, as well as the formulation
of a long-term strategic plan for reintegration and
rehabilitation. Such strategies should be based on
credible and impartial information, taking into account
the efforts made by Member States and in line with the
responsibility and authority of States.
It is also important to create an enabling environment
and implement many of the international commitments
that would ensure the protection of children. Indonesia
once again encourages Member States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict, as well as other relevant
conventions. Indonesia also encourages Member
States to support efforts towards the fulfilment of the
fundamental rights of children through child protection
legislation, education, training and resources to ensure
that the best interests of children are taken care of.
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7753

Let us once again redouble our efforts. What is at
stake is the future of the world and many generations
to come. Children deserve peace. Children have
the right to develop healthily and enjoy a happy and
harmonious life.

displacement, killing, sexual violence, maiming
and abduction, among other appalling brutalities.
This situation has been exacerbated by the action of
extremist non-State armed groups and by massive
forced displacements.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

Portugal believes that the Council must continue
to strive to find the best way to promote the protection
of children affected by armed conflict and better
respond to the magnitude of the challenges posed by the
tremendous brutality of the acts of violence committed
against them. In so doing, we need to take a certain
number of points into account.

Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): Let me start
by thanking today’s briefers for their presentations. I
should also like to seize this opportunity to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
her briefing, and take this occasion to commend her
work and efforts to ensure the protection of children in
situations of ongoing armed conflict.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, but let me underline
some aspects of particular significance to my country.
For the past 20 years, since Graça Machel presented
her study on the impact of armed conflict on children
(see A/51/306), much has been done by the Council to
protect children in situations of armed conflict and
for the promotion and protection of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Portugal is deeply
committed to the promotion and protection of human
rights and to international humanitarian law. In fact, the
first debate held in the Council on the issue of children
in armed conflict was promoted by Portugal in 1998
(see S/PV.3896). We were then already convinced, as
we remain today, that this issue has serious implications
for international peace and security.
Despite the significant progress achieved and the
establishment of a strong normative framework and a
mechanism for monitoring, reporting and responding
to grave violations against children, we note that huge
challenges remain, due in particular to the changing
nature of conflicts, protracted conflicts, the prevalence
of violent extremism and forced displacement, as
the latest Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/360)
highlights.
The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its long-term consequences
for durable peace, security and development are
undeniable. Because of their vulnerability, children not
only suffer directly the consequences of armed conflict
and of the collapse of the social fabric, but are being
deliberately targeted and subject to forced recruitment,

First, action plans are an important tool for
engaging with armed forces and non-State armed
groups and can play a positive role in ending violations
against children.
Secondly, we note with growing concern the
prevalence of attacks on and the use of schools and
hospitals for military purposes. Governments and
all other actors must protect schools and hospitals by
upholding the provisions of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
Thirdly, we must address the issue of impunity.
While Member States have the primary responsibility
in fulfilling their international commitments to ensure
the promotion and protection of human rights and of
international humanitarian law, the Security Council
has the political and ethical role of sending a clear
message that abuse against children is unacceptable and
of combating, though its action, the sense of impunity
among belligerents responsible for atrocities and abuses
committed against children. Where national authorities
fail to take the necessary steps to ensure accountability,
the Security Council can, as appropriate, play a more
proactive role. Portugal reiterates that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) can play a fundamental deterrent
role, complementary to the roles of tribunals at national
and international levels, and that further institutional
dialogue between the ICC and the Security Council is
fundamental in that regard.
On peacekeeping operations, Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of child-protection advisers in the
mandates, as well as mandatory pre-eployment training
on the protection of children to ensure that the situation
of children affected by armed conflict is adequately
addressed in peace missions by promoting advocacy,
mainstreaming, training, monitoring and reporting.
We also support effective screening of peacekeepers

16-2443763/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

to ensure that individuals who have committed grave
violations against children no longer serve with the
United Nations.
We cannot remain indifferent to these gross
violations of children’s rights. We thank Malaysia for its
leadership in the efforts to consolidate the mechanisms
at the disposal of the Council to deal with one of
the most appalling scourges of our time. Protecting
children from the ravages of war is a moral imperative
and an issue of international peace and security.
I would like to conclude by recalling the words of
Graça Machel:
“We need to embrace a new morality that puts children
where they belong — at the heart of all agendas.
Protecting children from the impact of armed conflict
is everyone’s responsibility — Governments,
international organizations and every element of
civil society.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Mrs. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me start by congratulating the outstanding
management and leadership shown by Japan during
its recent presidency of the Security Council. My
delegation would also like to thank the Malaysian
presidency for convening this timely debate to address
an issue of great sensitivity and concern for my country
given the number of children involved in and affected
by armed conflict.
Panama associates itself with the statement made
by the delegation of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network, but would like to make several
comments in our national capacity.

02/08/2016

the organization responsible for protecting their rights
are themselves the aggressors. Children are mutilated
and displaced. They perish in attacks on schools and
hospitals. They are victims of abduction and recruitment
in war zones. They are exposed to attacks and abuses of
their human rights.
UNICEF statistics are no more encouraging. They
indicate that up to 300,000 children worldwide are
involved in armed forces and groups with different
functions, thereby becoming the main protagonists
and victims of this scourge. UNICEF also urges that
the causes of conflict be addressed, as the report of the
Secretary General, and he himself this morning, also
do. Children have existiing rights; to ensure them we
need the participation of all segments of society under
co-responsibility. This imperative requires us to ensure
their rights and avert threats to them, or immediately
restoring their rights.
Although this would seem to be an issue that
primarily affects certains regions of the world, we
cannot ignore the importance of a coordinated and
unified response. Otherwise, judging by the dynamics
of the current population of migrants and refugees, we
will all be victims of the consequences of these children
affected by conflict today, who tomorrow could be
maladjusted adults.
In celebrating 20 years of the agenda on children and
armed conflict, we welcome and stress the resolutions
and mechanisms adopted to monitor and report on grave
violations of the rights of children, which have been
key to raising awareness of this very serious situation
and to promoting the protection of children affected,
including the possibility of sanctions.

“our collective failure to prevent ... violations
[that] are directly related to the denigration of the
respect for international humanitarian and human
rights law” (S/2015/360, para. 4).

My delegation would like to highlight the work
of Special Representative Zerrougi and the Children,
Not Soldiers campaign, which has led to momentum
on political commitments aimed at prohibiting
the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts. Panama attaches particular importance
to the leadership of Executive Director Lake and his
dedicated work on behalf of the neediest children. By
way of encouragement, we also commend the work of
Colombia to favour efforts aimed at protecting children
in the course of its peace process.

The numbers of children affected by armed
conflict are increasinly alarming. They are victims of
degrading and shameful acts of sexual exploitation and
violence — which are made the worse when staff of

Panama reiterates its commitment to international
efforts to ensure full protection for children’s rights
in all areas, and in particular when it comes to the
scourge of armed conflict and the challenges posed by

My delegation expresses its concern about the
contents of the report of the Secretary-General, as it is
indicative of the disproportionate impact that continues
to make children victims of armed conflict. We are also
troubled by what the Secretary-General calls

64/88

16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

violent extremism.My country is prepared to cooperate
actively with intenrational initiatives, programmes and
prevention mechanisms whose main goal is to ensure
the welfare and protection of children. We therefore
welcome the call made this morning by the SecretaryGeneral that the Council and its member States
make every effort to back up his words with actions
that protect children from the scourge of conflicts.
Twenty-five years after Panama’s ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, we reiterate our
determination to work together to join efforts in defence
of the principle of guaranteeing the best interests of
children under any circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): My delegation would like to
extend warm congratulations to Malaysia’s presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
to commend the President for convening this most
important debate on children in armed conflict. We
attach particular significance to the fact that Malaysia
is the current Chair of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We also
take note of the work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougi.
Given the horrendous threat to posed to international
peace and security by terrorism and violent extremism,
we welcome the particular emphasis at this debate on
the two thematic areas, namely, reducing the impact of
violent extremism on children, and children displaced
in conflict.
More than 65 million people have fled their homes
due to conflict and violence, and about half of those
affected are children. As Member States, we must
make it our responsibility to protect those children
forcibly displaced and to ensure their access to health
and education.
Sri Lanka commends the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral on his annual report (S/2016/360) on children
and armed conflict covering the year 2015. We also
welcome the briefing he gave this moring.
We continue to hear the same horrifying tale of the
increasing impact of terrorism and violent extremism
on children from Yemen to Nigeria to Syria, and from
Afghanistan to Somalia to South Sudan. We note with
great concern that children are the most significantly
affected by violent extremism and too often are the

S/PV.7753

direct targets of acts intended to cause the maximum
civilian casualties and terrorize communities. Attacks
on schools and hospitals were starkly prevalent this
past year, and documented in 19 out of 20 situations of
conflict. The increasing use of air strikes and explosive
weapons in populated areas has had a devastating
impact on schools and hospitals.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles — which are principles and guidelines
on children associated with armed forces or armed
groups — it is imperative that we as Member States
respond to violent extremism with a multi-pronged
approach that also addresses the root causes of poverty,
marginalization and disaffection that lead to the killing,
maiming, or forcible displacement and/or radicalization
of children. The Secretary-General has raised concerns
that current operations include the systematic treatment
of children as security threats as opposed to victims,
including the detention of children solely based on their
alleged association with armed groups or forces. It is
important that children not be detained unless they are
charged with recognizable offences, and then only in
accordance with juvenile justice standards and rules of
international law.
Sri Lanka has emerged from a nearly 30-year violent
conflict, which tore at the very fabric of our nation.
During that time, Sri Lanka witnessed the unbearable
horror of child soldiers, who were used as combatants
by non-State armed groups. Those innocent victims
were called the “baby brigade”. Forty per cent of those
children were girls. Many of them were taken forcibly
from their villages or schools to serve as combatants
or in support roles, such as cooks, and porters, among
others. In the fog of war, many became the victims
of conflict.
When the armed conflict ended, in May 2009,
a total of 594 child combatants between 12 and 18
years of age surrendered. Sri Lanka considered those
children victims of the conflict and took measures to
rehabilitate and reintegrate the former child combatants
by providing education, recreational facilities and
vocational training, as well as psychological support
to help them deal with their past. The strategies
and activities included improving the physical and
mental state by spiritual, psychosocial, personality
and leadership training, followed by vocational and
technical training in order to give them the best possible
chance in life to become productive citizens.

16-2443765/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

It was important to rebuild their trust in those
who were meant to protect them, their trust in society
and their faith even in themselves. Those positive
developments undertaken by Sri Lanka led the United
Nations to delist Sri Lanka from annex 2 of the report
of the Secretary-General on child combatants in
2012. Since January 2015, with positive changes in its
Administration, Sri Lanka has been able to go further
in its endeavours to chart a path of true reconciliation
and justice.
Our national initiatives and programme on
rehabilitating and reintegrating former child combatants
have been some of the most successful projects of
that nature in recent history. However, demobilizing
children from the ranks of non-State armed groups
and their subsequent rehabilitation and reintegration
into society are riddled with complications. There is no
one-size-fits-all formula to address this issue. But in all
our actions, compassion, kindness and understanding
must serve as the common thread. Sri Lanka believes
that there are three effective methods to reduce the
recruitment of child combatants: first, political and
economic pressure on the offending party; secondly,
mobilizing resources for rehabilitation programmes;
and, thirdly, addressing the socioeconomic, political
and ideological dynamics that seduce children into
groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da’esh.
But there is more to be done. There must be an
accurate and credible listing of perpetrators of the
six grave violations against children identified by the
Secretary-General. We need to strengthen monitoring,
reporting and response to child rights violations on
the ground; implement existing United Nations action
plans with armed forces and groups listed in the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s annual reports on
children and armed conflict; and unanimously call for
stronger protection of children’s rights within United
Nations peacekeeping operations. As we all know,
children are the first and most vulnerable casualties
of war. It is children who are exploited by non-State
armed groups. It is children who are in the cross hairs.
And impressionable as they are, children, at a young
age, will watch, learn and shape our future on the basis
of our actions. It is in the hands of those of us who make
decisions not only to set the right example, but to do
everything in our power so that our children are armed
with books, not guns, and that they play in sand boxes
rather than hide behind sand bags.
66/88

02/08/2016

Finally, Sri Lanka wishes to thank United Nations
agencies, in particular UNICEF and its dynamic
Executive Director, Mr. Anthony Lake, as well as our
bilateral partners for their assistance and support as we
addressed the challenges and issues of child combatants
during Sri Lanka’s armed conflict. Sri Lanka stands
steadfast in its support of the children of the world
and stands ready to work with other Member States,
particularly through sharing our experiences.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the observer State of Palestine.
Ms. Rasheed (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency this month and thank you for convening this
important debate on children and armed conflict. This
matter continues to be of the highest priority and urgency
for the State of Palestine. I would also like to join others
in thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict Leila
Zerrougui and UNICEF Executive Director Anthony
Lake for their briefings this morning.
Without any doubt, the call to action made in Graça
Machel’s 1996 report (see A/51/306) and the efforts
made thereafter by the international community have
contributed to notable successes and achievements
in the areas of children’s rights and the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. However, today,
as validated by the speakers in this debate, the world
faces new and grave challenges in connection with
the protection of children affected by armed conflict.
As such, the devastating impact and the long-lasting
consequences for millions of children must warrant an
immediate and serious response by the international
communit — or rather, a renewed call to action — in
order to overcome the unprecedented and persisting
challenges facing children.
The report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-General
before us today directly links the increased intensity
of grave violations in a number of situations of armed
conflict to the denigration of respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law. We could not agree
more with his assessment. For nearly half a century,
the Palestinian people and their children living under
Israeli occupation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, have endured appalling
levels of human suffering as their rights have been
violently denied and international humanitarian
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

law has continued to be trampled on by Israel, the
occupying Power.
Unprotected, despite the very clear provisions
of international law according protection to civilians
under foreign occupation, Palestinian children continue
to be killed, injured and terrorized by the occupying
Power with complete impunity. The SecretaryGeneral’s report clearly reflects that. In fact, not
only did violations by Israel against Palestinian
children continue, but since October 2015 they have
intensified as the occupying forces have unleashed a
new wave of aggression, provocation and incitement
against the entire Palestinian civilian population,
including children. Tragically, since then, more than 40
Palestinian children have been killed, many of whom in
extrajudicial executions.
As noted by the report and verified by many
international human rights organizations, Israeli
occupying forces resorted to the excessive use of force
and unlawful killings despite the fact that there were no
indications that the children killed posed an imminent
or immediate threat to Israeli occupying forces. In
addition to the killing of those children, we would also
like to share that, since October 2015, more than 2,600
children have also been injured, many severely, owing
to Israel’s use of live ammunition against unarmed and
defenceless Palestinian children.
The report before us also notes an increased number
of Palestinian children who were arrested and detained
by Israeli occupying forces during the reporting period,
including many who are currently being held under
administrative detention. In occupied East Jerusalem
alone, 860 Palestinian children were arrested, including
136 between 7 and 11 years of age, under the age of
criminal responsibility. It must be recalled that most,
if not all, children held in Israeli prisons or detention
centres are subjected to various forms of psychological
and physical torture.
Moreover, settler violence and terror against
Palestinians, including children, under the protection
and watch of the Israeli occupying forces, continue
unabated. The report notes that there were at least
20 cases of settler attacks that resulted in injury to
Palestinian children. This includes the terrorist attack
on 31 July 2015, when settler terrorists burned the
Dawabshe family home in the occupied West Bank
village of Duma, killing 18-month-old baby Ali and
fatally injuring his parents. Ali’s 4-year-old brother

S/PV.7753

Ahmad, who suffered severe burns, is the only
survivor and was only released from the hospital to a
rehabilitation facility just last week.
Besides those violations, Israel, the occupying
Power, continues with its systematic collective
punishment of the entire Palestinian civilian population
in the occupied Palestinian territory, which has
gravely affected our children. One example of that is
the occupying Power’s continued unlawful practice
of punitive home demolitions, which have rendered
hundreds of children and their families homeless. The
report also notes that attacks on schools and protected
personnel, and a pervasive environment of violence,
harassment and intimidation by the occupying Power,
continued to have an impact on Palestinian children’s
access to education. Attacks by the occupying Power
on hospitals in the occupied State of Palestine also
continued, despite the fact that hospitals, as well
as schools, are afforded special protection under
international humanitarian law.
Palestinian children in the occupied Gaza Strip
also continue to be victims of persistent violations of
international law at the hands of the occupying Power.
Children who managed to escape death or physical
injury during the three wars on Gaza over a six-year
span live with psychological effects that are severe
and resounding. Many have lost one or two parents,
and some have even lost their entire extended families.
Moreover, more than 44,000 Palestinian children
are still displaced as a result of their homes being
destroyed by the occupying Power in its 2014 war on
Gaza, in which grave violations, including war crimes,
were committed before the eyes of the international
community, without consequences for the occupying
Power or justice served for the Palestinian people.
In addition, the 10-year illegal Israeli blockade — a
repugnant form of collective punishment amounting to
a war crime and the source of countless human rights
violations — has persisted, deepening poverty, food
insecurity, health problems and many other social and
economic ills among children, including the fact that
for the first time in five decades the infant mortality
rate in Gaza has risen, as hospitals continue to lack
adequate infrastructure, basic drugs and supplies due
to Israeli restrictions.
All of these violations must cease and Israel must
be compelled to respect international law, for these
crimes committed against our children are intolerable

16-2443767/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

and unacceptable. We reiterate that the Palestinian
people and their children cannot remain the exception
to the responsibility to protect civilians from atrocities
and flagrant breaches of the law, for they are not just
statistics but human beings whose lives are being
constantly shattered by a brutal occupier that proves
over and over again its total disregard for the lives and
rights of Palestinian children.
Therefore, we call on the international community,
including the Security Council, to uphold its
responsibilities and provide the necessary assistance and
protection to Palestinian children and hold accountable
the violators of international law, especially those laws
meant to protect children’s rights. Palestinian children
deserve more than a life marked by the daily fear and
humiliation that comes with living under occupation.
They deserve to live in freedom, peace, dignity and
security, which can be realized only when they are free
from occupation and living in their own independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): On behalf
of the United Arab Emirates, I congratulate Malaysia
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.
We recognize the critical importance of this debate
and honour the twentieth anniversary of the children
and armed conflict report. We are participating in
today’s debate because of our long-standing dedication
to children in need worldwide. Nowhere is securing
children in conflict more urgent than in our region,
where the abuses against children are especially heartwrenching, as we have heard throughout the day and in
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General’s
briefing. In Syria, children have now been out of school
for six years, while thousands have been killed. In the
occupied Palestinian territories, generations of children
have been deprived of basic fundamental freedoms for
decades. Da’esh and other terrorist groups’ widespread
recruitment and use of children as tools of war is
equally abhorrent and must be ended.
The subject of Yemen has also been raised in
today’s debate, and I will focus my remarks on that topic
given the United Arab Emirates’s involvement in the
Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in Yemen, formed at
the request of President Hadi. To date, 79 Emiratis have
paid the ultimate price in service of Yemen. In the light
68/88

02/08/2016

of that sacrifice, the United Arab Emirates and all the
members of the Coalition take extraordinary measures to
protect children’s rights anywhere we are engaged. The
United Arab Emirates regrets the initial listing of the
Coalition in the annex of the 2015 report (S/2016/360),
but appreciates the Secretary-General’s decision to
remove the Coalition from the annex and to engage in
a forward-looking review to protect the integrity of the
report and strengthen its mechanisms. As committed,
accountable members of the international community,
the Coalition is currently investigating all allegations,
and findings will be submitted to the United Nations
in a responsible and transparent manner. Based on our
experience, we offer some procedural and substantive
suggestions to strengthen the impact of future reports
in the shared interest of protecting children in conflict
zones. Specifically, we advocate the adoption of the
following policies.
First,
consulting
regularly
with
national
Governments — as mandated in guidelines set forth in
resolution 1612 (2005) — is key to ensuring that the
information on which the report is based is accurate and
verified, with Member States and the United Nations
working together in good faith.
Secondly, with regard to reconsidering the utility of
the annex list, and specifically the listing of responsible
Member States alongside non-State actors and terrorist
groups, the annex must be connected to specific
outcomes to protect children. In that regard, the listing
of a coalition of countries is problematic legally and
practically, and should not become a practice.
Thirdly, we should establish clear and transparent
mechanisms for measuring criteria within the report in
a systematic, equitable manner that is apparent to all.
We do not bear the risk of engagement in any military
theatre lightly, and we continue to strive to minimize
the impact of operations on civilians. We have therefore
engaged directly with the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative, and have communicated details
of the Coalition’s rules of engagement, which are in
full compliance with international law, as well as the
review mechanisms, preventive systems and corrective
measures in place. Furthermore, the United Arab
Emirates and its Coalition partners welcome further
communication through a joint review to exchange
information and lessons learned. Moreover, we reiterate
the Coalition’s invitation to the United Nations team of
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

experts to visit its headquarters in Riyadh to further
engage in the review process.
Allow me to remind those here in the Chamber
that the Coalition itself was created to protect
civilians — including children — from Houthi rebels
and externally backed and other extremist groups.
At the request of the legitimate Yemeni Government,
the Coalition’s aims were to protect the welfare of
the Yemeni people; provide regional stability and
security by reinstating the legitimate Governments;
and, in parallel, halting the expansion of extremist
groups, including Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
and Da’esh. However, we all know that durable
solutions for stability are not gained through military
actions alone. That is why the United Arab Emirates
and its international partners are building long-term
institutional capacity in Yemen by developing the
country’s Government, social support infrastructure,
rule of law and economy.
Furthermore, we continue to address the urgent
humanitarian need on the ground by providing and
facilitating the delivery of aid. United Arab Emirates
contributions have totalled $900 million since
operations started in March 2014.
Ultimately, the United Arab Emirates and all
members of the coalition are strongly committed to
intra-Yemeni negotiations as part of the ongoing peace
process. The United Arab Emirates fully supports
the efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for
Yemen to bring the parties to a political resolution of
this conflict.
In closing, let me note the United Arab Emirates’
deep appreciation for the work of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and of other
relevant United Nations agencies, particularly UNICEF,
with which we have a strong, global partnership, to
protect children around the world. For us and other
responsible members of the international community,
we are not engaging in any discussion to protect our
image. The mandate of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict is a just and universal
one for which the United Arab Emirates offers its
full support.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Botswana.

S/PV.7753

Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We wish at the outset
to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
this morning and his report (S/2016/360), as well
as the representative of UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
Botswana reaffirms the importance it attaches
to the protection and promotion of the rights of
children, including in the context of armed conflict.
The international community therefore has a moral
obligation to collectively pay attention to children’s
welfare, without any distinction.
We strongly support all efforts aimed at preventing
violations against children during armed conflict in
all their manifestations, including the mandate and the
work of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict.
My delegation welcomes efforts such as the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign; the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict; and the Safe Schools
Declaration. We believe that these are timely initiatives
that will go a long way towards complementing ongoing
efforts to end the use of children in armed conflict and
protecting facilities such as schools and hospitals.
The nature and character of conflict has involved
over time, increasingly targeting innocent civilians
and subjecting them to unspeakable acts of horror,
exploitation and abuse. The rise in the number of
non-State actors involved in conflict further complicates
this already complex situation.
The threat to international peace and security
posed by these developments, particularly the
internationalization of these conflicts, requires urgent
and decisive action by the Council. Chief among its
objectives as it does so must be to ensure the protection
and promotion of the rights of children everywhere,
including in armed conflict, and to enable them to
study in an environment of safety and security.
Botswana is deeply concerned about the gravity of
these evolving violations against children, including
abductions, which have begun to occur at a startling
rate. The Secretary-General’s report shows that
whereas in the past the mass abduction of civilians,
including children in armed-conflict situations, was

16-2443769/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

largely a means to an end, today they are an end unto
themselves, with the prime objective of inflicting terror
and horror.
We note with sadness the numerous executions
and incidents involving the maiming of children that
have been clearly captured in the report. This matter
has been reported over time, and it is our sincere hope
that the perpetrators of such acts will one day be called
to account.
We must guarantee the full protection of the
rights of children so as to enable them to attend school
without interruption, enjoy access to all social services
that contribute to their development, good health and
well-being, so that they can realize their full potential.
Botswana firmly believes that States have the
primary responsibility to protect their own populations
from all manner of abuse. This includes the protection
of children from the risk of war. In this regard, we wish
to stress the urgency and importance of enhancing
political will and the commitment to prevent and
address the tragic plight of children in armed conflict.
We encourage focus on national ownership and
responsibility; engagement with the Governments
and armed groups concerned, aimed at establishing
frameworks for accountability; and the systematic
monitoring of such commitments, for these are of the
utmost priority to us.
We therefore call on the Security Council to continue
its efforts to fight impunity and enforce accountability,
including the adoption of targeted measures against
persistent perpetrators of violations against children.
Where violations are committed and verified, they
must be referred to the International Criminal Court,
which must, without exception, put an end to impunity
and bring the perpetrators to justice.
Botswana believes that the strengthening of
global efforts to end the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict should be consistent with
and complementary to wider efforts to promote and
implement Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict.
As we continue to seek solutions for international
peace and security, our strategies must be guided by
the desire for lasting and sustainable peace. We should
address the root causes of conflict, such as social
exclusion, economic inequality, gender discrimination
and ethnic tension, to mention but a few. In this regard,
70/88

02/08/2016

we welcome the significant efforts made by several
States in implementing Council resolutions, including
resolution 1612 (2005), 1998 (2011), 2068 (2012), 2143
(2014) and 2286 (2016), and we believe that these should
continue to be vigorously pursued.
We share the view that such efforts should be
supported in order to strengthen national capacities
for child protection, investigative and prosecutorial
capacities and accountability mechanisms, and the
establishment of age-verification processes for military
recruitment must be ensured.
Finally, Botswana reaffirms its commitment to
fulfilling its obligations under international law and
under all other international instruments to which it
is a party. Botswana regards it as fundamentally clear
that in some of the States where major conflicts and
crises rage, the authorities have manifestly failed in
their responsibility to protect civilians. In this respect,
we believe that where States are unwilling or unable to
protect their populations, the international community
must step in to safeguard human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): The Philippines
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We wish to extend our gratitude to the Malaysian
presidency for once again placing the issue of children
and armed conflict at the top of the agenda, especially
at a time when conflicts around the world continue
unabated, affecting children and other vulnerable groups
the most. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2016/360) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, as well as UNICEF, for their presentations.
The Philippines strongly believes that to provide
the greatest protection for our children, we have to
continue our work towards ending conflict and creating
an environment that is conducive for them to grow and
learn unimpeded.
It is for this reason that the Philippine Government,
under a new Administration, is committed to starting
dialogue and ultimately forging peace pacts with
various armed groups.
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

It remains steadfast in passing the Bangsamoro
Basic Law, based on the Comprehensive Agreement
on the Bangsamoro, signed with the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front on 27 March 2014.
Last month, a comprehensive peace road map was
approved by the President that aims to bring peace and
development by addressing the issue of the Bangsamoro
and the resumption of peace talks with the Communist
Party of the Philippines-New People’s Army-National
Democratic Front. Our Congress will have to pass a law
to implement this peace road map.
The Philippines remains committed to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and international
humanitarian law. The Council for the Welfare of
Children continues its work in implementing the
monitoring, response and reporting system for grave
violations of child rights. Local government units
participated in a series of orientation workshops on the
concept of the protocol of the MRRS so that they can
proactively monitor, report and respond to incidents
of grave child rights violations. The Council for the
Welfare of Children established a monitoring, response
and reporting hotline in April, which will be specific to
receiving calls related to grave child rights violations
in situations of armed conflict to provide an immediate
response to the victims.
The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process, meanwhile, has developed and mainstreamed
the conflict-sensitive peace-promoting manual, which
serves as a guide for national Government agencies
and local government units in ensuring the adoption
of a peace lens in their crafting of policies and in the
implementation of programmes and projects on the
ground, including for children in armed conflict.
For its part, the Department of National Defence
issued a circular in February that prescribed policies
and procedures to protect children from harm during
armed conflict and to prevent the commission of grave
child rights violations by both State and non-State actors
during armed conflict. A bill for special protection for
children in situations of armed conflict and another
one to establish permanent evacuation centres in local
government units are awaiting passage in the Philippine
Congress. Both bills will ensure the continuity of
education during and after an armed encounter.
The Philippines notes the incidents cited in the
Secretary-General’s report of violations of children’s
rights in indigenous communities. We remain committed

S/PV.7753

to addressing these concerns and bringing perpetrators
to justice. Our armed forces will also continue to work
with the United Nations on the strategic plan to prevent
and respond to grave child rights violations in situations
of armed conflicts.
Apart from our national efforts, I wish to end by
reiterating the Philippines’ commitment to working
with our international partners to ensure the utmost
protection for our children as we strive to resolve
conflicts and achieve lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Malaysia’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
to thank Malaysia for taking the initiative to organize
this debate on the plight of children in armed conflict.
I would like to commend Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and tell her how much we value
her commitment and dedication to children’s causes
throughout the world. Finally, I extend my thanks
to His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake and all
those who took the floor before me for their very
enlightening statements.
Before I proceed, I would like to make some
comments on the part of the report (S/2016/360)
presented to the Council that concerns my country.
The report provides some statistics on the situation
of child soldiers in my country. It is important to
remind the Council, as we have always stressed, that
today there are no longer child soldiers in the Congolese
national army. The children that our army hands over to
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
come from armed groups.
Going back to the statistics to which we alluded,
we would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
fact that, as the joint technical working group has
stated every time, these statistics are problematic to
the extent that the statistics presented by MONUSCO
are not necessarily in line with those of UNICEF
and of the European Union’s national programme for
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration (DDR),

16-2443771/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

which are all evolving structures within the technical
working group. During the discussions in the technical
working group, these structures have always insisted
that only the statistics validated by the European
Union’s national DDR programme should be taken into
account. In this context, it seems useful to inform the
Council briefly on the following points.
The situation of the 10 children found in the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), as mentioned in paragraph 46 of the report,
had been the subject of an investigation ordered by the
National Ministry of Defence to the Chief of Staff of our
army, who in turn issued the order to the Commander
of the 32nd Military Region. The latter, after verifying
the facts, brought Colonels Ramazani and Kamulete,
the alleged perpetrators, to justice.
With regard to the situation of the 22 children
found in the Angenga prison, they were captured by the
FARDC during military operations against the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, to which they
belonged. After they had been identified and there had
been an exchange about them with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, they were immediately
handed over to UNICEF Goma. It should be noted that
five of these children, at a much earlier date, had been
declared adults by child protection agencies in Goma.
The case of the 29 children allegedly killed or
maimed by the FARDC and 9 by the police is noted in
paragraph 47 of the report. MONUSCO did not bring
this case to the attention of the joint technical working
group, which is the appropriate context to exchange
information and to harmonize the views of each party.
The FARDC and the Congolese national police do
not acknowledge these facts, unless they happened
without their knowledge during the fighting against the
armed groups.
Finally, the use of schools for military purposes is
mentioned in paragraph 50 of the report. This practice
is not tolerated within the FARDC, especially since a
directive of the Ministry of Defence has prohibited it
for several years. It should be noted that the troops in all
units of our army now receive training in international
humanitarian law. Moreover, since the Government
and the United Nations signed the action plan,
awareness-raising campaigns have been conducted
and the contents of the plan are on the curriculum of
all the military academies in our country. In order to
demonstrate our determination never to use schools for
72/88

02/08/2016

military purposes, my country endorsed the Oslo Safe
Schools Declaration.
Having provided these explanations, I would like to
say that the issue of child soldiers is of concern to my
Government, which, under the leadership of the Head
of State, has decided to ban the recruitment and use of
children in our armed forces and our security services.
To translate this political resolve into action, the Head
of State has set up a structure to combat sexual violence
and the recruitment and use of children. The senior
State official responsible for managing this structure
works closely with authorities in the military, judiciary
and the Ministry for Gender, Women and Children.
Among the actions taken by the Government in the
context of this struggle I can cite the following. There
is an operation to identify military staff by setting
up a biometric database to manage soldiers’ personal
data, especially their age. An action plan has been
signed with the United Nations comprising a series of
commitments to put an end to the recruitment and use
of children by the army and to sexual violence against
children. Every six months the situation is assessed, in
collaboration with various partners, to take stock of the
progress achieved.
Two important directives have been signed by the
Minister of National Defence and the Deputy Head of
the National Intelligence Agency. The first is for the
armed forces and instructs the commanders of military
training centres to facilitate access to military barracks
by the United Nations child protection country teams,
as well as by child protection agencies for verification
purposes. This directive empowers the military
hiearchy to punish with disciplinary action and to
bring to justice any soldier under their command who
is guilty of committing serious violations of children’s
rights. The directive also requires that awareness
campaigns and training be held in all military garrisons
of the country in order to allow all military personnel to
become familiar with the action plan and the obligations
flowing therefrom.
Under the second directive, which applies to the
intelligence services, members of the United Nations
response team and child protection agencies are
permitted to work unhindered by and with transparency
from the intelligence services. This directive also
authorizes the release of any child linked to armed
groups and his or her transfer to a child-protection
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

agency. In addition, we have created two coordination
bodies to monitor the implementation of the action plan.
With respect to the fight against impunity, highranking officers of the army and police who have been
found guilty of violations against children’s rights have
been sentenced.
We have opened new courts whose mandate is to
punish serious crimes committed against children, and
the Government has taken a decision not to allow any
person found guilty of six or more serious violations
of children’s rights in time of conflict to remain in the
army.
With the financial support of UNICEF and working
in partnership with MONUSCO, the Department of
National Defence held a workshop in Kinshasa from
24 to 25 August 2015 to draft a road map of priorities
to fight the recruitment of children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The workshop brought together
people from the FARDC, the national police and civil
society from all of the provinces of the country. A
joint technical working group has been set up in areas
affected by armed conflict, namely, North Kivu, South
Kivu and Orientale provinces.
In addition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as the report of the Secretary-General highlights,
continues to carry out the United Nations Children,
Not Soldiers campaign, launched by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. My country has also
taken the initiative of implementing the objectives of
the campaign as they are defined in resolution 2143
(2014).
Undeniable progress has been made in my country’s
fight against the recruitment and use of children within
the army and intelligence services. As part of this
fight, 46,087 children linked with the armed forces
and armed groups have been demobilized. Of these
children, approximately 15,365 have been accepted for
formal education and are now attending 208 schools.
The other 30,722 are being given vocational training
within 417 professional apprenticeship structures.
Despite these successes, however, much work
remains to be done. As long as armed groups remain
active, this situation will persist. That is why my
Government remains determined to continue its efforts
to completely neutralize armed groups and thereby put
an end to this phenomenon.

S/PV.7753

I would be remiss if I did not express the gratitude
of my country to the United Nations and our numerous
international partners that have always supported
our efforts in combating the recruitment and use of
children. In particular, my country would like to thank
Japan and UNICEF for providing significant financial
support, without which it would have been difficult to
obtain the results we have achieved today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, an informal network of 40 interested Member
States that represents all five regional groups at the
United Nations.
The Group of Friends wishes to reiterate its very
strong support for the Children and Armed Conflict
agenda, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, and the
United Nations institutions working to promote the
rights of children in armed conflict worldwide.
On this twentieth anniversary of the creation of
this mandate by the General Assembly, we welcome
the evolution of a stronger normative and institutional
framework on the issue of children and armed conflit.
Today we have robust norms against the recruitment
and use of children and armed conflict, as well as a
growing range of tools to monitor and address all grave
violations against children.
A key element of the success of the children and
armed conflict agenda has been the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established under landmark
resolution 1612 (2005). The mechanism is designed to
document grave violations against children, strengthen
accountability and ensure compliance with international
legal standards in cooperation with national
Governments. It is important that the mechanism be
able to document the existence of grave violations
against children impartially and objectively, based on
facts on the ground. Therefore, the United Nations must
deploy appropriate resources to implement its children
and armed conflict mandate and the mechanism. In that
regard, the Group of Friends calls for the maintenance
of dedicated resources, leadership and expertise in
order to support the child-protection work of United
Nations peace operations and the respective agencies
that are part of the mechanism.

16-2443773/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

The Group of Friends welcomes the signing of
action plans by all eight countries whose Government
forces have been listed by the Secretary-General as
having recruited and used children in armed conflict,
including, most recently, the Sudan. We also commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General’s
efforts through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
We urge the full and timely implementation of action
plans by Governments and non-State actors alike to halt
and prevent violations against children.
Despite these successes, the Group of Friends
deplores the increase in the intensity of grave violations
against children recorded in several situations of conflict
in 2015. In particular, we are deeply concerned about
the rise of armed groups employing extreme violence
and their recruitment and use of children. The impact
on children will be felt for generations to come. We
must better consider how to prevent the radicalization
and recruitment of children, how to separate children
from such groups and reintegrate them into their
societies and how to deal with the survivors’ long-term
psychological and social implications. Throughout this
process, we must not lose sight of the fact that these
children should be treated as victims, not perpetrators.
Moreover, the prevalence of attacks on and the use of
schools and hospitals for military purposes remains
deeply worrying. The Group of Friends calls on all
parties to protect schools and hospitals by upholding
the provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The Group of Friends expresses its profound
concern with regard to the impact of the unprecedented
wave of forced displacement on children. We encourage
Governments to take urgent action to respect the rights
of children forcibly displaced as a result of conflict
and to ensure, in cooperation with the international
community, their protection, access to health and
education and dignified livelihoods for their families.
Moreover, today’s armed conflicts are resulting in new
physical and psychological disabilities among children,
which can make them become even more vulnerable
and face a higher risk of becoming victims of violence,
discrimination, abuse and neglect, which requires a
concerted response.
Lastly, the Group of Friends condemns in the
strongest terms ongoing incidents of sexual exploitation
and abuse against children, especially if they are
committed by United Nations forces and staff. We call
on the international community to redouble its efforts
74/88

02/08/2016

to combat this scourge and welcome recent efforts
undertaken by the United Nations and its States Member
to prevent these grave violations and to provide support
to victims.
(spoke in French)
I would now like to make an additional five points
in my capacity as the representative of Canada.
First is a statement of fact. We are especially
horrified by the emergence of armed groups that employ
extreme violence and recruitment and use children.
Second, we call on Member States to be steadfast
in their support for the children and armed conflict
agenda implemented by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui. Ms. Zerrougui has been a
tireless and effective champion. She needs our political
and financial support.
Thirdly, as we have heard many times today,
children represent over half of the 60 million displaced
persons worldwide, and over half of the 23 million
refugees. If we wish to help these children, one of the
simplest ways to do so is to offer them a welcoming land
as soon as possible. That is why Canada is so proud to
have resettled nearly 30,000 Syrian refugees over the
past year. It is also why we feel obligated to welcome
even more. The Obama Summit in September will be
an excellent opportunity for countries to come forward
with commitments to welcoming more refugees and
thereby help a greater number of children.
Fourthly, the United Nations must do more in its
peace operations to help children in situations of armed
conflict. The United Nations must redouble its efforts to
address the scourge of the sexual exploitation and abuse
of children. In that regard, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to prohibiting Government
armed forces listed in the annexes to his reports on
children and armed conflict from contributing troops
to peacekeeping operations.
(spoke in English)
Fifthly, Member States should strengthen their
promotion of the children and armed conflict agenda.
Building on the success of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict in New York, Canada
is supporting the establishment of local branches of
the Group of Friends in Afghanistan, the Philippines,
the Sudan and Geneva. It is our hope that such groups
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7753

will raise awareness, exchange views and coordinate
assistance on children and armed conflict issues at the
national and regional levels.

constituted a war crime under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and is punishable as such
by the national judicial system.

In sum, much work needs to be done. Yet, it is not
enough to deplore the abuses being committed. It is
incumbent upon all Member States to do what they can
to support children in armed conflict, both at home and
abroad. Canada stands ready to play its part in support
of this vital cause.

Greece was among the first endorsing States of
the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration of May 2015, which
calls upon parties to armed conflict to avoid using
educational buildings for military purposes or making
them targets of attack. We believe that the Safe Schools
Declaration provides a concrete way for countries to
commit to protecting children’s education even during
armed conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to congratulate
the Malaysian presidency of the Security Counci on the
initiative to convene this open debate on children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for their interest and commitment, as well as for their
very thorough briefings on the issue.
Greece aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I would like
to add the following.
Greece attaches great importance to the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. In recent years,
we have witnessed increasing challenges in this field.
Indeed, in protracted conflicts, humanitarian crises,
forced displacement and violent extremism, children
are directly affected and, in many instances, have
become targeted victims. The latest report submitted by
the Secretary-General (S/2016/306) is crucial in laying
out these challenges. We attach major importance to
the impartiality of the report and fully support the call
of the Secretary-General on all parties to work closely
with the Special Representative.
However, much more needs to be done to further
strengthen international efforts aimed at the protection
of children in armed conflicts. It is imperative to ensure
that children are able to grow up in a safe environment,
free from exploitation and any form of abuse and
violence. Having ratified the relevant international
normative framework for the protection of children,
Greece strongly encourages all States to sign, ratify and
fully implement the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its first Optional Protocol on the Involvement
of Children in Armed Conflicts. In Greece, since 2011
the recruitment of children in armed conflicts has

The competent Greek authorities are currently
elaborating an action plan on the rights of the child that
sets as a priority the protection of children in refugee
crises. My country, deeply. affected by unprecedented
refugee flows, spares no effort to provide assistance and
protect the rights of children fleeing armed conflicts. It
is our utmost priority to save thousands of children’s
lives in search-and-rescue operations at sea and to
receive them in a humane way. In 2015 alone, more than
150,000 people, including thousands of children, were
rescued by the Hellenic Coast Guard in about 2,500
operations at sea.
In concluding, I would like to reiterate that Greece
remains committed to effectively ensuring respect for
and protection of the fundamental rights of children as
a crucial guarantee for the future of our societies. In
that regard, my country fully subscribes to the call to
intensify international and regional efforts to strengthen
cooperation in putting an end to grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict around
the world.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank and commend Malaysia for
convening this important meeting to address the issue
of children and armed conflict.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report of 20 April (S/2016/306). We further thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony
Lake, for their informative briefings to the Council and
for their references to the joint efforts of the Sudan and
the United Nations to protect children in conflict zones
in the Sudan.

16-2443775/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

We should like to provide the Security Council
with clarifications concerning a number of paragraphs
of the Secretary-General’s report.
First, paragraph 135 refers to documented cases
of rape by Sudanese Armed Forces elements and
aligned militias. We note in that regard that the relevant
Sudanese civil and military law imposes maximum
penalties for proven violations. Cases are referred to the
judicial authorities, where they are speedily investigated
regardless of the position of the accused. It is also
worth noting that the Independent Expert, Mr. Aristide
Nononsi, issued a report on the humanitarian situation
in the Sudan, covering the period from October 2015 to
June 2016, that points to a decrease in cases of rape to
the lowest level recorded in any conflict zone. That is
testimony from an official who is authorized to conduct
monitoring and surveillance in my country.
Secondly, paragraph 136 notes that two schools and
three hospitals were attacked by the Sudanese Armed
Forces without specifying the names of the hospitals,
despite the fact that in Darfur, like elsewhere in the
Sudan and throughout the world, hospitals are clearly
marked and known. Nor does the report mention the
date of the attack or the number of casualties. Also, the
report does not cite the source for its information or
whether it is a United Nations source or a source of the
opposition forces or of the 22,740 non-governmental
organizations that operate in the conflict zone. We
note with satisfaction the increased interest among
United Nations States Members to cite the sources of
information in full transparency and clarity. In that
regard, I would like to refer to the statements made by
the representatives of Egypt, the Russian Federation,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and other States at this
crucial meeting on an important issue.
Paragraph 140 of the report refers to the recruitment
of four boys by the Sudanese Armed Forces in West
Darfur. I should like to clarify the following.
First, since the establishment of the Sudan Defence
Forces before the Second World War — even before
independence — our country had in place laws and
regulations banning the recruitment of children under
the age of 18. The recruitment form, knows as Form
5-A, includes a paragraph stipulating the age of the
applicant and requesting the submission of a birth
certificate or an age estimation certificate as further
proof to confirm the information. The recruitment
procedures for our Rapid Support Forces are based
76/88

02/08/2016

on the merits of each individual case. Similarly, we
require birth certificates or age estimation certificates.
Applicants also undergo medical exams, which makes
us confident that there are no minor children in the
ranks of the Rapid Support Forces.
Secondly, the reports claims in paragraph 140 have
not been verified. We therefore wonder why unverified
information is included in the report. Furthermore,
children captured in the battles of Goz Dongo and Fanga
were conscripts in the armed movements. They are still
in the ranks of the armed movements and are being
used by them. The Government has dealt with those
children in accordance with national and international
humanitarian law. We have provided them with the
necessary humanitarian and psychological support.
And we have developed a plan for their reintegration
and rehabilitation. We would like to reiterate that we
have taken steps on the ground and at the highest levels
to release the detained children. We will soon provide
the Council information on the steps taken. I would
like to thank Special Represenative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougi for her full cooperation, which
produced excellent results.
Paragraph 145 of the report states that the leaders
of the Justice and Equality Movement, the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi and the Sudan
Liberation/Abdul Wahid issued a join statement
promising to desist from grave violations against
children. We think this is meant only to cover up the
actual violations they commit against children. That
can be seen in their forced recruitment and abuse of
children in armed conflict. It is a statement without
weight that will not positively change the policies and
behaviours of the armed movements, nor influence our
unwavering commitment to end the recruitment and
use of children.
The report of the Secretary-General indicates that
we have signed a joint plan of action with the United
Nations to protect children in armed conflict. The
Special Representative visited the Sudan in March as
part of the joint cooperation between the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations to pursue efforts
to protect children. The Executive Director of UNICEF
commended the signing of the plan of action during the
high-level event heald at Headquarters on 11 July on
the theme “Rehabilitation and reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict: sharing best practices in
psychosocial rehabilitation and social reintegration”.
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7753

That was an illustration of the positive development with
regard to the situation of children and armed conflict.

made by the Secretary-General and the other briefers
this morning.

My delegation avails itself of this opportunity
to renew its commitment to implement the plan of
action, which was reached thanks to the commendable
efforts of the Special Representative. We also take
this opportunity to thank the individual countries and
groups of countries that have expressed their apreciation
for the signing of the plan of action. We think that such
positive comments serve to place great responsibility
on our shoulders. We are aware of that and are ready to
assume that responsibility so that we can cooperate with
the United Nations and the international community in
this area. We reiterate the importance of supporting
technical cooperation to achieve the noble joint goal of
protecting children from all types of violations.

In Bangladesh we often come across the iconic
poster for the first-ever humanitarian concert, organized
by the late George Harrison and Ravi Shankar here
in New York during our liberation war in 1971. The
poster showed a sepia-tinged image of a refugee child
blankly staring at a starvation-like situation. That sole
image spoke volumes about the countless children who
perished during the war due to armed attacks, torture,
displacement, starvation, disease, disappearance and
abandonment. We have yet to reconcile as a nation
with many of these unaccounted chapters of our
independence struggle.

The report also includes paragraphs concerning
violations against children by the Arab coalition in
Yemen. We would like again to emphasize the important
positive role of those forces in restoring legitimacy in
Yemen and protecting civilians, especially children,
following the military escalation that undermined
security, peace and stability in the country and the
region as a whole. We stress the noble objective of
the Arab coalition to achieve a political transition in
Yemen in accordance with all the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council. Restoring legitimacy quite
simply means restoring peace, which in turn means the
sustainable and full protection of children in Yemen.
In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
cooperate with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and her team to protect the
rights of children and enable the provision of correct,
accurate information and data. My country also
reaffirms its commitment to implement all regional
and international instruments on protecting the rights
of children. We are party to all such instruments. We
also reiterate our commitment to the implementation to
the plan of action signed with the United Nations to
protect children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momem (Bangladesh): The Bangladesh
delegation joins others in thanking your presidency,
Madam, for organizing this open debate and for sharing
a concise and informative concept note (S/2016/662,
annex). We appreciate the compelling statements

Children continue to be disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts around the world. The recent, belated
news about children faced with a famine-like situation
in areas under the sway of Boko Haram in Central Africa
demonstrates the limits of our global reach. The sight
of children being killed in despicable terrorist attacks
in Peshawar or Nice defies our faith in human sanity.
The abduction, enslavement and maiming of children,
and using them as human shields or suicide bombers
by terrorist and armed groups, are just abhorrent,
to say the least. The images of hapless children on
boats or swimming ashore in the Mediterranean Sea
or the Andaman Sea last year brought home to us the
horrifying realities of protracted armed conflicts and
the systematic purge of communities for how they look
or who they pray to.
Yet, as the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/360)
reveals, there are some grounds for solace. The
Children, Not Soldiers campaign is gaining steady
momentum, including in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as we just heard. United Nations-sponsored
action plans to remove children from combat operations,
often with the support of non-State armed groups, are
mostly going in the right direction. Most important,
the commitment to disarm children is often paving the
way for further inclusive dialogues among parties to
conflict. On all those fronts, we appreciate the diligent
work of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
on Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougi,
and her team.
The growing number of children displaced due
to conflicts poses a real test for our humanitarian
principles. In keeping with our pledge to leave no one
behind, we must commit to the protection and well-

16-2443777/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

being of these children as a shared responsibility. The
global compacts we envisage for refugee protection
and safe, regular and orderly migration must place the
cause of children, including unaccompanied minors
in mixed migratory movements, at the heart of their
respective agendas.
The lurking shadow of violent extremism and
terrorism that haunts our children’s lives everywhere
must not be allowed to be the new normal. The inherent
resilience of families and communities needs to be
bolstered in order to keep our children safe and engaged.
We must harness our resources to raise our children
as truly global citizens, with respect for tolerance,
pluralism and critical thinking embedded in them. An
enlightened and emancipated human being is perhaps
our best bet against the forces of destruction.
We draw hope from the growing awareness
demonstrated by various State and non-State actors
about relieving children of armed training and
operations. We owe much of those gains to the work
of UNICEF and a number of grass-roots organizations
committed to their cause. Civil society actors with
proven expertise must be encouraged to work in
close partnership with national and local authorities
to strengthen and scale up capacity for rehabilitation,
reintegration, counselling, legal aid, physiotherapy and
psychosocial support for children affected by armed
conflict and violent extremism.
We stand in principle behind the call for ending
targeted attacks against schools, hospitals and other
critical infrastructure for children. The growing
sensitization about avoiding school premises for
stationing armed forces, including peacekeepers, is
indeed positive. As a troop- and police-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Bangladesh remains committed to abide by those
broadly applicable norms and ensure protection of
children within the broader mandates for the protection
of civilians. In our regional context, we remain available
to advance dialogues on these issues through sharing of
ideas and good practices.
We recognize the challenge of evidence-based and
credible monitoring, analysis and reporting of child
rights violations, especially during armed conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s annual report, along with its
annexes, is indeed a powerful tool for raising global
consciousness about grave violations of child rights
and for triggering remedial responses. It is therefore
78/88

02/08/2016

crucial that the report aim at putting specific situations
in their right perspectives in order to reach informed
conclusions about the perpetrators and the seriousness
of the alleged violations.
In Bangladesh, our national children policy and
corresponding legal measures prohibit the recruitment
and use of children for armed conflicts. In memory of
the millions of children we lost during our liberation
war, we wish to remain engaged with any concrete
initiative in future to alleviate the situation of children
affected by armed conflict and violent extremism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mrs. Matar (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Malaysia for organizing this
open debate on the issue of children and armed conflict.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing at
the beginning of this debate, as well as his Special
Representatiave Leila Zerrougi and Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their respective
briefings and their commitment to children.
We have seen a horrendous increase in recent years
in the number of crimes against children during armed
conflict, especiallly in Africa and the Middle East.
Those conflicts are the source of long suffering for
many families in the war zones. Owing to their greater
vulnerability, this constitutes a violation of the rights
of the child. While the international community has
recognized that children do not belong in war zones,
we nevertheless see ongoing systematic violations of
children’s rights. Children and victims and soldiers.
They die in bombings. Extremist armed groups, sush as
Da’esh, Al-Qaidia in Iraq, Libya and Syria, the Houthi
militias in Yemen — all of them violate the rights of
children. Not only have they destabilized regions, these
extremist terrorist groups are kidnapping children in
order to recruit them into their ranks and to exploit them
in suicide bombings, which have become commonplace
in all those conflicts.
For its part, the Israeli occupation is violating the
rights of children in the occupied Palestinian territories.
The Kingdom of Bahrain therefore condemns the
violations of human rights by violent extremist groups.
While we condemn their acts in general, however, we
especially condemn those targeting children.
Today’s debate is a crucial step forward in terms of
evaluating the progress that has been made to address
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7753

serious violations against children’s rights. We therefore
welcome that the coalition for the re-establishment of
legitimacy in Yemen has been removed from the annex
to the annual report (S/2016/360) of the SecretaryGeneral. We would draw the Council’s attention to
the fact the coalition in fact invited a United Nations
group to visit Riyadh to observe what is being done in
humanitarian and military terms by the coalition.

Thousands of children around the world are
associated with armed forces and armed groups.
Boys and girls are not only used in combat, but also
in support roles or for sexual purposes. Once released
from armed forces or armed groups, many suffer from
severe psychological disorders. Providing reintegration
opportunities is not only a moral and legal obligation,
but also an important building block in sustaining peace.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need to make serious
efforts to end these acts against children. We call upon
the international community to endeavour to take the
necessary steps to end this phenomenon, in particular
via cooperation and the provision of technical and
logistical support to ensure that those who perpetrate
such crimes do not enjoy impunity.

The Secretary-General’s report also highlighted
the prevalence of armed groups that perpetrate extreme
violence. Those groups have committed atrocities
against children and tested the response capacity of
national authorities and the international community.
While recognizing the challenges that States face in
addressing the threats posed by such armed groups,
responses that do not comply with international law risk
inflicting further harm on civilians and helping the very
groups that Governments seek to combat. We reiterate
our concern with regard to the alarming reports that
certain parties that committed violations against girls
and boys in the context of war may have been omitted
from the annex of the Secretary-General’s report.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I thank the Presisdent
and the Malaysian presidency for convening this
important debate. I am also grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougi
and UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake for
their leadership and their briefings.
In 1996, following the Graça Machel report (see
A/51/306), the Security Council created the mandate
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, based on the realization that children were
the primary victims of armed conflict. Twenty years
after the Machel report, the international community’s
engagement has resulted in a strong framework and
concrete tools to engage with parties to conflict and
address the violations committed against children,
yet armed conflicts continue to have a horrific impact
on children, who are denied even the most basic of
human rights.
Brazil reiterates its strongest condemnation of the
recruitment and use of children, as well as all other
violations and abuses, including killing, maiming, rape,
other forms of sexual violence, attacks against schools
and hospitals, abduction and the denial of humanitarian
access. According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/360), this year’s casualties amount to
1,509 children, the highest number of children killed or
wounded in a six-month period since counting began in
2009. That is a cruel reminder of the disproportionate
impact of war on children and of the urgent need to
protect them.

We commend the efforts and results achieved so
far by the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. We also
commend Chad for having put in place all the measures
foreseen in the initiative and encourage other countries
facing the problem of the recruitment and the use of
children by Government forces to follow suit. The
momentum generated by the campaign has also created
opportunities for engagement with non-State armed
groups. The commitment of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo
to ending the recruitment of children in Colombia is a
case in point.
Conflicts have also led to an increasing number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, almost half
of whom are children. Obligations of States of origin,
transit and destination must not be disregarded on
the grounds of national security. As mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report, accountability for violence
against children remains too rare, even in countries that
have criminalized their recruitment. The protection of
children from serious crimes goes hand in hand with
tackling impunity and ensuring that the perpetrators
are held accountable. In that regard, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict

16-2443779/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

has played a crucial role. Brazil is proud to be one of
its signatories.
The right of children to education is not respected
in conflict settings where schools are destroyed and
teachers killed. The impact of such attacks on education
has long-term consequences. The mitralization of
education institutions also has devastating effects.
Detention on national security grounds is another
problem affecting thousands of children in today’s
conflicts. It is worrisome that children allegedly
associated with armed groups are increasingly treated
as security threats rather than as victims, particularly
in the context of counter-terrorism operations.
Conflict prevention remains the most ethical and
effective approach to shielding all civilians, including
children, from the plight of war. The Peacebuilding
Commission can play a constructive role in promoting
policies in countries emerging from conflict to foster
social cohesion and render children and youth less
vulnerable to recruitment and abuse, including by
terrorist groups. Children must not be deprived of
their childhood and future. Brazil continues to be fully
committed to that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation thanks the delegation of Malaysia, in its
roles of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, for having convened this debate.
Iraq thanks and commends Japan for its presidency
last month. We also thank Ms. Leila Zerrougi and her
team for their tireless efforts in carrying out such an
important task. We thank and recognize those States
that are supporting Iraq. We welcomed the holding of a
conference to provide aid to Iraq in Washington, D.C.,
last week.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/360)
notes with great concern the consequences of violent
extremism throughout the world, and in particular
their effect on children, resulting in the displacement
of millions of innocent victims, the majority of
whom are children. We share the Secretary-General’s
profound concern because we are among those States
that have suffered the most from foreign extremism
and its repercussions on our culture and our age-old
civilization. Such is the extremism that created the
80/88

02/08/2016

Da’esh and other terrorist groups that operate under the
same premises and share the same goals. Da’esh has
committed atrocities against children, whom it uses as
a means to achieve its nefarious ends.
In his report, the Secretary-General notes the
kidnapping of more than 1,000 Iraqi children and
the recruitment of 19 children as soldiers and suicide
terrorists. Da’esh has transformed schools into training
camps, thereby depriving children of their right to
an education. Those schools have become centres for
the torture and murder of teachers who have refused
to teach the Da’esh curriculum. In the area of public
health, children are among the first to suffer from the
actions of Da’esh, which has executed dozens of doctors
who refused to carry out its orders.
Moreover, the planting of bombs in homes, streets,
schools and hospitals has made it very difficult to
provide humanitarian and medical assistance to
children under siege by Da’esh. The child victims who
have been exploited by the extremist terrorist groups,
in particular young girls who have been sexually
assaulted and subject to physical and psychological
violence, deserve our absolute protection. I call on the
international community to support Iraq in assuming
its responsibility to address terrorism and rehabilitate
child victims.
We attach great importance to the United Nations.
We support the United Nations and work with it in
Geneva, Baghdad and New York. At the same time, we
call upon the United Nations to be as specific as possible
in its reports. We demand that it verify the sources of
information cited in its reports. We categorically reject
the accusations that have been made in this report
with regard to the national mobilization forces and the
national security forces of Iraq.
We believe that the sources of information are not
reliable. We do not know what prompts them to provide
that information. Some of the sources are not even
present in the liberated areas or on the battlefield. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has noted
that it is unable to ensure the accuracy of the numbers
contained in the report. We have, on more than one
occasion, insisted that imprecise information is a
burden on countries that seek to defend their territory
against the most merciless terrorist groups.
We therefore reject what is presented in the report,
to wit, that 12 children were drafted into the popular
mobilization forces, which are associated with Iraq’s
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

general staff. As such they are subject to the same rules
as other armed forces, and therefore cannot conscript
children under the age of 18.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Malaysia for having convened
this debate and for leading the Informal Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We welcome
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and
appreciate the work of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Anthony
Lake and their teams in preventing and eradicating the
brutal violations to which children are subjected to both
during and after conflicts.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and with the
statement delivered by the representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the Human Security Network. Chile is a
member of both groups.
We emphatically condemn the six most egregious
categories of violations that the Security Council has
identified. We States have the primary responsibility
of fighting against impunity and of prosecuting and
punishing the perpetrators of atrocity crimes committed
against children. If we are unable or disinclined to do so,
it is incumbent upon the International Criminal Court
to prosecute the crimes covered by the Rome Statute.
The Court’s recent conviction of Jean-Pierre Bemba
for crimes against humanity and war crimes, including
rape, which recognizes his command responsibility,
serves as a precedent in that regard.
We call for reparations for victims, including
children, of such atrocities through the Trust Fund
that has been established for that purpose. The
multidisciplinary rehabilitation and reintegration
of boys and girls affected by these grave violations
must be at the core of the United Nations system and
of mediation and peace efforts. The Colombian peace
process provides an good example in that connection.
Similarly, we must bolster national capacities and
the capacity of the Organization in order to provide
it with the necessary tools to protect and reintegrate
affected children, who above all should be recognized
as victims, in strict compliance with the law and
taking into account the special needs of girls. In that
regard, we call for enhanced predeployment training

S/PV.7753

for mission personnel in order to ensure that childprotection advisers have direct access to heads of
missions, without confusing their role with that of
human rights advisers.
It is crucial that reports on this topic and lists of
those responsible for the grave violations under this
agenda item be based on verified, timely and impartial
information, thereby avoiding double standards in
their drafting. Only in that way can we ensure that
the respective working group and the system at large
respond to the need to protect children.
Chile notes with concern the increasing use of
schools and hospitals for military purposes, including
the stockpiling of weapons, as well as attacks carried
out against such facilities. We call for the effective
implementation of resolutions 2143 (2014) and 2286
(2016) — co-sponsored by Chile — in addition to
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
as well as the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
Children are not only deprived of their right to
education, they are also victims of violent extremism,
propaganda and incitement to hatred. We must redouble
our efforts to eradicate such phenomena and implement
effective protection measures through a broad, not
merely military, approach that addresses the root causes
and establishes preventive measures by promoting a
culture of peace.
The success of the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign is not sufficient, it must go hand in hand
with the effective implementation of the action plans
of committed States, with the support of the elevant
partners. To that effect, we insist on the need to continue
efforts to ensure that all perpetrators commit to prevent
and eradicate such violations.
Finally, Chile expresses its appreciation to United
Nations and non-governmental organization personnel,
some of whom are here today, for their decisive efforts
to eradicate these violations and to safeguard the
childhood of the millions affected by conflict through
consideration of this Council agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I would like to start by
congratulating Malaysia on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August and thank
its delegation for convening this debate.

16-2443781/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

Last year’s meeting (see S/PV.7466), during which
resolution 2225 (2015) was adopted, which Turkey
co-sponsored, took a bold step in strengthening the
children and armed conflict agenda. However, as
the Secretary-General noted, serious challenges to
the protection of children affected by armed conflict
persisted throughout 2015. The impact of protracted
conflicts on children continued unabated. Turkey has
seen this very vividly in its neighbourhood, especially
in the eyes of millions of displaced children. With the
unfolding, large-scale movement of refugees in the
Mediterranean Basin, the number of refugee children
also saw a dramatic increase.
Regrettably, the international community has not
been able to prevent the deaths and injuries sustained
by thousands of children during attacks and air strikes,
often conducted indiscriminately on schools, hospitals,
marketplaces and internally displaced persons camps.
As long as such unacceptable acts and violations of
international humanitarian law continue, the forced
displacement of children will not cease. Today that
is especially true for thousands of children facing a
dire situation in Aleppo. Moreover, the increasing
involvement of non-State armed groups in violating
the basic rights of children is an issue of concern.
The crimes committed by terrorist organizations such
as Da’esh and Boko Haram must be underlined in
that regard. Nevertheless, there are positive aspects to
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations to diminish
the risks posed by armed conflicts to children. The
Children, Not Soldiers campaign led by the Office
of the Special Representative continues to generate
political momentum around the issue.
A number of important meetings and summits,
including the World Humanitarian Summit, have dealt
with issues relating to the protection of and assistance
for children in conflicts and emergencies.
In the period ahead, a display of joint and robust
political determination as well as concerted action will
be our most crucial tool for addressing the issue of
children and armed conflict. The efforts of the United
Nations to provide essential assistance to children,
as well as monitoring and reporting functions that
facilitate better planning, protection and response,
should be supported.
The continued implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping operations
82/88

02/08/2016

remains crucial. We should also bear in mind that
tackling terrorism and violent extremism requires a
comprehensive approach that includes the education
of youth.
In the face of the recent waves of displacement in
our region, Turkey has pursued an open-door policy
for Syrians fleeing the ongoing conflict. Turkey has
granted Syrians temporary protection status and
enacted numerous measures in order to alleviate the
harsh circumstances facing adults and children alike.
Around 156,000 Syrian children have been born in
Turkey during the course of the conflict. Free health
care, enrolment in Turkish schools and special measures
for psychosocial support have been provided to Syrian
children. Furthermore, for Syrian students completing
their secondary and high-school educations in Turkey,
there are also higher-education opportunities through
Government-provided scholarships and through
acceptance to Turkish universities.
The education of Syrian children will remain at the
top of our agenda. There are 830,000 school-age Syrian
children, and more than half of them are missing out on
schooling. International support for more classrooms
and educational opportunities for these children is
urgently needed.
We expect Member States to consider these
issues at the 19 September high-level meeting on
large-scale movements.
I would like to underline Turkey’s continuing
comprehensive efforts for the rehabilitation of
children suffering from the effects of terrorism in
our region and beyond. Turkey’s unwavering support
for all international and regional efforts related to the
protection of children will continue.
I have refrained from taking the Council’s valuable
time to respond to the baseless accusations levelled
by the representative of the Syrian regime. Suffice it
to say that we stand by the Syrian people and that our
humanitarian efforts are taking place in cooperation
with our partners and international organizations.
Before I conclude, let me quote the following
excerpts on Syria from paragraph 154 of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/360):
“Air strikes, indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas
and objects, and complex attacks were the primary
causes of the killing and maiming of children …
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

Aerial attacks and the shelling of civilian areas
by Government forces and international forces
supporting the Government killed and injured
531 children, including 133 from indiscriminate
barrel bombs.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Albatayneh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I should like also to thank
the briefers.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/360)
on violations against children in armed conflict
around the world makes it abundantly clear that those
violations continue to be committed in a systematic and
wide-scale manner and that there are grave challenges
before us to provide the necessary protection to
children. Perhaps one of the main reasons for the
increasing scope of the phenomenon is the failure to
provide the necessary protection to civilians in general
and children in particular, as well as the lack of a legal
framework to do so. We therefore believe that much of
the work that should be done to provide the necessary
protection and support to the children affected should
take place through the adoption of measures at the
national, regional and international levels.
At the national level, we continue to believe
that it is the responsibility of the State to protect its
civilians, particularly children, through legislative,
legal and judicial improvements and the development
of the policies necessary to deal with violations against
children in armed conflict; to hold accountable the
perpetrators of such violations; and to put an end to
impunity, since impunity and lack of accountability play
a major role in the spread of such criminality and make
the perpetrators believe that they can enjoy impunity.
At the regional level, it is important to promote
cooperation among States so as to devise joint policies
and strategies to address the issue of cross-border
armed groups that recruit children, and to do so through
the promotion of an security and military information
exchange among States, particularly those whose
civilians have been the victims of such violations.
At the international level, in the context of
the Security Council and other legal entities, it is
absolutely necessary not to reach any agreements or

S/PV.7753

hold any reconciliation processes among regional
parties or parties within one State at the expense of
other important issues, such as holding perpetrators
to account for their crimes. The United Nations should
supervise such processes to ensure that they do not fail
to punish perpetrators for their crimes against civilians
and children in particular.
Jordan continues to be concerned with regard to
certain violations perpetrated by peacekeepers and
members of other international forces not affiliated
with the United Nations, particularly violations against
children. In that regard, we welcome Security Council
resolution 2272 (2016), which stipulates that a military
unit or police unit must be repatriated when there is
definite proof that it has committed violations. We urge
that all those who have been involved in such violations
be held responsible for them.
We also support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General on the establishment of childprotection units in peacekeeping operations so as to
facilitate the provision of such protection and to make
it a main aspect of peacekeeping operations.
With regard to the baseless and false accusations
made by the representative of the Syrian regime in
our meeting today, we would like to stress that this is
only an attempt to create a diversion aimed at covering
up that regime’s failure to shoulder its responsibility
to protect its people and put an end to the killing and
displacement of children. These accusations fly in the
face of reality. Jordan is a country that has definite
credibility in supporting the States and peoples of the
region. We have since the beginning of the Syrian crisis
supported the Syrian people, 1.3 million of whom,
including hundreds of thousands of children, have fled
to Jordan in search of a safe haven following the killing
and destruction committed by the Syrian regime.
In this regard, Jordan continues to do its utmost
to provide Syrian children and refugees with a chance
at a better future and give them the highest levels of
protection and care, as demonstrated at the London
donors conference, at which the Jordanian Government
presented the international community with an
eight-point document laying out its policy to provide
educational opportunities to all refugee children so as
to provide them with a better future. We continue to
coordinate with United Nations specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations in establishing
specialized care centres to provide the necessary

16-2443783/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

educational, health and protective environment to
help children receive the services they need and the
psychological and social support to which they are
entitled.
In conclusion, with regard to the measures taken
by the coalition to restore legitimacy to Yemen and
the responses to all the queries raised with regard to
possible violations in Yemen, we would to see a working
group established to look into and verify the facts on
this issue. As stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/360), the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict continues to consider the
various cases before it and the coalition has invited the
Working Group several times to visit the region and to
review the facts that have been gleaned so far. In this
regard, the work is continuing and Jordan supports all
efforts to protect children in armed conflict. We thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this important meeting. Our appreciation also goes
to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their dedication and tireless efforts to protect
children affected by armed conflict.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Thailand on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
I thank the Secretary-General for reflecting in
his report (S/2016/360) the many positive steps taken
by Myanmar in relation to recruiting child soldiers.
Myanmar’s efforts to stop the recruitment of children
intensified after it signed the joint action plan with the
United Nations in 2012. Since then, a total of 744 former
child soldiers have been released and reintegrated
into their families and communities. Actions have
been taken against 382 military personnel, including
73 officers, for violating recruitment rules. Among
the 744 children who have been released, 553 have
benefited from various support programmes provided
by the Government, such as education, vocational
training, jobs and family subsidies. The remaining
84/88

02/08/2016

are mostly those who could not be contacted owing to
various reasons.
In collaboration with the United Nations country
task force on monitoring and reporting, UNICEF,
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and other NGOs, Myanmar has launched a nationwide
Children, Not Soldiers campaign to raise awareness
against child recruitment. Hotlines have been set up
to receive complaints or enquiries concerning child
recruitment and the reintegration of the former child
soldiers. Legal briefings and awareness-raising on the
prevention of the recruitment of underage children and
the four Geneva Conventions have also been continued.
At the same time, a monthly meeting with the country
task force on monitoring and reporting have been
regularly held to verify suspected child recruits.
Increased access to military battalions and units has
been granted for monitoring.
In recent months, the Government has also taken
additional measures to identify the remaining gaps in
full compliance and delisting. In May, a 12-member
Committee for the Prevention of Recruitment of Minors
in Military Service was formed by presidential decree.
The Committee has been tasked with implementing
measures, including strict enforcement of recruitment
procedures, and with enhancing cooperation with United
Nations agencies. Subsequently, a new joint action plan
has also been signed between the Committee and the
United Nations country task force on monitoring and
reporting. Our strong commitment to working with the
United Nations to solve this problem was manifested
yet again during the successful visit of the Special
Representative in July last year.
As the Secretary-General has rightly pointed out in
his report, sustainable peace is the only way to reduce
conflict-related displacement and to alleviate the plight
of children in armed conflicts. Peace is a prerequisite
to sustainable development and the perpetuity of
democracy and human rights. Bearing this in mind,
the Government of Myanmar has made peace and
national reconciliation its highest priorities on the
national agenda. We are now preparing in earnest a
union peace conference scheduled to convene by the
end of this month where all armed groups are invited
to participate. The peace conference will be attended
by the Government, the political parties, ethnic
nationalities and representatives from civil societies.
The conference will deliberate and strive for achieving
a comprehensive, all-inclusive and lasting peace, and
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

building a democratic federal union. We are confident
that we shall soon witness the dawn of a new era in
Myanmar where there is no more armed conflict and
peace prevails across the country. All children will
enjoy their full rights of freedom, education and
opportunities for the better future they deserve. They
shall no longer be the victims of armed conflicts when
the guns fall silent.
As a result of the unfailing commitment and
relentless efforts of the Government of Myanmar,
significant progress has been made in the prevention
of child recruitment, the release of child soldiers and
their reintegration into the communities. Despite all
these positive developments, Myanmar Tatmadaw,
the Myanmar Army, has yet to be delisted from the
United Nations report. Therefore, we hope that the
Myanmar Tatmadaw will soon be delisted from the
report in recognition of the Government’s continuous
cooperation with the United Nations and the progress
made in this regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I wish to thank Malaysia
for convening this open debate and for its leadership as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/360) and briefing. I am also grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony
Lake, for their insights.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Thailand on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Children and armed conflict has been firmly high
on the agenda of the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular. Tangible progress has been
made, especially the strong momentum generated by
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. Thousands of
children have been released from armed groups. States
concerned are implementing their respective Councilmandated action plans. Child protection policies have
been incorporated in peacekeeping operations. Civil
and social organizations are energetically contributing
to these endeavours.
Yet, these efforts are still falling far short of
our hopes and aspirations. Children continue to be

S/PV.7753

deprived of their basic rights and needs in both armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. The longer-term
impacts on children’s development are equally of
serious concern. Viet Nam condemns the continued
killing of and violence against children, including
sexual violence, as well as the recruitment and use
of child soldiers, the acts of abduction and attacks
targeting schools and hospitals. We call on all parties
to conflicts to put an end to these outrageous acts, first
and foremost, by complying with international human
rights and humanitarian law.
We wish to underline the importance of a
preventive strategy that addresses the root causes of
armed conflict by promoting sustainable development,
poverty eradication, national reconciliation, the rule
of law at both national and international levels, the
promotion and protection of human rights, and the
reintegration and rehabilitation of children affected by
armed conflict.
There are also challenges in responding to the needs
of children not only during, but also after conflicts. My
delegation is of the view that, in post-conflict situations,
priority should be given to children and United Nations
agencies should devote more resources to programmes
targeting children in the areas of education, mental and
physical health, as well as addressing the long-term
impacts on children, particularly girls and children
with disabilities.
As a country where generations of children have
suffered immensely from devastating wars, and
suffer even today, Viet Nam is strongly committed to
defending and promoting the best interests of children,
especially those affected by conflicts.
Viet Nam is making every possible effort to care
for and protect children with disabilities caused by
explosive remnants of war and agent orange/dioxin.
Viet Nam was one of the first countries to ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and has ratified
its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. During its term in the Council in 20082009, Viet Nam convened an open debate on children
and armed conflict (see S/PV.5936) and worked with
other Council members to adopt resolution 1882 (2009).
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Viet
Nam will continue to work with the Council and the
international community for the protection and the
betterment of children affected by armed conflict.

16-2443785/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Hadaifi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Malaysia’s assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month. We thank you for
convening this meeting to discuss a theme of great
importance to the most vulnerable segment of society,
namely, children. Qatar commends your delegation’s
efforts in chairing the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
The Security Council’s ongoing consideration
of this topic reflects the importance which the
international community attaches to the protection of
children, based on its understanding that building safe
and stable societies and achieving peace and security
in the world starts with the protection of children and
providing them with a safe and sound environment.
Despite the commitments undertaken in the framework
of international humanitarian law governing parties
to conflict that are intended to protect civilians in
armed conflict, and despite the fact that international
humanitarian law insists that warfare must be
bound by respect for the lives of civilians, given the
devastating impact of armed conflict on individuals
and societies — particularly children, who pay the
heaviest price as its most vulnerable, helpless and most
affected victims — we have all seen the grave impact
of war on the cognitive, physical and psychological
development of the children in armed conflict, as well
as its consequent effects on society.
International human rights law and instruments and
the Council’s resolutions all provide for the protection
of children, particularly protections in accordance with
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and its additional
protocols. Article 77 of Protocol I of 1977 stipulates
that
“[c]hildren shall be the object of special respect
and shall be protected against any form of indecent
assault. The Parties to the conflict shall provide
them with the care and aid they require, whether
because of their age or for any other reason”.
Similarly, article 38 of the 1989 (2011) Convention on
the Rights of the Child, which has been ratified by all
countries, stipulates the protection of children in armed
conflict.
86/88

02/08/2016

Qatar believes in the importance of education and
its positive impact on children’s development a sound
basis, free from violence and extremism. It is our
conviction that the right to education and concurrent
responsibilities are not rescinded due to armed conflict.
Children’s rights must therefore be protected. The State
of Qatar attaches great importance to guaranteeing
children’s education in times of crisis. This concern
was reflected in the establishment of the Education
Above All Foundation, which seeks to offer education
opportunities to societies suffering from conflict
and poverty. The Foundation has developed such
programmes as the Educate a Child initiative, which
has been implemented in cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
We provide education to children and empower them in
situations of armed conflict.
My country also supports the Safe Schools
Declaration which was adopted at the Oslo conference
last year under the them “Protect education from attack”.
We continue to focus on that issue and organized, in
cooperation with the Qatari Education Above All
Foundation and a number of permanent missions,
a high-level event on the margins of the seventieth
session of the General Assembly to empower children
and promote their inclusion in development efforts.
It aims to provide them with skills and knowledge,
protect them from exploitation and protect their right to
a decent standard of living.
Children must live in a safe environment, free from
fear and displacement. We are therefore taking ongoing
measures to implement a joint plan of action to that end.
Another important issue that we wish to highlight
is the responsibility of parties to a conflict to ensure
the delivery of assistance to children, which is a
critical obligation. The Fourth Geneva Convention
requires that civilians, even when associated with
the enemy, enjoy free access to medical supplies and
other items, including food, vaccines and medication.
In that regard, the State of Qatar is concerned about
violations that continue to affect child victims in the
occupied Palestinian territories and in Syria. Children
will continue to be be harmed and suffer until the
international community can achieve a settlement
to those conflicts. In that context, the Council must
prioritize the protection of children as it addresses
those matters.
16-24437

02/08/2016

Children and armed conflict

Tolerant Islamic shariah law played a pioneering
role in developing rules on protecting children from
the scourge of armed conflict. Any professional
involved in international humanitarian law knows
that the provisions of Islamic shariah law are in line
with international humanitarian law and international
instruments on the protection of children in conflict, as
confirmed in a number of studies and literature issued
by the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
international coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen
has therefore taken great pains to protect civilians
there and to offer them humanitarian assistance, and
to treat children with special care in accordance with
international humanitarian law and religious law.
Qatar is determined to maintain its principled
position and commitments in order to maintain its
cooperation with the international community to ensure
an enabling environment for the protection of children,
not only during armed conflict but at all times and in
all circumstances, so that they can grow up in a healthy
and sound environment that nurtures their potential and
turns them into peacemakers, thereby generating hope
in their societies and for humankind as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I would like
to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August, and commend it for convening this important
open debate on children and armed conflict. Our thanks
and appreciation also go to all briefers for their valuable
contributions.
Azerbaijan commends the Security Council for
keeping this topic high on its agenda and for the work
undertaken by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/360)
once again presents a devastating account of children
suffering from armed conflict. We especially note with
concern the increasing trend in child abductions. In this
regard, we reconfirm our support to resolution 2225
(2015), which designates abduction as a new criterion
for listing of parties in the Secretary-General’s annual
report.
The impact of violent extremism on children — in
particular the use of the Internet and social media to
brainwash and recruit children as combatants, suicide

S/PV.7753

bombers and executioners — has reached alarming
dimensions. We concur with the assessment in the
report that purely military and security approaches are
not sufficient. To effectively address the challenge, we
should focus on the triggers of violent extremism and
provide greater support to education as a powerful tool
to counter extremist ideologies.
The issue of children displaced by armed conflict is
another matter of utmost concern to Azerbaijan, and we
fully share the Secretary-General’s recommendation,
offered in paragraph 222, that the Security Council
highlight, in its resolutions and debates, the prevention
of displacement and the rights of children displaced
by conflict.
It is obvious that more sustained efforts and renewed
commitments are urgently required to combat impunity
in a more resolute manner. National authorities should
investigate and prosecute all violations and abuses
committed against children in situations of armed
conflict by bringing those responsible to justice and
thereby fully ensuring accountability, which will serve
as a strong warning to all perpetrators around the world
that their horrendous crimes will never be tolerated or go
unpunished. The international community should also
play a more proactive role in ensuring accountability
and the rule of law. In this context, we encourage the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to continue to share
information with the appropriate sanctions committees.
The war waged against Azerbaijan by neighbouring
Armenia has claimed the lives of tens of thousands
civilians, including children. In its relevant resolutions,
the Security Council has condemned the violations
of international humanitarian law committed during
the conflict, including attacks on civilians and the
bombardment of inhabited areas. However, the
perpetrators of those violations, including members
of the political and military leadership of Armenia,
continue to enjoy impunity, and this situation represents
a serious challenge to ensuring sustainable peace,
justice, truth and reconciliation.
Recently, in April, Armenia conducted large-scale
attacks, including against the civilian population of
Azerbaijan, as a result of which children were killed
and a number of schools, kindergartens and medical
facilities substantially damaged. In this regard, we
subscribe to the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that that all parties to the conflict should refrain

16-2443787/88

S/PV.7753

Children and armed conflict

from using explosive weapons in populated areas.
Indeed, the suffering of children could be significantly
alleviated if the parties were to respect international
humanitarian and human rights law.
The vast majority of atrocities against children are
attributed to non-State armed groups. The international
community should do its utmost to support the
countries concerned in their struggle to eradicate such
armed groups. The Secretary-General’s report refers to
the need of United Nations engagement with non-State
armed groups in order to effectively protect children.
While we recognize the humanitarian aspect of this
matter, it is our firm belief that any engagement with
the non-State actors should be undertaken exclusively
with the consent of the legitimate Government on whose
territory such groups operate. Otherwise, we run the
risk of sending the wrong message that violence pays
and of granting privileges to groups that undermine the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political unity of
United Nations Member States. On its part, the Council
should not only condemn acts by terrorist or extremist
forces; it should also adopt and apply a zero-tolerance
policy against them so as to create a safe environment
for children.
On a positive note, we are pleased to see that
some progress was made in alleviating the suffering
of children in situations of armed conflict during
the reporting period. Various action plans to end the
recruitment and use of children have been signed and
thousands of children have been released from armed
forces and armed groups. We welcome the progress made
by the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. Azerbaijan
supports the mandate of the Special Representative
and encourages her to pay attention to the suffering of
children in all situations of armed conflict

88/88

02/08/2016

Let me conclude by highlighting the urgent need of
conflict resolution all over the world, which constitutes
the most efficient way to put an end to the plight and
suffering of children. We call upon all Member States
and the international community to accelerate their
conflict-resolution efforts to that end.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to make a further statement.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I apologize for prolonging this meeting. I
know that everyone wants to rest, but I should like to
respond to the remarks made by the representatives of
the regimes of Jordan and Turkey.
With regard to the references made to grave
violations against Syrian children in the northern and
southern parts of my country, and to the mobilization
of Qatari, Jordanian and Saudi intelligence forces
along Jordan’s borders with Syria, these issues will be
revealed to be true in due course. Whenever we address
a particular issue, we first document it by gathering
evidence in our strategic analysis centres. If the
Jordanian regime is innocent of these accusations, as
the Jordanian Ambassador claims, time will prove it so.
The information concerning children and the
deplorable humanitarian situation in Jordan’s refugee
camps, particularly the story concerning the deaths
of two children there, was reported by the media
agencies of Jordan itself. That is also true of the refugee
camps of Turkey, which are rife with maiming, killing
and displacement.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

16-24437
