54

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

velopment Orga~zation,. t~e specialized a~encies,. the
regional econom1c ~omm1ss1ons a~d the {!mted Natio~s
Economic and Social Office at Be1rut to mtegrate their
review activities with the preparatory work for the
over-all review and appraisal so as to avoid unnecessary duplication in this field;
9. Calls upon Governments to extend their cooperation for the success of this important international
endeavour;
10. Decides that, at the sessions of the General
Assembly at which the biennial over-all appraisal takes
place, the work of the Second Committee shall be
organized in such a manner as to ensure sufficient time
for in-depth consideration of the Economic and Social
Council's report on over-all review and appraisal
together with the reports of the main bodies of the
United N ations having responsibilities for sectoral
review and appraisal.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2802 (XXVI). Co-operation hetween the United
Nations and the World Tourism Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2529 (XXIV) of 5 December 1969 on the establishment of an intergovernmental tourism organization,
Noting that the International Union of Official Travel
Organisations at its Extraordinary General Assembly
held at Mexico City adopted, on 28 September 1970,
the statutes of the World Tourism Organization, 8
Believing that the World Tourism Organization
should be established as early as possible,
Taking note of the decision taken by the Economic
and Social Council on 20 May 1971,9
l. Invites States whose national tourism organizations are members of the International Union of Official Travel Organisations to approve, as soon as possible, the statutes of the World Tourism Organization;
2. Emphasizes that an agreement between the United
Nations and the World Tourism Organization, defining
the role and sphere of competence of the latter, should
be concluded soon after the establishment of the organization;
3. Recommends that intensified negotiations to that
end be held between the United Nations and the International Union of Official Travel Organisations with
a view to finalizing a draft agreement;
4. Endorses the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council that the following guidelines be
kept in mind during those negotiations:
(a) Toe World Tourism Organization shall have the
decisive and central role in the field of world tourism
in co-operation with the existing machinery within the
United Nations;
(b) The fundamental aim of the World Tourism
Organization shall be the promotion and development
of tourism and particular attention shall be paid to
the interests of the developing countries in this regard;
s See E/4955.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fiftieth Session, Supplement No. 1 (El 5044), p. 25.

5. Recommends that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on co-operation and relationships between the
United Nations and the International Union of Official
Travel Organisations 10 should be revised in the light
of the discussions at the eighth session of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, the fiftieth
session of the Economic and Social Council and the
twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly, and
submitted to the Council at its fifty-third session in
arder to enable the Council to give concrete directions
to determine the course of the negotiations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council at its fifty-third session,
through the Committee for Programme and Coordination, a report on the activities of the United
Nations family in the field of development of tourism;
7. Recommends that steps should be taken, as
appropriate and with due regard to procedures of the
United Nations Development Programme, to enable
the designation of the World Tourism Organization as
a participating and executing agency of the Programme
in arder to assist that organization in carrying out its
functions related to the devclopment of tourism.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2803 (XXVI). Regional and suhregional advisory
services under the United Nations regular
programme of technical co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2563 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969 and 2687 (XXV) of 11 December 1970
on the role of the regional economic commissions in
the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 793 (XXX) of 3 August 1960 and General Assembly resolution 1823 (XVII) of 18 December 1962
on the decentralization of the economic and social
activities of the United Nations and the strengthening
of the regional economic commissions,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1442 (XLVII) of 31 July 1969 in which the
Council called upon the regional economic commissions
and the United Nations Economic and Social Office at
Beirut to play a more active role in the implementation of operational programmes for economic and social
action,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1601 (LI) of 20 July 1971 on regional and subregional
advisory services,
Considering that the regional economic commissions
and the United Nations Economic and Social Office at
Beirut will be called upan to assume majar responsibilities far review and appraisal at the regional level
of the progress in implementing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, contained in General Assembly
resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Stressing that the increasing responsibilíties being
discharged by the regional economic commissions in
the operational fields have a distinctive identity of their
own without duplicating United Nations Development
Programme activities, that these functions are an

9 Official

10

E/4861 and Corr.1.
