168

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

tions publication and to make it available to learned socie­
ties, research centres, universities, political and
humanitarian organizations and other interested groups;
18. Calls upon all Governments to co-operate with the
Special Rapporteur in making the report even more accu­
rate and informative;
19. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies and re­
gional, intergovernmental and other organizations con­
cerned to give wide publicity to the updated report;
20. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to give
high priority at its forty-ffth session to the consideration
of the updated report;
21. Decides to consider at its forty-fifth session, as a
matter of high priority, the item entitled "Adverse conse­
quences for the enjoyment of human rights of political,
military, economic and other forms of assistance given to
the racist and colonialist regime of South Africa", in the
light of any recommendations which the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities, the Commission on Human Rights, the Eco­
nomic and Social Council and the Special Committee
against Apartheid may wish to submit to it.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/93. Implementation of the International Plan of Ac­
tion on Aging and related activities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/51 of 3 December 1982, by
which it endorsed the International Plan of Action on Ag­
ing, adopted by consensus by the World Assembly on Ag­
ing, t 5
Recalling also its resolution 40/30 of 29 November
1985, in which it expressed its conviction that the elderly
must be considered an important and necessary element in
the development process at all levels within a given so­
ciety, and reaffirming that developing countries, in par­
ticular, need assistance in order to implement the Plan of
Action,
Keeping in mind its resolution 41/96 of 4 December
1986, in which it requested the Secretary-General to re­
view the world aging situation every six years,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/96, in which it urged Gov­
ernments to intensify their efforts, within the context of
their own national priorities, cultures and traditions, to
implement the recommendations contained in the Plan of
Action,
Reaffirming also its resolution 42/51 of 30 November
1987, in which it considered that the tenth anniversary of
the World Assembly on Aging should be marked in 1992
by appropriate follow-up activities in order to maintain
awareness on a global level of issues affecting the aging,
Taking into consideration the preliminary findings of the
second review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Plan of Action, as contained in the report of the Secretary­
General on the question of aging, 16 which indicate that co­
ordinating mechanisms and national machineries are es­
sential for implementing the Plan of Action,

15 See Report of the World Assembly on Aging. Vienna, 26
July-6August 1982 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.1.16),
chap. VI, sect. A.

16 A/43/583.

Noting with concern that the United Nations does not
have the necessary resources to deal effectively with re­
quests for assistance and expert advice in the feld of aging,
Alarmed by the large reduction in the staff working on
the programme on aging at the Centre for Social Develop­
ment and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, which
makes it difficult for the United Nations Office at Vienna
to carry out the mandates given to it in the Plan of Action
and reaffirmed repeatedly in General Assembly resolu­
tions,
Taking into consideration that there will be a marked in­
crease in the population over the age of sixty years, and
that increasingly women will constitute the majority of
these elderly populations,
Acknowledging the request of the Government of
Yugoslavia for a feasibility study on the establishment of a
United Nations affiliated institute on aging at Belgrade,
Recalling its requests to the Secretary-General to re­
spond favourably to the request of the African Regional
Conference on Aging, held at Dakar in December 1984,
for assistance in establishing an African gerontological so­
ciety,
Acknowledging also the guide for future activities relat­
ing to aging in the Asian and Pacific region adopted by the
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
at the Expert Seminar on the Promotion of National Infra­
structures for Aging Populations in Asia and the Pacific,
held at Bangkok from 14 to 17 December 1987,
Appreciating the invaluable role played by non­
governmental organizations in promoting greater aware­
ness of issues that involve aging and in advocating meas­
ures to implement the Plan of Action,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of aging;
2. Welcomes the system-wide approach to issues of ag­
ing worked out jointly by the concerned agencies and bod­
ies of the United Nations system at the inter-agency meet­
ing on system-wide co-ordination of policies and
programmes in the feld of aging, held at Vienna on IO and
11 March 1988, and recommends that the next meeting be
held to coincide with the second review and appraisal of
the International Plan of Action on Aging, in 1989;
3. Expresses its satisfaction that the International Insti­
tute on Aging has been established in Malta in co­
operation with the United Nations and was officially
inaugurated by the Secretary-General on 15 April 1988;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly on the activities of the International In­
stitute on Aging;
5. Stresses the imperative need to increase the impetus
of the implementation of the Plan of Action at national,
regional and international levels, and appeals for resources
to be provided commensurate with the requirements;
6. Urges the Secretary-General, in compliance with
the views of Member States as reflected in his report, to
maintain and strengthen the existing programmes on ag­
ing and to strengthen the United Nations system-wide co­
ordination of policies and programmes on aging, with the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs
continuing in its role as focal point in the United Nations
system for activities relating to aging;
7. Supports the recommendation made to the Secre­
tary-General by the Commission for Social Development
in its resolution 30/1 of 4 March 1987 that, in preparing
the medium-term plan for the period 1990-1995, he should
give priority to the careful elaboration of practical strate-

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

gies to implement the Plan of Action by providing fuller
co-ordination of aging activities in the United Nations sys­
tem and maintaining adequate programme budget alloca­
tions; 17
8. Recommends that aging should be considered a pri­
ority theme in both the proposed medium-term plan for
the period starting in 1992 and in the preparation of an in­
ternational development strategy for the fourth United
Nations development decade (1991-2000);
9. Urges that the staff of the Aging Unit of the Centre
for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs be
maintained at levels which will permit the Centre to carry
out its mandates as the focal point in the United Nations
for all matters relating to aging;
10. Urges the bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system, working in close co-operation with con­
cerned centres and institutes as well as non-governmental
organizations, and utilizing the networking mode of oper­
ation, to conduct further research and studies in order to
assist Member States in developing demographic and
socio-economic profiles of their elderly populations, so
that ways and means of ensuring the full and effective par­
ticipation of the elderly in development can be identified;
11. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to pay particular attention to the specific problems faced
by elderly women and to the discrimination suffered by
these women because of their sex and age;
12. Decides to commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the World Assembly on Aging in the plenary General As­
sembly at its forty-seventh session, in 1992, and requests
the Commission for Social Development to include in its
second review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Plan of Action a draft programme of substantive activities
to mark this occasion;
13. Strongly appeals to Governments and intergovern­
mental and non-governmental organizations to contribute
generously to the United Nations Trust Fund for Aging,
bearing in mind that the Fund is particularly well placed
to act as a catalyst for resource mobilization;
14. Welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts at fnd­
ing options for the optimal use of the original resources of
the Trust Fund for the Promotion of a United Nations
Programme for the Aging, which include the formulation
of a concerted programme of measures to the year 2000,
and the proposal to create a world foundation on aging,
which would encourage both the private and the public
sector to support the work of the United Nations system in
the feld of aging;
15. Calls upon the specialized agencies, regional com­
missions and other funding organizations concerned to
continue to support activities relating to the question of
aging, in particular by providing assistance for projects
that fall within their mandate;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the im­
plementation of the present resolution;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Question of aging".

75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

17 See Official Records of the f:mnomic and Social Council, 1987,
Supplement No. 7 (E/JlJR7/20), chap. I, sect. D.

169

43/94. Question of youth
The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 40/14 entitled "International

Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace",
adopted on 18 November 1985 by the General Assembly
acting as United Nations World Conference for the Inter­
national Youth Year. and its resolution 42/54 of
30 November 1987,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977
and 36/17 of 9 November 1981, by which it adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of com­
munication between the United Nations and youth and
youth organizations, and its resolution 42/55 of
30 November 1987,
Recalling also its resolutions 40/ I 6 of 18 November
1985 and 42/53 of 30 November 1987, entitled "Oppor­
tunities for youth",
Recalling further its resolution 36/29 of 13 November
1981 and its subsequent resolutions in which it, inter alia,
recognized the need to adopt appropriate measures for
securing the implementation and the enjoyment by youth
of human rights, particularly the right to education and to
work,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 18
submitted on the basis of its resolutions 42/52, 42/53,
42/54 and 42/55 of 30 November 1987,
Bearing in mind that the preparation for and observance
in 1985 of the International Youth Year: Participation,
Development, Peace offered a useful and significant op­
portunity for drawing attention to the situation and the
specific needs and aspirations of youth, for increasing co­
operation at all levels in dealing with youth issues, for un­
dertaking concerted action programmes in favour of
youth and for improving the participation of young people
in the study, decision-making processes and resolution of
major national, regional and international problems,
Recognizing that the guidelines for further planning and
suitable follow-up in the field of youth 19 provide a con­
structive framework for a long-term strategy in the feld of
youth,
Expressing its serious interest in systematically con­
solidating and building further on the results of the Inter­
national Youth Year in order to contribute to the increas­
ing active participation of young people in the political
and socio-economic life of their countries,
Convinced of the importance of the effective and efficient
functioning of the channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth organizations as a
basic prerequisite for the adequate information of young
people and their active participation in the work of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies at the na­
tional, regional and international levels, and also for in­
forming the United Nations of the problems facing youth,
with a view to fnding solutions to such problems,
Convinced that it is necessary to ensure full enjoyment
by youth of the rights stTulated in the Universal Declara­
tion of Human Rights, the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights20 and the Interna­
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 20 with spe­
cial regard to the right to education and to work,
Recognizing that in many countries the majority of
young people. under prevailing critical social and eco11 A/43/601.
4
1 See A/40/256, annex.
20 See resolution 2200 A ( XX I), annex.
