United Nations

S/PV.6767

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6767th meeting
Thursday, 10 May 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-33504 (E)

*1233504*

S/PV.6767

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

For the sake of brevity, I will focus my remarks
on the most relevant strategic aspects. A more detailed
version of this statement will be distributed today in
hard copy and made available on the website of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Australia, Austria, Israel,
Japan, Spain and the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At the outset, Ambassador Peter Wittig will make
a joint statement on behalf of the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) and the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). Ambassador Wittig will then brief the
Council in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, to be followed by
briefings by the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Wittig.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Mr. President, as you said,
I have the pleasure of making various statements
today — three, as a matter of fact. First, I will speak on
behalf of the three subsidiary bodies. Then,
immediately afterward, I will speak on behalf of the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. Finally, later in the
debate, I will make a statement in my national capacity.
On behalf of the Chairs of the three subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), I have the honour to update the
Security Council on the continuing cooperation among
the three Committees and their expert groups, as
requested by the Council in its resolutions 1989 (2011),
1963 (2010) and 1977 (2011), and earlier resolutions.

2

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. It remains important to
maintain close cooperation and effective coordination
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as well
as between their respective groups of experts. The
three Committees continue to attach great importance
to the coordination and cooperation between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee and the group of experts assisting
the 1540 Committee.
The Committees welcome the continuing efforts
of the expert groups to cooperate on outreach activities
and country visits within their respective mandates,
enhance cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, increase exchange of
information, participate in joint meetings and maintain
reciprocal representation as appropriate. I am pleased
to report that cooperation among the expert groups has
increased in some areas. The details are outlined in the
hard copy of this statement to be distributed.
At the same time, the Committees see room for
further improvement regarding cooperation and costeffectiveness. The expert groups should further
enhance their cooperation in line with their respective
mandates, in particular with regard to their outreach
activities.
The Committees note with concern that terrorist
groups continue to seek to exploit gaps in the capacity
of Member States to fully implement counter-terrorism
measures. The Committees’ groups of experts can play
a pertinent role in advising States that seek assistance
in building counter-terrorism capacity.
The Committees welcome all efforts aimed at
enhancing the visibility of United Nations counterterrorism activities and ensuring greater cooperation,
coordination and coherence among United Nations
entities with a view to promoting transparency and
avoiding duplication. The Committees take note of the

12-33504

S/PV.6767

recommendation of the Secretary-General for Member
States to consider appointing a United Nations counterterrorism coordinator, and, in that regard, look forward
to the discussions on that initiative in connection with
their deliberations on further improving crossinstitutional coherence of United Nations counterterrorism efforts.

terrorist measures as requested by the Security Council.
The Committee continues to explore new ways to
collaborate with Member States to support
implementation efforts.

The Committee realizes that the prompt, effective
implementation of sanctions measures is best achieved
when the sanctions list is accurate, up to date and userLet me now come to my second statement in my friendly. First, a new format for the list, designed to
capacity as Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. facilitate harmonization across all Security Council
In today’s briefing, as Chair of that Committee, I sanctions regimes, has been approved by the
would like to provide an update on the activities and Committee. Secondly, the Committee is conducting
achievements of the Committee established pursuant to reviews outlined in resolution 1989 (2011) in a
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning streamlined fashion, in particular regarding reportedly
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities since deceased individuals and defunct entities or entries that
my last briefing in November 2011 (see S/PV.6658). In lack sufficient identifiers.
my remarks I shall focus on what the Committee
The Committee relies on the cooperation of
considers to be the most important elements: first, the
Member States for the successful conduct of these
evolving nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida;
reviews. The Committee will continue to make every
secondly, enhancing implementation of the sanctions
effort to devise review modalities that will allow for an
measures; and thirdly, fair and clear procedures. A
effective and credible review process without
more detailed version of this statement will be
overburdening Member States. The Committee has
distributed in a hard copy today and made available on
held preliminary discussions on the recommendations
the Committee’s website.
submitted by the Monitoring Team in its twelfth report.
My first point concerns the nature of the threat The Committee will transmit the Monitoring Team’s
posed by Al-Qaida. Al-Qaida and its associates report to the Security Council once it has concluded its
continue to pose a threat to international peace and considerations, and will provide the Council with the
security, and this threat continues to evolve. As such, it Committee’s position on the recommendations. The
is important for Member States to continue making Monitoring Team continues to support the work of the
every effort to fully implement the measures outlined Committee, including through outreach activities and
in resolution 1989 (2011).
by engaging with individual States and participating in
conferences. In doing so, the Team promotes the work
At the same time, the Committee remains
of the Committee to a wider audience and encourages
committed to ensuring that the Al-Qaida sanctions list
implementation.
is dynamic and responsive to the changing nature of
the threat. The Committee’s decisions related to listing
My third point concerns fair and clear procedures.
and de-listing are based on requests by Member States. The Security Council’s decision to establish and
In this context, the Committee recalls that it remains enhance the Office of the Ombudsperson continues to
the responsibility of all Member States to ensure that be a milestone in the field of targeted sanctions. The
the list of targeted individuals and entities accurately Ombudsperson is mandated to assist the Committee in
reflects the evolving threat posed by Al-Qaida through safeguarding the rights of listed individuals in a fair,
the submission of listing and de-listing requests in a independent and effective process. The Committee has
timely manner.
successfully established a transparent practice for
processing recommendations on de-listing petitions
My second point relates to implementation. The
submitted through the Ombudsperson’s Office. In
Committee recalls that counter-terrorism measures
15 cases that were submitted through the Office of the
adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Ombudsperson, the Committee has completed its
Charter are binding on all Member States. The
consideration, resulting in 13 individuals and
Committee notes with concern that Al-Qaida and
23 entities being removed from the list. Currently, four
associated terrorist groups seek to exploit gaps in the
comprehensive reports of the Ombudsperson are under
capacity of Member States to fully implement counterconsideration by the Committee. For further details, I

12-33504

3

S/PV.6767

advise members to consult the website of the
Ombudsperson.

promotion of dialogue and understanding among
civilizations.

In resolution 1989 (2011), the Security Council
has set out clear guidance for this process, including
the timelines for the Ombudsperson and the Committee.
The Committee remains committed to observing these,
since they are considered to be a fundamental element
of fairness. For the same reason, the Committee
attaches great importance to providing a rationale for
its decisions. In conclusion, the Ombudsperson process
is producing tangible results by further enhancing fair
and clear procedures.

The
survey
considers
the
status
of
implementation of the resolution by geographical
region and by theme, identifies gaps in implementation,
and suggests new, practical approaches to achieving the
goals set forth in the resolution. In particular, the
survey highlights the human rights challenges involved
in seeking to prevent genuine incitement while not
infringing upon the fundamental rights to freedom of
expression and freedom of belief. The survey notes the
need to pay more attention, within a human rights
framework, to Internet and other social-media content
that is considered to be incitement. It also highlights
the importance of giving victims of terrorism, and civil
society more generally, a role in efforts to counter
incitement motivated by extremism and intolerance.

As Chair and on behalf of the Committee, I
would like to thank all Member States for their
continued willingness to cooperate constructively with
the Committee, its Monitoring Team and the Office of
the Ombudsperson. The Committee has brought many
improvements to fruition in recent years, and remains
committed to building upon these advancements.
The President: I thank Ambassador Wittig for his
joint statement and briefing.
I give the floor to Ambassador Puri, Chairman of
the security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and in his national capacity.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I have had the
honour to chair the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) since the beginning of 2011. It
gives me great pleasure to brief the Security Council
on the work of the Committee since the previous
briefing, held in November last year (see S/PV.6658).
The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and to play a critical role in promoting and facilitating
their implementation.
I would like to highlight here the publication in
January of the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) by Member States, prepared by
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate (CTED) pursuant to the provisions of
resolution 1963 (2010). As members will recall,
resolution 1624 (2005) addresses the critical but
complex issues of prohibiting incitement to commit
acts of terrorism and countering incitement motivated
by extremism and intolerance, including through the

4

The elements of this year’s programme of work
include organizing another special meeting, open to the
wider membership, that will focus on the key aspects
of the Committee’s implementation of its mandate. The
special meeting will provide a further opportunity for
Counter-Terrorism Committee members and the rest of
the United Nations membership to discuss counterterrorism issues of priority concern. The Committee
has not yet agreed on the agenda or timing for the
special meeting.
The Committee is also scheduled to conduct an
interim review of CTED by 30 June, in accordance
with resolution 1963 (2010). The Committee will also
explore the possibility of collaborating with the InterParliamentary Union, identifying available practices,
elements and good standards that could help Member
States to develop their respective comprehensive and
integrated counter-terrorism strategies in accordance
with resolution 1963 (2010), and will focus on further
improving the format of the global surveys on the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The Committee is also in the process of
reviewing the format of the preliminary implementation
assessment in order to enhance its usefulness as a
diagnostic tool. In that regard, all United Nations
Member States have their own preliminary
implementation assessments, and the stocktaking of
their country counter-terrorism profiles is being carried
out by CTED.
The Committee continues to focus on regionspecific discussions and on issues identified in the

12-33504

S/PV.6767

2011 global survey. The Committee also continues to
organize and participate in discussions and workshops
on thematic issues. Some of the major issues
considered by the Committee during the past six
months include countering incitement to terrorism by
preventing the subversion of educational, cultural and
religious institutions; terrorism prevention and
countering incitement to terrorism through the Internet;
and preventing the abuse of non-profit organizations
for terrorism-financing purposes. The Committee also
held a discussion on developments in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in West
Africa.
As part of its efforts to enhance its interaction
with international and regional organizations and
United Nations entities, the Committee has also heard
briefings on counter-terrorism by Mr. Alexey Kuzyura,
Chairperson of the Working Group of the Meeting of
Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and Law
Enforcement Organizations on counter-terrorism; by
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation CounterTerrorism Task Force; and the Asia/Pacific Group on
Money Laundering.
CTED has also been active in conducting a
number of workshops on specific topics aimed at a
specific regional audience. Important workshops
organized during this period include the subregional
workshop for South and South-East Asian States on
controlling the physical cross-border transportation of
cash and bearer-negotiable instruments, held in Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, in November 2011; the first of a
series of around six regional workshops and
consultations on the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005), held for East African States in Nairobi in late
November 2011; the third regional workshop on
protecting the non-profit sector from abuse by terrorist
financers, held in Nairobi for countries of East Africa
in late February; and the fifth regional workshop for
police officers and prosecutors of South Asia, held in
March in New Delhi.
Major forthcoming events include a regional
workshop on controlling the cross-border movement of
bearer-negotiable instruments, scheduled for 14 to
19 May in Tonga; the third seminar for counterterrorism practitioners, scheduled for June in Algiers;
the regional workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005), scheduled for July in Morocco;
and the sixth regional workshop for police officers,
prosecutors and judges in South Asia on effectively

12-33504

countering terrorism, scheduled for later this year in
Islamabad.
In addition, the Committee and CTED continue to
enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance for capacity-building at the national and
subregional levels. Furthermore, the Committee and
CTED will continue to pay close attention to the
question of respect for human rights and the rule of law
in the counter-terrorism measures taken by States, in
accordance with the relevant mandates conferred by
the Security Council.
During the reporting period, the Committee and
CTED organized a briefing for the wider membership
on recent developments in their work. Member States
were also invited to a regional presentation on
developments in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) in West Africa, held on the same occasion. The
Committee and CTED continue to work closely with
the relevant working groups of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum in order to support, coordinate and complement
one another’s counter-terrorism endeavours. I attach
high priority to enhancing transparency and public
outreach and to strengthening cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
the work of the Committee.
In conclusion, the Committee will continue to
play a critical role in the global fight against terrorism
and strive to do so in a more strategic and transparent
manner so that it can more effectively contribute to the
global counter-terrorism effort within the scope of its
mandate. I would like to conclude by expressing my
sincere appreciation to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of CTED, and to his team for their excellent
work on the Committee’s behalf, and to thank the
Secretariat for its continued support.
I would now like to make a brief statement in my
national capacity.
The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) should continue to further strengthen
their ongoing efforts in the fight against terrorism.
India fully supports all efforts that strengthen
international and regional cooperation and, most
importantly, help ensure the effective implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions, including

5

S/PV.6767

1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), and a comprehensive
and integrated implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The outcome document adopted by the CounterTerrorism Committee at its special meeting, held on
28 September 2011, is a major landmark in providing
strategic direction to the work of the Committee aimed
at strengthening the capacity of States in their counterterrorism efforts. It raises the benchmark in the fight
against terrorism to a higher level. It urges all Member
States to ensure zero tolerance towards terrorism and to
take urgent action to prevent and combat terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations through the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
other relevant international instruments. We urge all
United Nations Member States to strive to implement
that approach in their counter-terrorism efforts.
Since the splitting of the 1267 sanctions regime
in June 2011, it has been a challenging period for the
1267 Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) in adjusting to the
revised mandates. The Monitoring Team needs to put
greater focus on comprehensively and objectively
examining the linkages between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, which pose a serious threat to international
peace and security.
It is critical that all sanctions regimes established
by the Security Council ensure swift, fair and
transparent procedures in their decision-making. The
processes of listing and de-listing need to be guided by
the same set of principles: fairness, credibility and
transparency.
Concerning the 1540 Committee, India fully
shares international concerns over the serious threat
posed by nuclear terrorism and clandestine
proliferation to international security. We are fully
cognizant of the catastrophic dangers that transfers of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) to non-State
actors and terrorists could entail. The international
community must join hands to eliminate the risks
relating to sensitive materials and technologies falling
into the hands of terrorists and non-State actors. The
international response to the threat needs to be national,
as well as multilateral and global. India has an
unwavering commitment to global efforts for
preventing the proliferation of WMDs and their means
of delivery. We support the work of the 1540

6

Committee in accordance with its mandate. We propose
to host a workshop of the Committee later this year.
In conclusion, we need greater international,
regional and subregional cooperation in our counterterrorism efforts. International cooperation and
concerted action against terrorists and their sponsors,
including the complete dismantling of terrorist safe
havens, sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures are critical imperatives
for defeating the scourge of terrorism.
Our collective endeavour should be to enhance
coherence and synergy among different counterterrorism structures that are dealing with the issue of
terrorism within the United Nations. In this context, we
welcome the recent initiative of the Secretary-General
for Member States to consider the creation of the post
of United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, and
express our willingness to fully engage in all
deliberations aimed at further improving the crossinstitutional coherence and effectiveness of United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. We need to bear in
mind that success in the implementation of counterterrorism measures not only requires the fullest
cooperative and collective effort by all Member States,
but also their fullest participation in processes that
affect the collective security of all the nations equally.
The President: I thank Ambassador Hardeep
Singh Puri for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Baso
Sangqu, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I am very pleased,
as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), to give
an overview of the main developments in the work of
the Committee since the most recent joint briefing, on
14 November 2011 (see S/PV.6658), in addition to the
information just delivered by Ambassador Wittig in the
joint statement.
I will update the Council on the first annual
review of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
conducted by the Committee and on recent activities.
Before I do so, I want to express my gratitude to
Lebanon for having served as acting Chair of the
Committee at the end of 2011.
In accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution 1977
(2011), the Committee conducted, with the assistance of

12-33504

S/PV.6767

its experts, its first annual review on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The review showed the
progress made by States and other activities relevant to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during the
period from 1 January to 31 December 2011. The report
on the review was transmitted to the Security Council on
1 February 2012 (S/2012/79, annex) and is structured in
two parts. The first part provides a factual summary of
the year under consideration, based on the structure of
resolution 1977 (2011) in the areas of implementation,
assistance, cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, and transparency and
outreach. The second part is analytical, with a forwardlooking perspective, identifying nine steps that the
Committee may consider, taking into account
recommendations contained in the report submitted to
the Security Council on 12 September 2011
(S/2011/579). The annual review is also available on the
website of the 1540 Committee.
Since the most recent joint briefing, the 1540
Committee has conducted activities focused on
implementation,
assistance,
cooperation
with
international organizations, and outreach and
transparency, in accordance with resolution 1977
(2011) and with the tenth programme of work of the
Committee for the period from 1 June 2011 to 31 May
2012.
With regard to implementation, monitoring and
facilitating, the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by States is a key function of the Committee,
bearing in mind that the full implementation of the
resolution by States is a long-term task. As no initial
report on the implementation of the resolution has been
received since the most recent joint briefing, the
number of States that have not yet submitted a report
remains at 25. However, the Committee has received
additional information from several States. Belarus
informed the Committee of its intention to prepare a
national framework document on the implementation
of the resolution. Serbia informed the Committee of the
adoption of a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) for the
period
2012-2016.
Montenegro
provided
the
Committee with point of contact information.
In addition, experts supporting the Committee
have conducted country-specific dialogues with several
States, with a view to facilitating the implementation of
the resolution. Experts conducted a site visit to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as part of

12-33504

the United States of America country visit. This was
done at the invitation of the United States Government,
which wished to discuss the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Let me also note that a visit
was planned to the Republic of the Congo, at its
invitation, to discuss several aspects of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
the submission of an initial report. The visit was
eventually postponed owing to the accidental fire in the
central arms and ammunition depot in Brazzaville. I
ensure the Republic of the Congo of our sympathy for
their situation and of our willingness to reschedule the
visit at a more convenient time.
On assistance, the 1540 Committee continues to
actively play its clearinghouse role to facilitate matchmaking between requests and offers of assistance in
relation with the implementation by States of
resolution 1540 (2004). In that regard, the Committee
continues to implement its revised guidelines on
processing assistance requests. Since the most recent
joint briefing, the Committee has received additional
information regarding assistance from Serbia and point
of contact information for assistance from Madagascar.
As Chairman of the 1540 Committee, I have sent
letters to States and regional organizations that have
requested assistance to inform them of the responses
received and to enquire whether their requests were
met.
In anticipation of the Group of Eight Global
Partnership Working Group meeting in Washington, D.C.,
on 24 and 25 January 2012, the Committee approved an
updated consolidated list of assistance requests prepared
by its experts and shared it with the presidency of the
Group of Eight (G-8) for distribution to the G-8
partners, calling for a substantive and proactive dialogue
on that issue. Since the most recent joint briefing, the
1540 Committee and its experts have participated in
three meetings of the Global Partnership Working
Group, where assistance and capacity-building matters
were discussed.
The Committee continues to cooperate with
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, participating in outreach events organized
or co-organized, for instance, by the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA), the League
of Arab States, the Counter-Terrorism Committee

7

S/PV.6767

Executive Directorate (CTED), the World Customs
Organization and the secretariat of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States.

accordance with paragraph 5 (a) of resolution 1977
(2011). The Committee has approved and transmitted
to the Council recommendations for the structure,
methods, modalities, expertise and geographical
representation of the Committee and the group of
The Committee received a briefing from the
experts. A call for nominations was subsequently
Chair of The Hague Code of Conduct, who noted that,
launched, and Committee members are now actively
although the Code had not been negotiated within the
consulting on finalizing the process of establishing the
framework of the United Nations, it had a valuable role
group. As Chair of the Committee, I call for a speedy
to play in furthering the aims of resolution 1540 (2004).
conclusion to that process and establishment of the
The Committee received points of contact new group of experts without delay, as it is already
information from the African Union and the OSCE. becoming clear that the work of the Committee and the
The Committee has also received a communication progress it has made so far will be adversely affected if
from the OSCE submitting point of contact information we do not have a group of experts in place as soon as
for 44 of its participating States, in accordance with possible.
OSCE Decision 19/11, entitled “Points of Contact on
The second matter before the Committee is that
UN Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)”, adopted
of strengthening the existing administrative and
on 14 December 2011.
logistics support for the Committee by the Office for
The Committee may consider a strategy for Disarmament Affairs, as requested by the Council in
engaging with international, regional and subregional paragraph 22 (a) of resolution 1977 (2011), including
organizations and other entities, as appropriate, in through strengthening the regional capacity of UNODA
particular with respect to information-sharing, the to support implementation of the resolution at the
exchange of experiences and lessons learned and regional, subregional and national levels. Completing
cooperation in assisting Member States.
those two tasks will be a major focus of the
Committee’s work in the upcoming period.
Since our most recent joint briefing, the
Committee and its experts have participated in 31
I would now like, if I may, to make a brief
outreach events, listed on the website of the Committee. statement in my national capacity.
These include participation in the first Conference of
South Africa believes that the United Nations
International, Regional and Subregional Industry
remains at the forefront of international efforts to
Associations on Resolution 1540 (2004) held in
combat terrorism. Those efforts should comply with
Germany, from 23 to 25 April 2012, which was
legal norms and standards and with human rights and
attended by Committee members from both Germany
humanitarian law. The Security Council and the three
and Pakistan.
terrorism-related Committees play an important role in
The Committee, with the assistance of its experts, that regard. We therefore support strengthened
has also participated in various country-specific coordination and cooperation among the Committees,
activities, including Albania, Belarus, Colombia, and believe that their efforts should complement the
Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, Myanmar and work of the General Assembly on counter-terrorism,
Turkmenistan.
particularly the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Transparency is a key principle guiding the work
of the Committee. With the support of the United
South Africa believes that in implementing our
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the various obligations under resolutions 1267 (1999),
Committee undertook a major redesign of its website, 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), we should
which has been launched and can now be accessed in take into account the need for a Member State-driven
its new configuration.
agenda. Accordingly, we recognize that it is up to each
State to contextualize the Global Counter-Terrorism
Before I conclude, let me highlight two matters
Strategy within its own national framework. This will
on which, I hope, it will be possible for the Committee
make it relevant to the overall objective of combating
to make progress. The first is the establishment of a
the threats of terrorism and of the possibility that
group of experts in support of the Committee, in

8

12-33504

S/PV.6767

non-State actors, including terrorists, may acquire
weapons of mass destruction.
In that regard, we welcome the continuing work
of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force
(CTITF) in promoting cooperation in implementing the
Strategy, and their close cooperation with the
terrorism-related Committees. As we have heard from
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
three expert groups have been able to work
cooperatively and share information on specific themes
and activities. We welcome these and other ongoing
efforts to improve the Committee’s procedures and
working methods, particularly in order to streamline
processes, avoid duplication and create transparency.
We also value the work being done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED to provide
technical assistance to those States that request it, to
facilitate Member States’ compliance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, and to assist in
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

South Africa’s concern about the use or threat of use of
such weapons also extends to the potential threat that
non-State actors may acquire materials that could be
used for the development of those weapons and their
delivery systems. However, we are heartened by the
commitment expressed by many developing countries
to implementing their commitments to preventing
non-State actors, including terrorists, from acquiring
such materials.
It is important that those concerns be addressed
with the proper understanding that, as States implement
their Chapter VII obligations as contained in resolution
1540 (2004), their national ownership of that process is
to be respected. South Africa has tried to reach out in a
more even-handed manner to developing countries. We
have noticed that one of the key recent trends emerging
in the Committee from the developing world’s
perspective is the increasing number of States that have
requested some form of assistance in implementing
their legally binding obligations under the resolution,
while we are also pleased that resolution 1977 (2011)
provides us with a mechanism by which to do so.

In conclusion, the Council has an important role
to play in ensuring that the counter-terrorism strategy
Security Council sanctions have to be capable of
of the United Nations shall become more transparent
withstanding legal scrutiny, including on the question
and accountable to the wider membership that it
of due process. There are a number of
represents. South Africa is pleased to note that some
well-documented legal challenges in various parts of
progress has been made in that regard, and we hope
the world to the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime.
that our efforts to find a sustainable strategy to combat
We therefore welcome the efforts to create fair and
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and to
transparent procedures for the listing and delisting
eradicate the dangers posed by non-State actors,
processes. Similarly, the Office of the Ombudsperson,
including the possibility of terrorists’ acquiring
with the support of Council members, is playing a
sensitive materials, remain at the centre of our
significant role in strengthening the legitimacy and
discussions.
credibility of the work of the sanctions committees.
The President: I thank Ambassador Sangqu for
South Africa emphasizes that we should look
his briefing.
carefully at the proposed appointment of a counterI now give the floor to those members of the
terrorism coordinator. Such a position should have an
appropriate mandate and scope, and take into account Council wishing to make statements.
the specific mandates of the various United Nations
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
structures dealing with terrorism. My delegation is of
United States would like to commend the work of the
the view that the creation of any new office should be
Committee Chairs, Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and
measured against its potential contribution to
Sangqu, for their exceptional efforts and strong
facilitating international efforts to combat terrorism,
leadership.
rather than duplicating existing structures or placing an
As we look back on the past decade, the
additional burden on Member States, especially those
Council’s sustained commitment to promoting the
of the developing world.
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
The existence of weapons of mass destruction
(2001) and 1540 (2004) has helped to cement a global
poses a threat to the very existence of humankind.

12-33504

9

S/PV.6767

consensus against terrorism in all its forms. As a result,
we now have stronger legal and policy tools for
fighting terrorism at both the national and regional
levels.
Even though Osama Bin Laden no longer directs
the Al-Qaida organization, we remain gravely
concerned that Al-Qaida and its affiliates continue to
carry out unconscionable acts of terrorism in diverse
regions of the world. The Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities must continue to be vigilant and to adapt to
that evolving threat. We particularly encourage the
Committee, with the support of its Monitoring Team, to
rededicate itself to ensuring the full implementation of
the 1267 assets freeze, arms embargo and travel ban.
We envision swift and credible responses to reported
non-compliance, as well as the provision of training
and capacity-building support. We also welcome recent
major improvements in the fairness and transparency
of the Committee’s work, and once again commend the
Ombudsperson for her hard work and diligence.
We continue to strongly support the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in monitoring
and promoting the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). We are particularly pleased
that the work of CTED has evolved in recent years to
become more hands-on and practical in its focus. In a
spirit of innovation and collaboration, CTED should
continue to strengthen its work at the bilateral,
subregional and regional levels to facilitate capacitybuilding assistance. We believe that the new United
Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism is already
helping to focus the Organization’s system on
improving coordination on counter-terrorism issues.
We also think that the appointment of a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, can help foster a more strategic and
coordinated United Nations approach to those issues.

we need to help ensure that terrorist hostage-takers
cannot enjoy the benefits of ransoms.
As we discussed in last month’s Security Council
meeting on illicit cross-border trafficking (see
S/PV.6760), the United Nations must also improve its
ability to help Member States to secure porous or
unguarded borders that allow terrorists to travel with
impunity. The United Nations has a role to play in
helping States to strengthen the capacity of civilian
courts to prosecute and convict terrorists. The United
States is pleased to continue to support CTED-led
projects that bring together practitioners at the regional
and subregional levels to address common counterterrorism challenges.
This year, under our presidency of the Group of
Eight (G-8), the United States has promoted the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in both the
Global Partnership and the Non-Proliferation Directors
Group. The G-8 continues to work closely with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to find meaningful ways to respond to requests
for assistance from Member States, including by
engaging
with
international
governmental
organizations that are able to provide programmes and
training.
In September 2011, the United States hosted the
first country visit by the Committee and its Group of
Experts to review our whole-of-Government approach
to preventing the proliferation of chemical, biological
and nuclear weapons. We are pleased to see that other
States have similarly invited the Committee to conduct
such visits and to share their best practices for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). We hope that
that trend continues.
To ensure continued progress, the United States
strongly encourages other Member States and regional
organizations to contribute to the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Trust Fund for Global and
Regional Disarmament Activities. The implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) does more than address
proliferation issues. It also benefits Member States by
focusing on broader security concerns, such as border
controls, trafficking in drugs and weapons, maritime
security and public health, all of which contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

In such an environment, we hope that there will
be further opportunities for the CTC and CTED to
address some of the critical civilian counter-terrorism
challenges of today. For example, more work remains
to be done in countering the increase in kidnapping for
ransom as a means of financing terrorism and other
criminal activity. It poses a threat to all nations and
We are pleased with the progress made by the
their citizens. As a first step to eradicating that practice, Committees under the capable leadership of the Chairs.
The Council’s counter-terrorism efforts will guide and

10

12-33504

S/PV.6767

reinforce the actions of Member States to deter
terrorism, including the threats posed by Al-Qaida and
its affiliated groups, as well as proliferation efforts by
non-State actors.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Wittig, Hardeep
Singh Puri and Sangqu for their briefings. I also wish
to express my appreciation for their leadership as the
Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and resolution 1540 (2004), respectively.
The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee is an
important counter-terrorism body of the Security
Council. Recently, the Committee has made substantial
and sustained efforts to review the procedures for
listing, de-listing and updating the sanctions list and
has made extensive efforts to comprehensively
implement resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).
China supports the Committee’s efforts to regularly
review the sanctions list, as planned, and to strengthen
its contact with the relevant States. China welcomes
the support provided to the Committee by the
Monitoring Team. We note the effective work
undertaken by the Office of the Ombudsperson to
safeguard the fairness and transparency of the
sanctions regime. We hope that Member States will
actively cooperate with the Committee’s work in order
to preserve the authority and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
also undertaken significant work in terms of
implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant resolutions. China would like to express its
appreciation for such efforts. China supports the work
of the CTC in organizing regional workshops and in
providing technical assistance through the CTC
Executive Directorate. We hope that the Committee
will continue to engage in dialogue with Member
States and to help them to strengthen their counterterrorism capacity.
China is pleased to see that the 1540 Committee
has successfully completed its first annual review
(S/2012/79, annex), and has made encouraging
progress in terms of promoting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by providing assistance and by
undertaking outreach activities. China supports the

12-33504

Committee in continuing with its sound and steady
work to further achieve the various goals of resolution
1540 (2004) in a comprehensive, balanced and
effective manner, and in assisting countries in fulfilling
their obligations under the provisions of the resolution.
The Committee’s current priority is to officially
establish a group of experts. China supports the Chair
in undertaking consultations with all relevant parties
and in promptly reaching consensus on outstanding
issues. China is ready to work with all parties to
promote the international non-proliferation process.
Terrorism is the common enemy of the
international community. As a victim of terrorism,
China is opposed to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and to the practice of double standards
with regard to counter-terrorism. China supports the
United Nations and the Security Council playing a key
role in international counter-terrorism cooperation, as
well as enhanced cooperation and coordination among
the relevant bodies.
We support the presidential statement on counterterrorism recently adopted by
the Council
(S/PRST/2012/17), and hope that the international
community will continue to strengthen its cooperation
in preventing and combating terrorism.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of Germany, India and South Africa
for their reports on the work of the Committees under
their leadership. We see the work of the Committees
and their increased cooperation as significant
preconditions for strengthening the effectiveness of the
Security Council’s contribution to countering global
terrorism, which remains one of the main threats to
international peace and security.
We welcome the Security Council’s leadership on
counter-terrorism, as affirmed by the Security Council
meeting on 4 May (see S/PV.6765). The adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2012/17 at that meeting
sends an important signal for the strengthening of joint
efforts to counter the existing terrorist threat. The need
for such an effort was further underscored by today’s
terrorist acts in Damascus, in which many civilians,
including children, were killed. We call on the Security
Council to resolutely condemn that dreadful crime.
We note with satisfaction that the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) has continued to monitor

11

S/PV.6767

the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) through
the preliminary assessments of implementation and
country visits. There is still room for improvement
under those mechanisms. The CTC will address such
issues, but, in principle, the existing capacities affirm
their effectiveness. Through those efforts, the
Committee has also demonstrated the specialized
experience gained by States. In that context, we set
great store by the CTC’s proposed visit to Russia.
One of the main outcomes of the Committee’s
work was the adoption of the global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), which
sought to counteract incitement to terrorism and its
ideological support (see S/2012/16). The review was
carried out pursuant to resolution 1963 (2010) and is an
important element in implementing the CTC plan of
action and resolution 1624 (2005), as initiated by
Russia.
Russia actively participated in drafting the report
on that important topic. The main findings in the
document encouraged the international community, the
Security Council, the CTC and the CTC Executive
Directorate (CTED) to strengthen their efforts to
pre-empt and prevent terrorism and violent extremism
and to combat the radicalization of society.
We note that in the review, as in other decisions
of the Security Council, mention is made of the use of
the Internet for terrorist purposes. This problem
requires particular attention and the development of
universal legal standards under the auspices of the
United Nations.
We also welcome the review’s stress on issues
related to enhancing intercultural dialogue and
interfaith understanding. We view this important longterm undertaking in the context of combating the
ideological breeding ground of terrorism and
preventing new supporters from joining terrorists’
ranks. We continue to support the strengthening of
contacts between the CTC and international and
regional organizations with a view to the further
establishment of an extensive network of counterterrorist cooperation under the auspices of the United
Nations.
We take note of the close and regular contacts of
the CTC and the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004) with the
Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations on

12

terrorism-related issues, which was initiated by the
Russian Federal Security Service. Another briefing was
held early this year with the representatives of the
Meeting to the CTC. We are determined to continue
this useful practice.
We welcome the role of the CTED in rendering
assistance to the CTC. We support the participation of
the Directorate on the basis of the existing mandate, as
well as the efforts of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and its
cooperation with the expert groups of the specialized
Committees of the Security Council.
We note once again that the updated mandate
contained in resolution 1963 (2010) sets significant
challenges for the Directorate and calls on CTED as a
whole and its leadership to continue to work tirelessly.
We had hoped that the modifications made last June to
the sanctions regime of the 1267 Committee and the
splitting off from it of the anti-Taliban component
would help promote national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. Sadly, at this time that is not happening,
as Taliban activity is continuing.
We continue to believe that drawing a clear line
between Al-Qaida and mere Taliban supporters is very
complex. Al-Qaida does not seem to be about to leave
Afghanistan or break off its ties with the Taliban. One
can argue that the two organizations have different
agendas, but no one can deny that they still have close
terrorist ties and cooperation. Against that backdrop,
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) remains one of the most
effective mechanisms of the Security Council in the
field of counter-terrorism, and its sanctions list should
duly reflect the threat emerging from Al-Qaida, which
is spreading to new regions. We support the proposal to
include additional individuals on the list.
However, the practice of the application of
sanctions against entities and individuals involved in
terrorist activities should continue to be done on a
case-by-case basis and in compliance with due
procedures.
The
expanded
powers
of
the
Ombudsperson on delisting and new procedures for the
consideration of requests for delisting have ensured an
optimal level of transparency for the Committee’s
procedures thus far.
In considering issues related to further procedural
improvements, we must not be carried away by
populism or try to involve the Committee in functions

12-33504

S/PV.6767

that are outside its remit, but rather work on the basis
of fully upholding the fundamental principles and
expeditiousness of its work.

the establishment of a group of experts for that
Committee and that it will once again enjoy full expert
support.

Another important task is enhancing the
effectiveness of the sanctions mechanisms, which fully
depends on the implementation by States of their
international commitments in that area.

In conclusion, I should like to note that the idea
of the Secretary-General to create the post of a special
representative on counter-terrorism issues merits
thorough consideration by the States Members of the
United Nations during the upcoming review of the
Global Strategy. Its implementation could enhance the
coordination of the activities carried out in this sphere
of the numerous organs both within the United Nations
system and outside. However, it should not lead to any
changes in the mandates of those organs or be
detrimental to them. That applies above all to the
counter-terrorist structures of the Security Council.

Regrettably, we are once again forced to note that
in that respect outstanding problems remain. The
Stockholm-based website Kavkaz Center — the
information portal of the terrorist organization Caucus
Emirates, which was listed in July 2011 — remains up
and running. That is in breach of paragraph 6 of
resolution 1989 (2011), whereby this site should be
subjected to financial sanctions leading to a cessation
of its activities. The Swedish authorities have still not
implemented that resolution, effectively allowing the
site to continue propagating the ideas of terrorism and
religious intolerance.
The prevention of any possibility of weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials falling into the hands of terrorists is an
important task facing the international community. A
key international legal instrument for its implementation
remains resolution 1540 (2004), which encourages
States to strengthen national systems for monitoring and
control in the sphere of non-proliferation.

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Ambassadors Peter Wittig,
Hardeep Singh Puri and Baso Sangqu for their
informative briefings and for the skill and dedication
they have displayed at the helm of the Security Council
subsidiary Committees that they respectively head.

First, with respect to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), I should like to note the
current threat posed by Al-Qaida. We are aware that
sanctions regimes have contributed to undermining
sources of terrorist funding and have succeeded in
suppressing acts of terrorism. However, there is
Russia calls for the full implementation of the
evidence that the threat posed by Al-Qaida continues to
resolution by all countries, taking into account the
evolve; thus the Committee, with the first-rate
comprehensive long-term nature of its requirements.
assistance of the Monitoring Team, must continue to
We welcome the work done by the 1540 Committee
analyse the threat and adapt its work to the changing
and its experts during the reporting period. In particular,
nature of terrorism and its diverse manifestations. This
we note the adoption of the report on the annual review
must obviously be duly reflected on the list.
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
takes stock of the progress achieved in 2011 and sets
We welcome the improvements made by the
new objectives. We welcome the determination of its Committee concerning procedural guarantees and the
Chair to give the activities of the Committee a regular consideration of applications for listing and delisting.
and systemic nature.
Resolution 1989 (2011) represents not only progress in
terms of the rights of the persons and entities that are
The Committee must continue prioritizing issues
included on the list, but it also makes it possible to
related to the provision of assistance to States in the
strengthen the credibility of the sanctions regime. By
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by playing a
delisting persons and entities who and which should
coordinating role in the activities of the international
not be on the list, we have made the list into a living
community towards that end. For our part, we are
reflection of the current state of the threat.
willing to continue actively to support efforts in the
area of assistance, including in the context of our
We urge the Committee to continue its work,
cooperation on issues related to resolution 1540 (2004) taking into account the opinions of other Member
with the States members of the Commonwealth of States, particularly those of States whose inhabitants or
Independent States. We hope that very soon we will see nationals appear on the list. However, such interaction

12-33504

13

S/PV.6767

must take place in full respect of the independence of
the recommendations of the Ombudsperson, the
confidentiality of the process and established deadlines
and procedures, which provide legal certainty to the
mechanisms for listing and delisting.
That brings me to the work carried out by the
Ombudsperson, whom we congratulate and thank for
her independence, professionalism and courage. We
were pleased by that experience and are interested in
developing the idea put forth by some States to extend
that position to all sanctions committees.
We believe that the terms of reference
establishing that office did not limit it solely to the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, but included all of
the others. The work of the Security Council must be
transparent and respect the rule of law, thus an
ombudsperson for each of the committees would be
eminently justifiable.
Secondly, over the last decade the role of the
Security Council in the fight against terrorism has
grown and evolved very quickly. There have been
many successes since the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001). My delegation is grateful for the outstanding
support provided on that issue by both the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
My country believes that for there to continue to
be progress, first, closer dialogue among United
Nations Member States is crucial; secondly, work must
continue on developing mechanisms to provide
technical assistance to those countries that request it,
and thirdly, a regional approach must be adopted, as
paying special attention to the specificities of each
region enables greater understanding of the challenges
and recommendations applicable to the reality of each
country.
Another important point to add is that greater
emphasis must be put on the conditions that foster
terrorism and allow it to spread. Guatemala believes
that effective efforts to counter terrorism depend on
our ability to address successfully the economic, social
and political conditions that feed the phenomenon.
Thus, the prevention of terrorist acts and the
elimination of incitements to terrorism, including
extremism and intolerance, are vitally important and

14

should serve as a departure point in seeking a lasting
solution to the threat of terrorism.
In that vein, we support the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) and welcome the global inquiry
into its implementation. We highly value the work to
assess the various levels of experience and problems of
countries and regions in relation to the implementation
of the resolution.
Thirdly, resolution 1540 (2004) has been used as
one of the main international instruments in preventing
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, in particular, terrorists. Resolution
1977 (2011) determined the principal role of the United
Nations and the Security Council in those matters and
established the conditions needed to encourage
multilateral endeavours.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) plays a fundamental
role in coordinating and enhancing the efficiency of the
work carried out. We believe that the Committee and
its Expert Group have worked in a commendable
fashion during the reporting period in promoting
intensified international activity aimed at combating
the risks and threats of proliferation.
Guatemala welcomes the measures taken to
ensure consistency in the work of the Committee and
believes it is important to continue those efforts. The
1540 Committee has also proved to be a vital
mechanism in supporting and assisting Member States
through continued efforts aimed at promoting and
developing their abilities to counter those threats.
Guatemala acknowledges and pays tribute to the work
carried out in that area.
With respect to the work of the Expert Group of
the 1540 Committee, we believe that their work
pursuant to resolution 1977 (2011) is of the greatest
importance. Without the support provided by the Group
to Member States, in particular the developing
countries, it would prove difficult for many of them to
draw up action plans, submit national reports and make
progress on the measures necessary to comply with the
provisions of the resolution. We wish, therefore, to
underscore that the Committee must refer its
recommendations on the eight experts selected in
accordance with the previously agreed criteria, in
particular a broad geographical representation, to the
Secretary-General as quickly as possible, as they

12-33504

S/PV.6767

reflect the legitimate interests of the international
community for a balanced and equitable representation.
Resolution 1977 (2011) is clear in establishing the
criteria for the selection of the experts, compliance
with which is important to ensure that the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) maintains its legitimacy.
Guatemala trusts that the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council will continue to promote cooperation
among Member States and help them to overcome
obstacles to implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The Permanent Representatives of Germany,
India and South Africa, as well as deserving of our
gratitude, may also be assured that we will provide our
full support to their work.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Peter Wittig of
Germany, Hardeep Singh Puri of India and Baso
Sangqu of South Africa for their detailed reports on the
work of the counter-terrorism Committees and for their
dynamic leadership of them. The recommendations and
analyses they have presented to the Council all deserve
careful analysis.
The Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC) and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) contribute to
strengthening all capacities of Member States related to
implementation of their obligations pursuant to the
various international instruments and to promoting
international cooperation to counter terrorism. It is
therefore crucial to strengthen coordination activities,
continuously assess the working methods and
strengthen the tools available in order to promote
assistance and cooperation among Member States.
Colombia wishes to underscore the importance of
the work being carried out, pursuant to their mandates,
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and Entities and the Expert
Group of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). There is a need for

12-33504

greater information-sharing, for more coordination of
visits to countries under their respective mandates, for
more efficient delivery and follow-up of technical
assistance, and for closer relations with regional and
international organizations and organs.
I should like to refer to the 1267 and 1989
Committee. Strict compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1989 (2011) is essential. The effective
implementation of sanctions depends on keeping the
list current and on the quality of information provided
by Member States to update it, adding, keeping or
removing individuals or entities. The sanctions regime
reforms introduced in resolution 1989 (2011) have
promoted due process, transparency and the quality of
the list. The new procedure for updating the list
represents real progress, especially as regards
individuals no longer living or entities that either no
longer exist or about which there is so little identifying
information that effective action is impossible. It is
essential to comply with the procedures and timetables
provided for in the resolution provides.
Bolstering the Office of the Ombudsperson and
its mandate continue to be critical to the legitimacy of
the sanction regime. The number of de-listing requests
processed by the Office, its reports to the Committee
and the decisions taken to date as a result show that the
Office effectively promotes transparency and
safeguards rights. We strongly believe that such a
mechanism should be established for all sanctions
committees.
I now turn to the CTC and the recent CTED
global survey of the implementation by Member States
of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) (see
S/2012/16), outlining the significant achievements of
Member States’ efforts to fight terrorism. The report
focuses in particular on respect for human rights and
the growing awareness that listening to victims is an
important strategic element in preventing terrorism and
incitement to terrorist acts. The Directorate should
focus on that aspect even more. We must concentrate
on protecting and defending the rights of victims and
their families. They must be listened to, and Member
States must be provided with the necessary
mechanisms to offer assistance, heal their pain and take
concrete measures to protect and promote their rights.
My delegation underlines the Committee’s recent work
to review the procedure for preliminary evaluations for
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), so as to
improve its value as an information-gathering tool. We

15

S/PV.6767

hope that the new procedure will facilitate dialogue
with the Member States.
The proliferation of all types of weapons of mass
destruction and related materials, along with the risk
that they fall into the hands of non-State armed groups
and terrorists, is a serious threat to international peace
and security. It is therefore crucial to maintain close
cooperation and effective coordination among the
relevant anti-terrorism committees and their respective
groups of experts.
Colombia recognizes and commends the work
being done at the regional, subregional and
international levels to bolster implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We have therefore convened
several meetings and workshops on strengthening
national capacities through cooperation and aid. The
first seminar for the Andean region on resolution 1540
(2004), held last March in Bogota, helped to identify
areas of cooperation among members and ways of
improving relations between Andean States and
regional and international organizations.
Resolution 1977 (2011), extending the mandate
of the 1540 Committee for 10 years, established a
group of experts to support the Committee in fulfilling
its functions, based on the expertise and wide regional
representation of its members. My delegation reiterates
the importance of honouring those criteria in the
selection process in which the Committee is currently
engaged.
We believe that the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to designate a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator should be seriously
discussed by the General Assembly in its review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
order to avoid duplicating existing structures, the
Assembly should bear in mind that the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force was established
to ensure coordination and coherence in the United
Nations efforts to confront the international scourge of
terrorism, as it carries out the principles and purposes
of the Charter.
To facilitate the full implementation and
fulfilment of obligations under Security Council
resolutions on terrorism, we believe it essential to
increase technical assistance to Member States in
building their national capacities and to provide the
tools they need to pursue their fight against terrorism.

16

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sanqu for their briefings
and for their work chairing the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), 1373
(2001) and 1549 (2004). The Council has recently had
the chance to demonstrate its resolve in the fight
against terrorism in the debate held on 4 May (see
S/PV.6765). The work of the three Committees is a
crucial response to the ongoing and varied threats
posed by terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery.
I align myself with the statement to be made by
the Head of the Delegation of the European Union.
The threat posed by Al-Qaida has changed but
remains an immediate danger. Efforts to improve the
implementation of resolution 1989 (2011) must
therefore be pursued. In that regard, I commend the
work of the Monitoring Team, which, through regular
contact with Member States, contributes to improving
the implementation of sanctions. It has also helped to
make the sanctions list more functional by finding
mechanisms to improve its accuracy and by modifying
its procedure so as to facilitate its implementation and
by States and financial institutions.
To continue to adapt to the threat, it is important
that the Committees continue its cooperation with
INTERPOL and the Financial Action Task Force.
Inasmuch as the threat posed by Al-Qaida has expanded
to new regions, we believe that the Monitoring Team
should concentrate more intensively on those areas.
We recall that resolution 1989 (2011) improved
guarantees of due process, thanks especially to its
strengthening of the role of the Ombudsperson, whose
excellent work we commend. Strengthening the role of
the Ombudsperson not only promotes the rights of
individuals and entities on the list, but is also a key
factor in guaranteeing the list’s legitimacy.
The implementation of sanctions against
Al-Qaida is crucial, but we know that it alone cannot
constitute a response to the threat of terrorism. All
States must therefore build up prevention and
suppression mechanisms. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), with the support of its Executive
Directorate, helps States to do that. The Committee has
studied in depth the resources and needs of all States,
thanks to resolution 1373 (2001), producing
preliminary evaluations. We commend the efforts under
way to improve that analysis tool.

12-33504

S/PV.6767

Since the last Council meeting on the subject (see
S/PV.6658), the Committee has also studied the
Directorate’s global survey of the implementation by
Member States of resolution 1624 (2005) (see
S/2012/16), which aims to prevent incitements to
terrorist acts. It is vital that the report dedicate a
section to upholding human rights on that complex
subject. We also wish to welcome the efforts of the
Committee, and in particular of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), in
involving other organizations in those activities, in
particular the contacts on the Sahel between CTED and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.
Finally, the holding of thematic workshops
should be encouraged, as they allow us to raise specific
subjects related to countering terrorism at the regional
level and to step up regional cooperation. As an
example, I would cite regional workshops conducted
on the prevention of the abusive use of non-profit
organizations for funding terrorism. We know the
difficulties that certain non-governmental organizations
can encounter in trying to protect themselves from that
risk.
Nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical
terrorism remains one of the main threats to our
security. The Council reiterated that point in its
presidential statement of 19 April (S/PRST/2012/14)
during the debate on nuclear security (see S/PV.6753).
Progress has been made in responding to the threat.
The issues and actions arising from resolution 1540
(2004) since 2004 have been widely taken up
throughout the United Nations, and States have
adopted numerous measures to implement the
resolution. In particular, since we are meeting just a
few weeks after the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit,
major efforts have been made at the very highest levels
to better combat the nuclear terror threat and to
safeguard the most vulnerable sources.
In that respect, we are pleased that the Seoul
Summit took fully into account the question of
radiological terrorism. It also provided an opportunity
for reiterating our collective support for existing
instruments and mechanisms to strengthen nuclear
security and highlight the need for the relevant
resolutions to be fully implemented by all the States
concerned. For its part, France recently revised its
rules for the physical protection of nuclear materials.
All those efforts must be continued ahead of the third
summit in the Netherlands in 2014.

12-33504

Regarding the 1540 Committee, resolution 1977
(2011) gave it the tools to better carry out its mandate.
We are welcome the progress that the Committee has
made in its implementation since our last meeting by
conveying to the Council its annual review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
recommendations for the group of experts. But that is
not enough. It is vital above all for the group of experts
to be established. Only three experts are currently
helping the Committee, and their contracts will expire
on 31 May. That situation is not tenable when the
workload continues to grow.
Moreover, it is necessary for the Committee to
define, as stipulated in the resolution, specific
priorities for its work and to develop knowledgesharing and good practices. It is by making full use of
those new instruments that the 1540 Committee will
see its capacities improved and that we will be able to
offer real help to countries in fighting proliferation and
adapting to new challenges in that realm.
I now come to assistance in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). As the Council knows, my
country coordinates the Working Group on that issue.
Much progress has been made, although there is still a
long way to go. The Committee regularly updates its
database of requests for and offers of assistance; that
data was presented at the Group of Eight (G-8) meeting
in Washington, D.C., in late January. In that respect,
we welcome the attempt of the Committee and its
experts to step up dialogue with the G-8 working group
in that area. Moreover, the development of countryspecific visits is a step forward that should be
continued. Finally, other efforts are under way to
improve the Committee’s procedures for providing
assistance, better respond to relevant requests, and
continue regular dialogue with the various stakeholders
regarding assistance.
It is paramount not only to continue unceasingly
to improve coordination among the United Nations
counter-terrorism committees, but also to strengthen
cooperation with other United Nations forums and
external forums, for example, the Global CounterTerrorism Forum. We are counting on the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to enhance that
cooperation.
Finally, as the review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will take place in
June, it is vital to strengthen coordination of the

17

S/PV.6767

various United Nations counter-terrorism bodies. In
that respect, we support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to create the post of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me thank
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001),
and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu,
for their comprehensive briefings today and for their
effective leadership of those Committees.
Let me start with the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. I
would like to focus on two issues here: on the role of
the Ombudsperson and on the importance of robustly
implementing the sanctions.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the Office
of the Ombudsperson. Ensuring that the Ombudsperson
has access to all possible sources of information,
including classified information, is crucial to the
process. The United Kingdom is among those States
that have concluded an arrangement with the
Ombudsperson through which to share confidential
information relevant to de-listing requests. Such
agreements reinforce our collective endeavour to
ensure that the sanctions remain effective, responsive
and fair. We encourage all Member States to enter into
their own agreements with the Ombudsperson.
We must not be complacent about the global
terrorist threat posed by Al-Qaida. We encourage the
Sanctions Committee to continue its work to ensure
that sanctions are implemented robustly. We welcome
the effective work of the Monitoring Team to that end.
The Al-Qaida sanctions remain highly relevant.
They play a vital role in disrupting groups and
individuals, making it more difficult for them to
operate. The United Kingdom will continue to work
actively to ensure that the list of those designated best
represents the threat we face today.

“[y]et again it is the people of Syria who are suffering
as a result of the repression and violence, which must
come to an end”.
We commend the valuable work of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
under the leadership of Mr. Mike Smith. CTED’s work
with Member States to help build capacity to combat
terrorism remains essential. Greater coherence between
the various parts of the United Nations counterterrorism apparatus will further reinforce our efforts.
That will require CTED and Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and all relevant
United Nations agencies and offices to work together
in a cooperative and mutually supportive way. That is
why the United Kingdom supports the SecretaryGeneral’s announcement that he will seek to appoint a
counter-terrorism coordinator. We look forward to
working with all Member States, through the Security
Council and the General Assembly, to make that a
reality.
In that context, we also welcome the initial
meetings following the creation of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, generously funded by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Centre can provide
much needed support to the CTITF’s activities.
As we work together in combating terrorism, we
do not forget the particular challenges posed to our
collective security by proliferation. We encourage
States to provide updates as they make progress in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). States should
recognize that action undertaken, for example, to
improve the security of information relevant to
weapons of mass destruction is relevant to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Making
such linkages will enable more effective reporting to
the Committee.

The United Kingdom encourages all States,
where appropriate, to engage with the international
The United Nations remains the cornerstone of nuclear security initiatives and conventions and, for
the international community’s counter-terrorism efforts. those that have yet to ratify the International Atomic
We know that terrorism can be defeated only when Energy Agency’s amended Convention on the Physical
Member States meet their obligations under the Protection of Nuclear Material and the International
relevant United Nations resolutions and cooperate fully Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
to contest the terrorists’ narrative and to prevent their Terrorism, to do so.
activities. In that context, we condemn today’s bomb
Finally, we hope that the composition of the 1540
attacks in Damascus, which have claimed over 40 lives
expert group can be quickly resolved to ensure that the
and injured more than 300 people, most of them
Committee will continue to benefit from its valuable
civilians. As the British Foreign Secretary said today,
support.

18

12-33504

S/PV.6767

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I should like to make
some brief comments in my national capacity, first
with regard to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and secondly on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. I preface this
statement by saying that Germany aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union and of the group of like-minded countries.
At the most recent briefing of the three
Committee Chairs on 14 November 2011 (see
S/PV.6658), I announced an industry outreach
conference in Germany in order to promote the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Six months
later, I am pleased to report that my Government,
together with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, successfully organized a
conference of international, regional and subregional
industry associations at Wiesbaden, Germany, from
23 to 25 April. The conference, we felt, was innovative,
useful and forward-looking. It was innovative because
never before had a conference related to resolution
1540 (2004) brought together such a variety of
different actors, in particular from the private sector.
Through over 25 participating industry associations,
interaction between the 1540 Committee and industry
in more than 100 countries — representing several
thousand private enterprises — has become a reality.
The conference was useful because it fulfilled
requirements spelled out in the Council’s resolutions to
reach out to industry in the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Industry
associations expressed their willingness to disseminate
relevant practices. More awareness-raising and the
establishment of a two-way communication channel
between the Committee and the private sector are only
two of many tasks deriving from the event.
It was forward-looking, we felt, because many if
not all participants expressed their desire for a followup mechanism. The Wiesbaden process will be
continued. My country stands ready to actively
contribute to a substantial follow-up in order to
facilitate the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
More specifically, the Germany Foreign Ministry
would be willing to co-host further conferences and
focused workshops on a regular basis. Germany also
counts on the commitment of partners in this regard.

12-33504

I should like to make some additional remarks on
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. Germany attaches
the utmost importance to the implementation of the
mandate of the Ombudsperson, who is tasked with
assisting the Committee in ensuring that the right of
listed individuals to a fair, independent and effective
process is safeguarded. As Chair of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, we will continue to focus on
ensuring that procedures and timelines are respected
and reasoned decisions provided. We commend the
Ombudsperson, Judge Kimberley Prost, for her
professional work and her tireless efforts.
In conclusion, regarding cooperation between the
three counter-terrorism-related Committees, Germany
shares the view that there is room for further
improvement. The degree of cooperation should be
taken to an even more ambitious level of integration,
also in view of the proposal of the Secretary-General
that Member States approve the establishment of a
United
Nations
counter-terrorism
coordinator.
Committees and expert groups should agree on
representing each other at outreach events more
frequently. Cases in which representatives of more than
one expert group participate in the same outreach event
should be limited to well-reasoned exceptions. This
will help to save limited resources for more focused
and effective outreach activities, and to enhance the
Security Council’s impact in the field of counterterrorism.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Peter Wittig, Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri and Ambassador Baso Sangqu for their briefings
today. We appreciate the coordination among the three
Committees and their efforts in promoting greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States
concerning their respective areas of activities.
We share the view of the Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities that the threat of
terrorism is evolving, that the mechanism for the
implementation of sanctions measures needs to be
tailored to the threat, and that fair and clear procedures
have been introduced by the Ombudsperson, at least in
the de-listing processes, if not in all processes of the
Committee.
We are of the view that the evolving threat of
terrorism has taken new forms, such as individuals

19

S/PV.6767

radicalized by Internet and extremist websites in
various parts of the world. In this context, it is
important to ensure that the list of targeted individuals
sufficiently reflects the changing nature of the threat
posed by Al-Qaida. We agree that the list needs to be
accurate, up to date and user-friendly if the
implementation of the sanctions is to be successful. We
have noted the efforts of the 1267 Sanctions
Committee to bring clarity to its working methods and
to improve its guidelines. We hope that the Committee
shall continue to bring greater transparency to its work.
Pakistan appreciates the fact that the role of the
Ombudsperson has been enhanced by resolution 1989
(2011). Since November 2011, four individuals and 23
entities have been de-listed on the recommendation of
the Ombudsperson. We hope that a similar role will
also be devised for the Ombudsperson in the listing
processes. We also expect that the demonstration effect
of the Ombudsperson’s positive contribution will lead
us to introduce this institution into all other sanctions
regimes in order to ensure due process and
transparency in their work.
We feel that visits to States by the Monitoring
Team and expert groups should be used to foster
cooperation by facilitating the provision of technical
assistance and promoting constructive dialogue. We
hope that post-visit briefings and reports shall continue
to be made on a regular basis. These have been useful
in enhancing the Committee’s understanding of issues
and promoting transparency.
The biggest challenge to the sanctions regime,
however, comes from the increasing number of court
cases. For example, A number of listings have been
challenged in Pakistani courts. The decisions of
domestic and international courts and tribunals on the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime have not only gained
publicity but brought to the fore the legal challenges
faced by the sanctions regime. It remains to be seen
whether new changes will satisfy courts around the
world, because the legal community is more inclined to
welcome verifiable evidence that could be acceptable
in a court of law. The questions of due process and
effective remedy should therefore be at the heart of the
Committee’s work.
Terrorism has become the bane of all countries
alike. Resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) have
no doubt created equal obligations for all of us.
Terrorism is not a localized or region-specific problem.

20

The modern manifestations and mutations of terrorism,
which range from the radicalization of individuals to
financing of well-known groups from various parts of
the world, endanger the peace and security of the entire
world. The measures to combat this problem should
therefore be based on equality of obligations and
international cooperation and coordination.
Global cooperation against terrorism has been
highly successful. Determined and collective action has
contained and disrupted the violent agendas of the
terrorists. The immediate and short-term anti-terrorist
response must, however, be accompanied by a clear,
long term strategy for success in ensuring an end to
this murderous tactic. Such a strategy must include the
following elements: addressing the root causes of
terrorism, including, inter alia, delegitimizing the
terrorist’s cause; we must do more to address issues
such as the denial of the right to self-determination,
military intervention, and the use of force; addressing
broader and structural issues, including political and
economic injustices; and ensuring that counterterrorism activities are in full conformity with
international law and respect the sovereignty of States
and fundamental human rights.
We support the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
efforts to promote and facilitate the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We have
noted the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). The issue of the prohibition of
incitement to commit terrorist acts is very complex. On
the one hand is the imperative of preventing incitement
to terrorist acts, while, on the other is the challenge of
ensuring freedom of expression, and hence the need to
maintain the delicate balance. Besides, all efforts to
counter incitement must be undertaken in the light of
the agreed principle that terrorism and extremism
cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
The delegation of Pakistan supports the activities
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), particularly in the area of
capacity-building. CTED’s regional workshops in Asia
and Africa on specific topics will go a long way
towards enhancing the capacities of States to
effectively counter terrorism. Pakistan has been
regularly participating in regional workshops organized
by CTED. Pakistan participated in the fifth regional
workshop in New Delhi in March 2012. We are
planning to hold the sixth regional workshop for police

12-33504

S/PV.6767

officers, prosecutors and judges in South Asia on
counter-terrorism, in Islamabad later this year.

of overlap and synergies in their work, mandate and
activities.

Pakistan shares the global concerns over the
possibility of non-State actors acquiring weapons and
materials of mass destruction, as well as their means of
delivery. At the national level, we have undertaken
several legislative, organizational and administrative
measures to address those potential challenges. We
have filed four comprehensive reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540
Committee and the experts assisting it play an
important and complementary role to the established
treaty regimes and international organizations in the
area of weapons of mass destruction. We will continue
to support all international efforts to promote fair and
equitable
solutions
to
non-proliferation
and
disarmament challenges.

Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representatives of India, Germany and
South Africa for their briefings on the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
We commend the outstanding work they have done and
assure them of Morocco’s ongoing support as they
carry out the important tasks of three Committees they
preside over. Morocco has been able to cooperate in an
exemplary fashion with the three Committees and their
groups of experts and, as a Council member, shall
spare no effort in the collective efforts to strengthen
their role and fine-tune their actions.

Coordination and cooperation among experts of
the three Committees is a useful mechanism to assist
Member States in the implementation of Security
Council resolutions. In undertaking those efforts, the
Committees and their respective experts work towards
the shared objective of preventing terrorist activities
and addressing illicit trafficking in weapons or
materials of mass destruction and the means to deliver
them. There are areas of synergy in their work, such as
supporting States in building their capacity, law
enforcement and border controls. Yet the Committees
have distinct mandates and focus. This differentiated
nature of mandate and focus needs to be adhered to.
The duplication and overlap of activities and mandate
is best avoided.

The very useful discussion that the Council held
on 4 May (S/PV.6765), at the commendable initiative
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, provided an ideal
opportunity to reaffirm our determination to pursue our
joint efforts to strengthen and adapt the actions of the
Security Council, including those of the three
Committees, to counter terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

The composition of experts in the Committees
needs rationalization and reform. With the shift in the
core area of work of these Committees from
establishing
frameworks
to
implementation,
particularly through assistance and capacity-building, it
would be prudent to diversify the pool of experts from
diverse geographic areas. Such an effort would also
help advance an even better level of understanding and
ownership of those important issues to a large number
of Member States.
We value the information exchange among the
experts and their efforts to save costs by representing
alternatively at outreach events and joint meetings
within their respective mandates. We look forward to
receiving their joint feedback and assessment on areas

12-33504

We welcome the fact that the Security Council is
continuing to take important measures to consolidate
the work of the counter-terrorism Committees and to
adapt their mandates and work to the evolution of the
threat and the needs of Member States. In that regard,
we support the endeavours of the three Committees and
the groups of experts that help them to achieve greater
coordination, consistency and synergy as they
implement their respective mandates. We also support
greater transparency and increased dialogue with
Member States in order to identify their needs and
respond appropriately to their requests for assistance.
After more than a decade, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) is still indispensable to our
collective fight against terrorism. The revision of its
mandate after the adoption of resolution 1963 (2010)
made it possible to place greater emphasis on specific
areas requiring more attention and action. We
commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate for completing the global survey of the
implementation by Member States of resolution 1624
(2005) (see S/2012/16). The useful conclusions of that
survey are an important contribution to Member States

21

S/PV.6767

efforts to counter new forms of radicalization and
incitement to terrorism.

By and large, we remain in favour of greater
coordination with Member States, aimed at supporting
them as they carry out their obligations under the
Morocco supports the general approach of the
sanctions regime. It is important to take into account,
CTC, aiming, on the one hand, to consolidate a
as far as possible, the specific context of each region
strategic and transparent approach and, on the other, to
and the particular challenges each country faces. The
enhance the Committee’s role of facilitating and
continuous reform of the Committee’s procedures in
coordinating the supply of technical assistance in
order to make them more equitable and transparent is
building Member States’ capacities to combat terrorism.
an important goal that still captures the attention of all
The organization by the Executive Directorate of
Committee members and encourages them to action.
thematic workshops in a regional and transregional
Here, we would like to pay tribute to the
approach to technical aspects in combating terrorism
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Prost, for her
remains a useful tool in building the capacities of
commitment and the remarkable job she has done.
Member States and improving the coordination of their
counter-terrorism services. We encourage the
Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
Executive Directorate to explore, together with all of resolution 1540 (2004), Morocco, which has presented
its partners, intensifying activities to foster dialogue, an initial report and additional information, welcomes
cooperation and coordination among Member States, in the work of the Committee and its role and that of its
particular at the regional and subregional levels.
Chair in combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and preventing their being acquired
With regard to the concerns voiced by Council
by non-State actors. The first report (S/2012/79)
members in the course of the high-level meeting on
prepared pursuant to resolution 1977 (2011) and
4 May, in particular on the critical situation in the
submitted to the Council in February 2012, reflects the
Sahel, we believe that the CTC, as well as the 1267 and
efforts of the Committee in that regard and contains the
1540 Committees, should pay particular attention to
Committee’s proposals to make its work more effective
that region, which has recently witnessed a growth in
in the future and to improve its interaction with
terrorist attacks and in the degree of sophistication of
Member States. In that connection, we would like to
such attacks carried out by groups operating in zones
emphasize how important it is to bolster activities
beset by political, economic and social problems.
involving assistance and international cooperation to
Morocco is ready to support all specific actions of the
meet the needs of Member States. The guidelines laid
Council aimed at countering the risk of terrorism in the
out by the Committee should provide a basis for
Sahel region.
dialogue with Member States in order to identify
The sanctions regime established pursuant to shortcomings and difficulties in implementing the
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) is one of the resolutions.
most effective tools of the United Nations to combat
Lastly, if it is to be able to fulfil its role of
terrorism and remains a symbol of our collective
supporting national implementation efforts, the
resolve to counter the threat of Al-Qaida and associated
Committee must have the expertise of a highly
groups. We commend the regular review process for
qualified panel of experts at its disposal. In that respect,
the consolidated list, which has improved its quality
it is urgent for the Committee to complete the
and consequently made the sanctions regime more
appointment of the new members of the group of
effective. It is imperative that this exercise be
experts, taking into account the type of expertise
continued with the same perseverance and discipline in
needed and the principle of geographical representation.
order to maintain the credibility of the regime and keep
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in
it aligned with the evolution of the threat and the
important changes in the modus operandi of terrorist French): I would like, on behalf of the delegation of
groups. In that regard, we note with interest the Togo, to express my gratitude to the Chairs of the three
recommendations made to the Committee by the Committees, Ambassadors Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in Puri and Baso Sangqu, for their briefings, and to the
its twelfth report, particularly with regard to the means members of the panel for their very helpful work. I also
to adapt the sanctions regime to the regional spread of take this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
role played by the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost,
the Al-Qaida threat.

22

12-33504

S/PV.6767

in seeking out the information needed for the proper
implementation of the relevant resolutions. Finally, I
would like to express our appreciation for the
commendable work carried out by the monitoring team
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities and the experts from the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Today’s briefings have highlighted the need for
the international community to create true synergy in
the work of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), with a
view to effectively countering the scourges that
threaten international peace and security.
A few days ago, on 4 May (see S/PV.6765), the
Security Council deliberated on the threats to
international peace and security and on the need for
cooperation among States themselves, among non-State
organizations, and between States and these
organizations to prevent the threat from perpetuating
itself and to prevent certain materials from falling into
the hands of terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida.
The briefings just presented reveal in a number of
respects how the three Committees have addressed this
need to cooperate in order to confront terrorism. In that
respect, my delegation would like to commend the
work carried out by the Committees, which remain a
vital part of the institutional arsenal of the Security
Council in its ongoing struggle against terrorism. This
struggle requires the cooperation and assistance of —
as well as capacity-building for — subregional entities
charged with promoting the implementation of the
three relevant resolutions of the Council.
It goes without saying that our world today is,
even more than yesterday, haunted by the spectre of
new threats to international peace and security, which,
needless to say, involve weapons of mass destruction,
nuclear weapons and other dangerous materials falling
into the hands of non-State actors. We must all pull
together to face those threats. The briefings just
presented to us were sufficiently enlightening.
Nevertheless, my country would like to make the
following observations.

12-33504

First, it is gratifying to note that, in the most
recent report presented by those Committees to the
Council, significant headway has been made in terms
of cooperation among States and regional and
subregional organizations in implementing the
aforementioned resolutions and in terms of capacitybuilding for the various stakeholders and the assistance
that is given to them in adopting best practices to fulfil
their commitments pursuant to those resolutions.
In the area under consideration, we welcome the
willingness of States to provide the necessary
information, allowing the Committees to deliver on
commitments linked to their respective mandates. The
merit of those positive developments reflects well on
both the group of experts and the Committees.
Next, turning to the 1373 Committee, we note
that the assessment of progress in implementation
reflects the need to improve procedures for States’
implementation of the resolution. However, the
assessment calls for greater awareness and capacitybuilding, especially for States, in order to enable them
to better understand this document, which we believe
could yield more conclusive results. We call on the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
continue its tireless work on behalf of States.
Turning to the 1540 Committee, we wish to note
that this Committee is currently revitalizing its expert
capacities, which are, nevertheless, doing excellent
work, which will enable the Committee, as far as
possible, to deliver on its mandate. However, my
delegation would like to recall — and this is a key
concern for the Committee in the context of resolution
1977 (2011) — that the appointment of experts should
take into account their expertise and the principle of
geographic distribution. In my country’s view, the
resolution considers those two criteria as cumulative.
We therefore hope that those criteria will retain the
attention of the Council in order to make the
Committee more inclusive and to allow a better
reflection of the concerns of all regions.
Togo would like to invite States to consider,
moreover, the work before these various entities, in
particular the 1540 Committee, in order to consider
strengthening it in terms of structure and technical
manpower.
Finally, my delegation encourages the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and

23

S/PV.6767

entities to continue working towards greater
streamlining, in terms of criteria and listing and
delisting procedures in order to prevent terrorists who
have supposedly reformed or died in the meantime
from taking up arms again, thus jeopardizing or
undoing years of hard work and sacrifice.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would first like
to thank Ambassadors Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri
and Baso Sangqu for their comprehensive briefings and
to commend them for their work, leadership and
commitment in chairing the three Committees focused
on the fight against terrorism.
The statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union naturally reflects Portugal’s views on
this important issue. Allow me, however, to emphasize
some aspects of particular relevance to my country,
starting with the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
has produced some intensive and commendable work,
particularly regarding the review of its sanctions list.
On the delisting side, we are pleased to express
our appreciation for the significant improvements
introduced by the Office of the Ombudsperson in the
area of fair and clear procedures for delisting, thus
reinforcing the sanctions mechanism and its efficiency.
We take this opportunity to highlight once again the
active role of Judge Kimberly Prost in achieving these
goals according to her mandate. Like the United
Kingdom, we have concluded an agreement for sharing
classified information with Judge Prost, and we
encourage other States to do the same. In our view, the
success achieved so far and the role played by the
Ombudsperson in that sanctions regime should
encourage us to look at the next logical step — the
introduction of the same mechanism into the
framework of other United Nations sanctions
regimes — an idea that deserves our active support and
that of other members of the Council.
On the other side of that issue, and again in order
to reinforce the efficiency of the sanctions regime, we
believe that enhanced efforts should be made to
continue to update the list in order to include those
individuals and entities currently leading or supporting
Al-Qaida or its affiliated groups but not yet listed. We
also welcome the highly effective work that continues
to be done under the Committee’s guidance by its
Monitoring Group.

24

Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
I would like to highlight three aspects. First is the need
to encourage and assist States in developing
comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism and
preventive strategies: strategies that are not only
devoted to law enforcement and reactive approaches,
but are also designed to address the conditions
conducive to radicalization and recruitment for terrorist
purposes, which means that they must include
consistent preventive efforts and measures of a
structural and cross-cutting nature. We would advocate
that the special meeting to be held by the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) later this year be devoted
to that important matter.
Secondly, we very much value the attention given
to the efforts made by CTC and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) to help strengthen,
when requested, multilateral and bilateral technical
assistance programmes to aid States and regions
especially affected by terrorism. Indeed, a regional
approach often seems to make for the most effective
framework, by promoting regional solutions more
tailored to realities on the ground and better adapted to
respond to similar challenges and build on common
strengths and capacities. In that regard we welcome the
CTED thematic and regional presentations on West
Africa, the Horn of Africa, the Sahel and the Maghreb.
Last but not least, let me reiterate the special
importance of ensuring that counter-terrorism measures
fully comply with obligations under international law,
particularly in the areas of international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law. Full respect for human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law is
also, in our view, an indispensable tool for effective
counter-radicalization and for combating terrorism
narratives and appeals. In that regard, we continue to
support the efforts undertaken by the Committee and
CTED and look forward to the upcoming thematic
presentation on human rights and counter-terrorism.
Turning now to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I want to commend
its fulfilment of the main provisions set out in
resolution 1977 (2011), namely, the first annual review
on progress made by Member States and other
stakeholders in implementing resolution 1540 (2004),
as well as the recommendations put forward by the
Committee for the establishment of a group of experts.
The group of experts will play a fundamental role in

12-33504

S/PV.6767

assisting the Committee, and I share the sense of
urgency about completing the process. Finally, I would
also like to thank the Office for Disarmament Affairs
for its readiness to engage with the 1540 Committee in
supporting implementation of the resolution at the
regional, subregional and national levels.

Executive Directorate in promoting and facilitating that
implementation.

We welcomed the issuance earlier this year of the
global survey of Member States’ implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) (see S/2012/16). We were
pleased with the survey’s comprehensive approach,
To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support which included analysing the implementation by
for every measure that could be instrumental in geographical region and by theme, assessing the
maximizing coordination among all the United Nations evolution of challenges and identifying implementation
entities relevant to efforts to prevent and combat gaps that Member States have encountered. We also
terrorism. Among those tools, we believe that United commend the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
Nations political missions and offices in the field — for new, practical approaches aimed at helping Member
which are particularly well placed for assessing States strengthen their implementation, which in our
terrorism risks and forms of violent extremism — opinion constitute the most important part of the
should be given mandates and resources adequate to survey and one to which States should give particular
advising and assisting on appropriate preventive efforts. consideration.
As with many other international threats, we believe
Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
strongly that prevention is key to achieving mediumresolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
and long-term success in fighting terrorism.
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, we
The President: I shall now make a statement in share the view that Al-Qaida and its affiliates continue
my capacity as representative of Azerbaijan.
to pose a serious threat to international peace and
security. Azerbaijan welcomes the Committee’s
To begin with, I would like to thank Ambassadors
ongoing efforts to counter Al-Qaida-related terrorism.
Wittig, Puri and Sangqu for their comprehensive
We agree that the Committee’s practical approach to
briefings, and to express our appreciation for their
the Al-Qaida sanctions list, including its regular
second year of excellent work and professional
updates and review, contributes to universal and
leadership of the three Committees with countereffective implementation of the sanctions. It is
terrorism mandates.
important that the Committee ensure that sanctions are
Azerbaijan strongly supports close cooperation fully implemented and appropriately adjusted to
and effective coordination among those Committees. address current threats from Al-Qaida and its associates.
The presidential statement adopted by the Council last
We would also like to mention the support
week (S/PRST/2012/17) reiterated the need for
rendered by the Monitoring Team through its outreach
enhancing
continued
cooperation
among
the
activities, including engaging with Member States and
Committees and their groups of experts. Information
collaborating with various regional and subregional
exchange, joint outreach activities and country visits,
organizations and civil society. The Monitoring Team
coordinated activities with international and regional
has played a crucial role in raising awareness and
organizations, joint meetings and representation are all
increasing knowledge of the sanctions regime, and we
important tools for effective cooperation. In that regard,
highlight in particular its contribution to completing
we are pleased to note the increased cooperation in
narrative summaries for all the entries on the Al-Qaida
some areas among the expert groups, and hope to see
list.
greater collaboration in other areas as well.
Azerbaijan is greatly appreciative of the activities
Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, I
1540 (2004), in particular its close interaction with
would like to underline the enormous importance of the
Member States. It is essential that the Committee
full implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
continue to solicit national implementation reports
(2005) and 1963 (2010) by Member States, and to
from Member States and, with support from the Group
stress the crucial role of the Counter-Terrorism
of Experts, to work constructively with them to
Committee (CTC) and the Counter-Terrorism
increase the number of such reports.

12-33504

25

S/PV.6767

Meanwhile, we believe that finalizing the
establishment of the group of experts that will assist
the Committee in carrying out its mandate under
resolution 1540 (2004) is crucial. However, in so doing,
we cannot allow any region to be overrepresented in
that small group of experts. In that regard, we reiterate
our firm belief that broad geographical representation
must be one of the major criteria in selecting
appropriate experts to serve in the Group.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
the opportunity for my delegation to participate in this
debate on the activities undertaken by the three
Security Council Committees on the fight against
terrorism. In that regard, we would like to fully
endorse the content of the statement to be made by the
representative of the delegation of the European Union.
We all know that terrorism is a global, complex
and constantly changing threat that requires us to keep
adjusting our response capacities. For that reason, we
must continue to promote and to strengthen
cooperation at all levels. We must not overlook the fact
that the ideological factors behind organized crime,
unresolved conflicts, alienation, social marginalization
or the lack of peaceful integration in local communities
often converge in terrorism. Therefore, apart from
critical police and judicial activities, the response
should often include an element of development.
One-sided or ad hoc solutions are not a valid
option. A legitimate and systematic approach based on
international cooperation is therefore needed. To that
end, we have been developing a very satisfactory
multilateral system in many respects. However, we are
aware that there are still challenges in combating that
scourge.
We may congratulate ourselves on having helped
establish such an approach with, first, the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted by
consensus under General Assembly resolution 60/288
in 2006, which we will jointly review for the third time
next June; secondly, relevant Security Council
resolutions; and, thirdly, existing international legal
instruments. The United Nations system has been
undertaking significant work in the fight against
terrorism. It must continue to play a prominent role as

26

the guarantor of international law. Spain is committed
to that.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate the strong
commitment of Spain in the fight against all forms of
terrorism, whatever its motive or manifestation. I
would also like to reaffirm my Government’s wish that
such a task be an ongoing priority of the United
Nations agenda.
In addition to our cruel experience of jihadist
terrorism with the attacks of 11 March 2004, Spain
suffered the blows of the Euskadi Ta Askatasuna
terrorist organization for more than four decades. With
unity and determination, we managed to defeat it
through a democratic response, on the basis of our
constitutional model of rights and freedoms, as well as
international cooperation, which we greatly appreciate.
We are a worthy example that, as States, we cannot
successfully act alone in the fight against terrorism.
Spain demonstrates particular solidarity with the
victims, who so often suffer, apart from the attack itself,
the added injustice of rejection or neglect. We believe
that our national legislation is an advanced model of
recognition, protection and assistance for the victims of
terrorism, whose spirit we wish to disseminate and
promote at the international level. We also call for a
new meeting to provide follow-up to the symposium on
victims of terrorism, convened by the SecretaryGeneral in New York in September 2008. That meeting
gave significant impetus to giving a face and voice to
such victims. We should be mobilized into providing
assistance and support to victims of terrorism on moral
grounds.
I wish to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities; resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism; and resolution 1540
(2004) for the information provided and for their work
with their respective groups of experts.
Spain would like to highlight the work of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. We value the Committee’s
efforts to increase the transparency of the system to
review and update the names of persons and entities on
the sanctions regime Consolidated List.

12-33504

S/PV.6767

The adoption of resolution 1989 (2011) led to an
improvement in the Committee’s procedures and the
calibre of the consolidated list. We underscore the need
to continue to ensure that such procedures are impartial
and transparent. We also emphasize the important role
of the Ombudsperson in improving that impartiality
and transparency. In that regard, we would also like to
stress the important work of the Committee’s
Monitoring Team.
Spain would also like to underscore the work
carried out by the Counter-terrorism Committee (CTC)
and its Executive Directorate (CTED) in ensuring the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2011), 1624
(2005) and 1963 (2010) and the provision of technical
assistance to countries that need it and request it. In
that regard, I would like to point out the progress made
regarding victims of terrorism with the adoption of
resolution 1963 (2010), as it demonstrates deep
solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families.
It is also worth mentioning CTED’s efforts to
execute its mandate. In particular, we support its work
on technical assistance in implementing resolution
1373 (2001). Convinced of its very valuable
contribution, we believe that its human and material
resources should be strengthened to ensure stronger
direct presence and assistance on the ground in the
relevant countries.
The proliferation and possession of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors or by rogue States
or those that violate international law are serious
threats to international peace and security. We have
shown our support for the 1540 Committee’s efforts to
design monitoring mechanisms for the implementation
of that resolution and to further its universal
application.
Spain welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011), since it extends and
strengthens the mandate of the 1540 Committee in the
essential context of Member States’ full and strict
compliance with their obligations with regard to
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems
in all its aspects. In that context, Spain wishes to
underscore the work of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, and calls for further cooperation
among all stakeholders in the fight against nuclear
terrorism.

12-33504

During this debate, the need to further improve
cooperation among the three Committees and their
expert groups has been pointed out. We also deem it
important that the United Nations system entities that
depend on the Security Council, as well as those that
are part of the Secretariat and most closely tied to the
General Assembly, maintain smooth relations in a
context of flexible and effective coordination, so as to
allow for consistent, complementary and holistic action
in our efforts to eradicate terrorism. Hence we
welcome the announcement by the Secretary-General
of his intention to establish a single coordinator in the
combat against terrorism. We are ready to continue to
reflect and debate as required to continue to improve
the system that we have created, with a view to
promoting the implementation of the Global Strategy
through operational, rigorous, open and participatory
procedures.
I should like to conclude by expressing my
appreciation for the efforts of the three Committees to
enhance the effectiveness of their work. It is also
encouraging to see the growing awareness of the need
for all measures to respect individual human rights.
With this essential respect for human rights, the entire
international community must demonstrate its firm
resolve to tackle the barbarity of terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council’s three counter-terrorism-related Committees
for their respective briefings this morning.
Last year, during the 10-year anniversary of the
events of 11 September 2001, a special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee was held. At that
meeting, we reviewed the progress made to date in the
fight against terrorism and reaffirmed our commitment
to zero tolerance for terrorism. In addition, the Global
Counterterrorism Forum and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, new structures aimed at
redoubling our efforts to counter terrorism, were
established. It was a significant year in which we
stepped forward into the next phase of the international
fight against terrorism. This year as well we expect a
great deal of active and constructive discussions in the
Security Council.
Japan is actively participating in the Global
Counterterrorism Forum and highly values its activities,

27

S/PV.6767

including the opening of an international centre to
counter violent extremism and the holding of several
meetings of each working group to strengthen
international cooperation in the area of counterterrorism.
In the effort to advance international counterterrorism efforts, we hope that the three committees
and the various bodies of the United Nations will take
further steps toward ensuring greater dialogue,
cooperation and collaboration with relevant bodies
such as the Forum and private-sector organizations,
and that such efforts will produce synergistic effects,
thereby improving the ability of all parties to deal with
terrorism by integrating and sharing best practices.
Even in the next phase of the international fight
against terrorism, the central role of the broad and
continuous activities of the relevant bodies, especially
the three committees, must not change. At the same
time, it is necessary to ensure the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations counter-terrorism
measures.
In that regard, Japan values highly the activities
of the Ombudsperson in the context of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), which maintain and enhance the
legitimacy and credibility of the sanctions regime. We
will continue to cooperate actively with the work of the
Ombudsperson and the Committee.
Japan stands squarely behind the three
Committees. At the same time, we deem it equally
essential to make their activities more transparent and
widely known. To that end, Japan hosted in Tokyo a
series of seminars on the promotion of accession to the
international counter-terrorism Conventions and
Protocols. With regard to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), twice last year my Government hosted seminars
here in New York on sanctions, non-proliferation and
disarmament, including the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in order to facilitate the
engagement of Member States and to promote the
sharing of experience and knowledge. Together with
Poland and Turkey, we will convene another meeting on
21 May here in New York.

example, for nearly two decades now Japan has
spearheaded regional efforts by organizing Asian
export-control seminars. That series of meetings,
including one hosted in February of this year, has
contributed to creating a wider regional network of
experts from the Governments of East Asian countries.
We understand that Germany also hosted a conference
in Wiesbaden in April aimed at strengthening publicprivate collaboration in their region. Japan welcomes
such initiatives, since we believe that, regardless of the
membership of the Security Council, it is important to
continue and strengthen such efforts at the regional
level.
The United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator,
whose appointment was recommended by the
Secretary-General, could ensure the consistency and
integrity of all efforts by United Nations entities in the
field of counter-terrorism. Japan recognizes the
necessity of establishing that position and hopes to see
active discussions on the initiative and its mandate in
the Security Council. In that regard, it is necessary that
in the establishment of a counter-terrorism coordinator,
duplication be avoided.
We strongly hope that the three Committees will
continue to fulfil their roles in close coordination with
one another. At the same time, it will be important to
deal with several of the issues facing the Committees.
We need to enhance their cooperation with the relevant
bodies as well as the Committees’ legitimacy and
credibility. We must also expand movements and make
greater efforts at the regional level, as well as
appropriately enhance the consistency and integrity of
all activities concerning counter-terrorism in the
United Nations.
The Government of Japan will continue to take
all possible measures to cooperate positively in the
efforts of the three Committees.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the informal group of
like-minded States on targeted sanctions. This group
comprises Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland and my own country, Austria.

In addition to global efforts, regional cooperation
is key to materializing tangible outcomes in these areas.
Let me join others in thanking the Chairs of the
Japan has provided development assistance as well as
three Committees for their informative briefings. As
support for capacity-building to countries in Asia. For

28

12-33504

S/PV.6767

the focus of our group is on strengthening the United
Nations sanctions regimes through the implementation
of fair and clear procedures, my remarks will
concentrate on the Committee established pursuant to
Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. Our group considers that targeted sanctions are
a useful and necessary tool in maintaining international
peace and security, including in effectively combating
international terrorism. We therefore support
strengthening the effectiveness of the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime.
Almost a year after the adoption of resolution
1989 (2011), on 17 June 2011, it is suitable to take
stock of its implementation. The members of our group
were pleased to see that that resolution has given both
the Ombudsperson and the designating State the
mandate to recommend de-listings. This procedure, in
particular by requiring consensus on the part of the
Committee to reject a delisting recommendation, has
already proved to be a significant step in providing
due-process guarantees for listed individuals or entities.
We applaud Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost for her
highly professional and dedicated work and steadfast
efforts to examine whether the criterion for a continued
listing is fulfilled. For that to be the case, there must be
an association of the individual, entity, group or
undertaking with Al-Qaida.
Our group is of the firm view that the success of
the Ombudsperson’s work and the credibility of the
Committee hinge in particular upon the following
conditions. The provision of all relevant information,
including confidential information, is key to enabling
the Ombudsperson to carry out her mandate effectively
and examine whether a de-listing request is justified.
We therefore encourage all States to consider
concluding agreements or arrangements for sharing
confidential information with the Office of the
Ombudsperson. Switzerland, Belgium, Costa Rica,
Germany and Liechtenstein have already concluded
such arrangements, while other members of our group,
including my own country, will soon follow suit.
One of the cornerstones of the rule of law and of
due process is the obligation to provide reasons for
decisions affecting the rights of individuals or entities.
Whereas situations might occur in which the
Committee will not follow the Ombudsperson’s
recommendations, resolution 1989 (2011) obliges the
Committee to give reasons for its decisions under all

12-33504

circumstances. This must apply all the more if
recommendations are rejected by the Council on appeal
by a member of the Committee. The rule of law must
apply not only outside the United Nations, but also
within the United Nations, in particular in situations in
which actions by the United Nations may directly
affect individual rights. The United Nations should
lead the way in that regard.
Therefore, it is crucial that the Committee’s
procedures be closely followed. Resolution 1989
(2011) provides for a three-phase process: an
information-gathering period, a dialogue phase and,
finally, the Committee discussion. Respect for those
procedures, including time limits, by the Committee,
the Ombudsperson and all other relevant actors is
essential for fairness and transparency and impacts on
the overall image of the Committee.
The like-minded States reiterate their strong
support for the mandate of the Ombudsperson and the
strict implementation of resolution 1989 (2011) in
order to safeguard the Council’s commendable efforts
in advancing fair and clear procedures and due process.
We urge all Member States to take note of the fact that
the Ombudsperson is mandated to conduct her work in
an independent and impartial manner.
With a view to the renewal of the mandates of the
Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team at the end of
this year, the like-minded group reaffirms its continued
commitment to improving fair and clear procedures for
targeted sanctions and to making United Nations
sanctions more effective. On the basis of its letter to
the Security Council of April 2011, the group is
committed to tackling the remaining challenges and
weaknesses of the current Al-Qaida sanctions regime
and to supporting the Council in further improving the
regime. Safeguarding the transparency of the process is
definitely a key element. In that regard, the disclosure
of the identity of the designating State is crucial.
Another very important issue impacting on the
Office of the Ombudsperson concerns the duration of
its mandate, which should be extended beyond the
existing 18 months. In addition, adding a sunset clause
for all designations would underline that the measures
taken against individuals and entities are by nature
preventive and temporary, and not punitive.
The need to strengthen fair and clear procedures
is not limited to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, but is
relevant to the other sanctions committees. A person

29

S/PV.6767

de-listed by the Al-Qaida Committee upon
recommendation of the Ombudsperson, but thereafter
listed by another sanctions Committee can only
approach the focal point for de-listing pursuant to
resolution 1730 (2006), but no longer the
Ombudsperson. However, the mandate of the focal
point does not provide for procedures comparable to
those of the Ombudsperson. That inequality of due
process lacks justification.
We therefore continue to call for further steps to
improve the procedural fairness and clarity of other
sanctions regimes. Such steps should include aligning
listing and de-listing procedures with resolution 1989
(2011) and the Ombudsperson process. That would
greatly enhance the observance of the rights of the
affected individuals and entities and thereby improve
the legitimacy and effectiveness of the Security
Council’s work.
Finally, let me state in my national capacity that
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
The President: I
representative of Israel.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Prosor (Israel): Ambassador Mehdiyev, I
would like to personally congratulate you on your
presidency of the Security Council this month and to
thank you for convening this very important meeting. I
would also like to express my appreciation to the
Chairs of the counter-terrorism Committees for their
briefings this morning and their continued efforts to
strengthen the United Nations response to terrorism.
We have been discussing the issue of terrorism in
this Chamber for decades, yet States still speak out
about this challenge as if they were discussing a
lightning strike. For too many, terrorism is abstract and
remote until it finally strikes them. Allow me to
assume the role of forecaster. Nearly every State in the
Chamber will be affected by terrorism. And one thing
is clear — the less we do to prevent terrorism today,
the more we will face its deadly consequences
tomorrow.
I would like to lend Israel’s support to several
positive developments within the United Nations
system. It happens, sometimes. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism indicated in its 2012
work programme that it would update the format of the

30

preliminary implementation assessments. Any move to
improve the quality of assessments is commendable.
Israel believes that the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
facilitating technical assistance is especially important.
All opportunities to match donors with recipient States
should be vigorously explored.
In his recent report on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/66/762), the SecretaryGeneral identified border control as an issue of critical
concern. Israel agrees wholeheartedly. In that context, I
would like to voice our support for the Council’s
presidential statement of 25 April on illicit crossborder flows (S/PRST/2012/16).
The
close
cooperation
between
the
Ombudsperson and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities has
brought about greater transparency and fairness in the
sanctions regime. The improved procedures facilitate
compliance with the regime. Israel appreciates the
Ombudsperson’s briefings to States on the activities of
her office in the spirit of transparency and ongoing
dialogue.
Finally, I wish to reiterate Israel’s strong support
for resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee
established to carry out its mandate. The international
community has a clear duty to do whatever it takes to
keep the world’s most dangerous weapons out of the
hands of the world’s most dangerous terrorists and
regimes.
Israel is proud to share its unique expertise with
others in the global fight against terrorism. We are
closely engaged in capacity-building initiatives with a
number of States and regional organizations in Africa,
South America and Asia. We are also working closely
with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Our collaborative
efforts span a range of issues, from money-laundering
to terrorist financing and from aviation security to
border protection.
People do not become terrorists in a vacuum.
They are taught to hate and they learn to kill. We see
this clearly in the Middle East today, where Statesponsored incitement fills schools, mosques and the
media. Across the region, terrorism and martyrdom are
being taught and glorified to the next generation.

12-33504

S/PV.6767

The prevalence of incitement around the world
calls for the international community’s immediate
action. Countering incitement and radicalization is one
of the most effective counter-terrorism tools at our
disposal. We must promote education that teaches
peace instead of hate, tolerance instead of violence and
mutual understanding instead of martyrdom.
Recent United Nations reports show how far we
have to go on this issue. CTED revealed disturbing
gaps in its recent global survey on the implementation
of resolution 1624 (2005) (see S/2012/16). For
example, it noted that relatively little attention is being
paid to “preventing the subversion of educational,
cultural, and religious institutions by terrorists and
their supporters”, as called for in paragraph 3 of that
resolution (S/2012/16, para. 7). States must act to
stamp out institutionalized messages of hate.
The growing nexus between terrorism and
transnational criminal networks presents another acute
challenge. Hezbollah’s activities offer one example of
that disturbing trend. That terrorist organization has
established itself as a major player in the global
narcotics market, operating a network that spans from
West Africa to the Middle East to Latin America.
Hezbollah uses its global network to fund its terrorist
activities and to provide the logistical support to carry
them out. It is clear that today a straight line runs from
picturesque fields of opium poppies to the pictures of
bombs exploding in city centres.
The misuse of cyberspace is another area of
growing concern. Increasingly, the web has become a
central hub for spreading incitement and glorifying
terrorism. It is also used for terrorist recruitment,
instruction and financing. States must look for new tools
to prevent such abuse. I would like to take this
opportunity to invite all members of the Security
Council to join us next month in Israel for a major
conference on cybersecurity. It will take place on 6 June
at Tel Aviv University, under the auspices of the Yuval
Ne’eman Workshop for Science, Technology and
Security.
In the midst of technical discussions like this, we
must never forget that each victim of terrorism has a
face and a family, a name and a story. Two months ago,
an Israeli diplomat named Tal Yehoshua Koren left our
Embassy in New Delhi to pick up her children from
school. An Iranian terrorist sped up beside her and

12-33504

attached a bomb to her car. It exploded, seriously
injuring that innocent mother of two.
That same morning, the same network — and the
same Government — attempted similar attacks on
Israeli diplomats in Bangkok and Tbilisi. Many other
plots by Iranian networks have been foiled, from
Washington to Baku to Bangkok. We also see grave
cause for concern in Syria, where Al-Assad terrorizes
his own people, as he spreads terrorism around the
world.
Each act of terrorism holds the potential for
serious consequences that extend well beyond the
borders of any particular nation. We see that today in
southern Israel, where terrorists from Gaza —
sponsored by Iran — continue to rain down rockets on
1 million Israeli civilians, day in and day out. One
rocket that explodes in the wrong place at the wrong
time could ignite a dangerous escalation in our region.
Yet the Council has not condemned the rocket fire. It
has not uttered a single word. It is time for all in this
Chamber to finally wake up to that dangerous reality. I
have said it before and I will say it again: today’s
silence is tomorrow’s tragedy.
Terrorism is a changing and growing threat.
Increasingly, terrorists are sponsored, funded and
directed by Governments and working with criminals.
In a world that has never been more connected, those
networks have never had greater opportunities to cause
devastating damage. The international community must
stay one step ahead. The world does not have the
luxury to stand idle. Complacency will breed
catastrophe, and we will all bear the consequences.
History shows us that terrorism can strike anyone
and anywhere. It could be me. It could be anyone here.
It could be our families or our communities. Every
State Member of this Organization should be clear
about its choices. To turn a blind eye to terrorists is to
choose terrorism. Overlooking incitement is choosing
to educate the next generation of terrorists.
For the sake of our children, our nations and our
common future, we must drain the swamps of hate and
lawlessness that spawn terror — and hold all those
accountable who support it.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.

31

S/PV.6767

Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union and its member States.
As this is the first time I have the chance to speak
in this Chamber in the month of May, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and Azerbaijan on assuming the
presidency of the Council and to thank the United
States for its efforts during the month of April.
The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
Thank you very much, Sir, for organizing this
useful briefing. We appreciate the efforts of the Chair
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism and the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), and we thank them for providing us with
information on their activities and undertakings. Let
me also underscore the essential role of the resolutions
themselves in the global counter-terrorism efforts.
With
regard
to
counter-terrorism-related
sanctions, we welcome the further procedural
improvements introduced to the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime in June last year in resolution 1989 (2011). The
Office of the Ombudsperson has made an important
contribution to ensuring fair and clear procedures for
individuals who seek delisting, and I am honoured to
have been involved, in my former capacity as
Ambassador, in the development of that Office.
Pursuant to resolution 1989 (2011), we encourage
designated individuals who are considering, or are in
the process of, challenging their listings through
national and regional courts to submit a petition for
delisting to the Office of the Ombudsperson. We
underline the importance of all relevant information
being shared with the Office of the Ombudsperson, and
that it particularly welcomes arrangements on the
provision of confidential information.
Countering and preventing terrorism can be
successful in the long run only when core universal
values and the rule of law are respected, and

32

international law — including human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law — are
fully complied with. The promotion and protection of
human rights is essential for all components of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
that context, an international conference was organized
on 12 March by Denmark, which holds the presidency
of the Council of the European Union. The aim of the
conference was to help identify ways to better bring
counter-terrorism measures and capacity-building
efforts into line with the requirements of human rights
and the rule of law. That task is of utmost importance if
we wish to succeed in our long-term efforts to counter
and prevent the scourge of terrorism. We also look
forward to the upcoming review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
We commend the recent activities of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate and look forward to
its future work, in particular the upcoming workshops
for Sahel and Maghreb countries. We welcome the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, including, among others, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime with its Terrorism
Prevention Branch, as well as the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute. We
also look forward to the development of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
In addition, we welcome all efforts aimed at
enhancing the visibility of United Nations counterterrorism activities and at ensuring greater cooperation,
coordination and coherence among United Nations
entities, including, when appropriate, the contribution
of relevant United Nations political offices and
missions in the field. In that context, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendation. for consideration
by Member States, of the appointment of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, as a step
towards
further
improving
cross-institutional
coherence in the United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts.
Finally, let me turn to the resolution 1540 (2004)
regime. As recognized during the recent Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit, the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) will strengthen global efforts
to prevent the acquisition and use by terrorists of
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and
materials. We strongly support the robust and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). To that end,
the European Union is currently finalizing a new

12-33504

S/PV.6767

council decision focused on State assistance. We have
also launched an extensive technical assistance
programme on export control, focused in the first
instance on neighbouring countries and which will be
gradually expanded to South-East Asia and the
Mediterranean. In that context, the European Union
also co-sponsored the Conference of International,
Regional and Sub-Regional Industry Associations on
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540
(2004) in Wiesbaden, Germany, in April.
The timing of today’s joint briefing coincides
with the regular European Union-United Nations
political dialogue on counter-terrorism. I would like to
conclude by underlining the importance that we attach
to the close collaboration between the United Nations
and the European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and for the admirable manner in
which you are undertaking the task.
We have closely followed the briefings presented
by the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies in today’s
meeting, and we thank them for their statements.
Syria reaffirms its condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
source or perpetrators, be they groups, individuals or
States. Terrorism consists of criminal, aggressive and
unjust acts that target the lives and property of
innocent people, and its effects touch everyone without
distinction.
Today started as a beautiful sunny day in most of
the capitals of the world, but it was a bloody day in
Damascus. Our capital was shaken by two suicide
terrorist attacks that killed 56 innocent individuals and
grievously injured 372 others; the remains of 15
individuals have yet to be identified. Those statistics
characterized this morning in Damascus, in contrast to
the morning enjoyed by all other capitals in the world.
It is therefore appropriate that, on behalf of my
Government, I today address the members of the
Security Council on the subject of counter-terrorism.
At 7:30 a.m. local time, two suicide terrorist
bombers exploded two vehicles laden with explosives
in an neighbourhood of Damascus that is densely

12-33504

populated with civilians. The area has four schools,
including a primary school, a preparatory school and a
secondary school. The two explosions took place at a
time when students were on their way to school. As I
mentioned earlier, the explosions killed dozens of
innocent victims, civilian and military. Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan quickly condemned the cowardly
act, as did General Mood, chief of the United Nations
observer mission. We expect the Security Council,
under the wise leadership of its President, to condemn
that cowardly act loudly and clearly, and to take a firm
stance in addressing it in all its Arab, regional and
international dimensions.
The explosion took place at the same time as
another explosion in Aleppo this morning, which also
claimed several civilian victims and did massive
damage to private property.
Council members are well aware that, while Syria
has witnessed a noticeable reduction in the level of
violence, there has recently been an increase in the
scale and frequency of terrorist activities and
operations in the country. Extremist terrorist groups
have emerged, using unusual criminal methods and
carrying out organized terrorist operations based on
extremist Takfiri edicts that label others as apostates
and which are issued by inciters residing in countries
well known to us all. These groups use suicide
bombers, booby-trapped cars, explosive belts and
packages to attack vital facilities and infrastructure and
to sow fear among citizens. That is apparent in the
terrorist explosions that have taken place in various
areas around Damascus and Aleppo, as well as the two
recent explosions in the province of Idlib, which the
Security Council regrettably failed to condemn for
unjustifiable political reasons.
The same applies to the terrorist explosion that
took place yesterday in Daraa, targeting a convoy of
the United Nations observer mission, which led to
injuries among members of the Syrian security forces
who were accompanying the convoy. That incident led
the Secretary-General to condemn the explosion and all
acts of violence, including the use of explosive devices
in Syrian cities to target the forces of law and order,
civilians and public and private property on a
continuous daily basis; armed robbery, banditry, theft,
vandalism, attacks on citizens in their homes and in
their shops, in order to provoke and terrorize them; and
the kidnapping of individuals for ransom, which is then
used to support terrorist activities.

33

S/PV.6767

The number of army, police and security
personnel kidnapped between 24 March to 26 April
alone is 220 individuals. Some of those organized
terrorist acts have carried the hallmarks of Al-Qaida
method and ideology, including the mutilation of
corpses, the killing of entire families on the basis of
purely sectarian affiliation, and the carrying out of
simultaneous suicide explosions in separate areas.
Since the beginning of the aforementioned events,
we have conscientiously stressed that armed terrorist
organizations associated with Al-Qaida are carrying out
the atrocities in Syria, but many political parties and
hostile media have cast doubt on our assertions. Today
we are witnessing the public endorsement by groups
and organizations affiliated with Al-Qaida of terrorist
activities and operations carried out in Syria in
response to appeals issued by leaders of Al-Qaida such
as Ayman Al-Zawahiri, who has called for jihad in
Syria.
Statements have also been made by the leaders of
Western intelligence agencies, admitting that the
Al-Qaida branch in a State bordering on Syria was
behind the recent terrorist bombings in Damascus and
Aleppo, following the infiltration by Al-Qaida
elements into the ranks of the armed opposition
fighting the Syrian Government. Arab and non-Arab
media are reporting on a daily basis the deaths in Syria
of foreign fighters of various nationalities in the course
of undertaking terrorist operations. Indeed, some
Al-Qaida-affiliated websites have been lamenting the
loss of members of their groups in carrying out
terrorist activities in Syria.
I have a list of 26 names of terrorists, some of
whom are affiliated with Al-Qaida. We have
transmitted the list to the Secretary-General, the
President of the Security Council and the Chairman of
its counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies. We also have
recordings of those same individuals confessing that
they are terrorists and had entered the country to carry
out terrorist operations. This evidence is available from
our delegation, and we are pleased to provide any
member of the Security Council with copies.
Furthermore, we are in possession of copious
documentary evidence of terrorist activities, all in
English, and the names and citizenship of terrorists and
those who have incited and supported them. Members
of the Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
Chairmen of the Council’s subsidiary bodies shall soon

34

receive this evidence. We also have a list of the names
of 12 foreign terrorists who have been killed in Syria,
including a French, a British and a Belgian citizen.
This list is also available from our delegation, and we
request you, Sir, to distribute it among the members of
the Security Council.
Terrorist operations cannot be carried out without
financing and support in the form of funds, weapons
and operatives. Unfortunately, some Arab States and
States of the region and beyond have provided such
resources to help armed terrorist groups carry out
terrorist activities in Syria. Those countries have
publically and openly pledged to provide support in the
form of weapons, funds, training and safe havens to
help terrorists carry out acts of terrorism and sabotage
against the peace and security of the Syrian State and
people. To that end, they are engaged in illegal crossborder movements from neighbouring States.
The smuggling of funds and weapons to armed
groups is a reality encountered on a daily and even
hourly basis by the customs authorities and border
guards of Syria. High-level officials of Syria’s
neighbours have spoken publically about disrupting the
smuggling of weapons, money and people into Syria.
For example, on 20 March the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lebanon spoke of the arrest by the Lebanese
authorities of 27 individuals on charges of smuggling
weapons into Syria. The Director of the General
Security Service of Jordan has spoken of the detention
by the Jordanian authorities of a number of individuals
attempting to sneak weapons into Syria through our
border crossings.
We have sent dozens of letters to the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General on this
topic. The most recent was that of 24 April concerning
terrorists, most affiliated with Al-Qaida, who had been
arrested in Syria following their infiltration of our
borders for the purpose of undertaking terrorist
operations. I should like to inform the Council that, on
27 April, the Lebanese authorities detained and seized
the vessel Lutfallah II, which had sailed from Misurata,
Libya, to Lebanon via Alexandria, Egypt, carrying 180
tons of weapons and advanced communications
equipment,
including
rocket-propelled
grenade
launchers, French anti-tank and anti-aircraft launchers,
and large amounts of TNT. This weaponry was
intended to be smuggled into Syria for use in armed
terrorist operations.

12-33504

S/PV.6767

Statements have also been issued by certain
armed terrorist groups, noting earlier successes in
smuggling shipments of weapons, including American
Stinger anti-aircraft rockets, into Syria. At the same
time, a high-level official of the Libyan National
Transitional Council had announced that 5,000 antiaircraft had been misplaced or lost from Libyan
arsenals. There have also been reports of Turkish and
Libyan cooperation with other Arab and non-Arab
States in sending lethal weapons to armed groups in
order to sow death and destruction in Syria. I find it
strange that the aforementioned ship entered Lebanese
territorial waters via Egypt, passing without
interdiction the positions occupied by the maritime
units of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Agreements to conspire to smuggle weapons and
to facilitate the entry of terrorists into Syria undermine
all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis there
and to facilitate the implementation of the Security
Council’s resolutions and Mr. Annan’s peace plan.
Indeed, they reflect an attempt to undo Mr. Annan’s
mission and a blatant attack on Syrian sovereignty.
The Security Council, at a meeting presided over
by the President of Azerbaijan last week (see
S/PV.6765), reaffirmed in presidential statement
S/PRST/2012/17
its
strong
and
unequivocal
denunciation and condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of its perpetrators,
location or purposes. We call on the Council to
translate those words into deeds, to take the immediate
actions necessary to stop all terrorist activities in Syria,
and to exert maximum pressure on the States that are
facilitating, financing and inciting the groups
undertaking such activities to comply with the
Council’s resolutions concerning terrorism and Syria.
Terrorist acts have spilled the precious blood of
our people. The day will come when we shall call to
account all those who have taken part in, incited,
financed or facilitated such activities. Terrorism is an
international crime that requires an international
response. That was the gist of the presidential
statement issued on behalf of all members of the
Council. Accordingly, the fight against terrorism
cannot be selective, relative or subjective. It must
match deeds to words. We also call on the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 1373 (2001) to complete their mandated
tasks and to implement the substance of these
resolutions with respect to events in Syria.

12-33504

The terrorist activities now taking place in Syria,
which target the stability of the State, the nation and
society, are no less dangerous than the terrorist
activities that targeted New York on 11 September and
the terrorist activities that targeted Madrid and London.
There is no righteous terrorism and malicious terrorism.
There is only one terrorism that must be combated. The
terrorism that targets Syria is the same as the one that
targeted New York, London, Madrid and other cities.
There are also media, cultural, political and economic
terrorism. It is all terrorism. There is no merit for a
Member State of this Organization to finance the
creation of a centre for counter-terrorism while it
stands behind the incitement to terrorism and finances
terrorist groups in my country. Terrorism is one and the
same.
Finally, terrorism throughout the world is caused
primarily by Zionist terrorism, which was initiated by
Israel much earlier in the life of this international
Organization. In 1954, Israel hijacked a Syrian aircraft.
It was the first time ever that a civilian aircraft had
been hijacked. Later, Israel carried out a series of
terrorist activities that you are well aware of and which
led to the displacement of millions of Palestinians from
their homes. The course of Israeli terrorism has
continued to this day. The words that you heard from
the speaker who spoke before me were merely a
distraction to divert attention from Israeli terrorism, the
sole purpose of which is to undermine the possibility of
establishing a Palestinian State in the West Bank and
Gaza and to focus attention on issues other than State
terrorism, a form of terrorism that is well-evidenced in
thousands of documents issued by the United Nations
in New York and Geneva.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. White (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Council today. I
would also like to thank the Chairs of the three
Committees, Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu, for
their valuable and informative briefings and for their
leadership of the key subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council.
Unfortunately, as we know and have been
reminded today, terrorism remains a key threat to
international peace and security. Comprehensive and
coordinated action remains essential if we are to
address the threat of terrorism. To that end, Australia is

35

S/PV.6767

strongly committed to promoting the universal and
effective implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). We have conducted numerous
outreach and capacity-building activities focused on
assisting countries in developing and strengthening
their legal frameworks and technical capabilities. In the
past two years, Australia has provided counterterrorism financing, capacity-building and technical
assistance to over 30 countries in the Pacific, SouthEast Asia, South Asia and Africa. This is an area in
which Australia has particular expertise and which we
are committed to sharing with others.
In relation to resolution 1373 (2001), in June the
International Organization for Migration will hold a
border security workshop in Nigeria, which Australia is
sponsoring. We are also supporting a new United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime programme of
work on counter-terrorism financing and anti-money
laundering in Kenya and Somalia. This builds on a
workshop Australia presented for East African
Community countries last month on counter-terrorism
financing and anti-money laundering.
We were also pleased to have the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Ambassador Sangqu, speak at the fourth
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum Inter-Sessional Meeting on Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament in Sydney in March. That meeting
was an important opportunity to raise awareness of the
work of the 1540 Committee and to share best
practices on strengthening resolution 1540 (2004) in
the Asia-Pacific region, and we would like to
acknowledge
Ambassador
Sangqu’s
important
contribution.
Australia remains committed to promoting the
implementation of the resolutions on counter-terrorism
and to assisting countries to build and develop their
capacities both in our region and beyond. More broadly
on the United Nations counter-terrorism agenda,
Australia looks forward to a constructive review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June, in which
we will engage actively. We welcome the suggestion
for the establishment of a new counter-terrorism
coordination position and see great benefit in greater
cooperation among United Nations entities to ensure
coordination and coherence in counter-terrorism efforts
of the United Nations system.

36

I now wish to make some comments on the 1267
Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Australia believes in the
importance of the United Nations setting an example
with regard to the principles it seeks to promote. As the
Secretary-General has noted recently in his latest
report entitled “Delivering justice: programme of
action to strengthen the rule of law at the national and
international levels” (A/66/749), the application of
basic rule-of-law principles is crucial to the legitimacy
of actions taken by the principal organs of the United
Nations, including the Security Council. This is a key
part of strengthening the rule of law at the international
level.
We strongly support efforts to improve the
fairness, transparency and effectiveness of United
Nations sanctions system procedures. To ensure that
only the appropriate people and entities remain listed,
it is crucial for individuals and entities to understand
the reasons for their listing and to be afforded the
opportunity to provide information so that delisting can
occur when appropriate. It is also important for the
Security Council sanctions system to be able to
withstand domestic legal challenge if it is to remain
effective.
We believe that the establishment of the
Ombudsperson for the 1267 sanctions regime has been
an important step forward in strengthening fair
procedures, particularly in relation to delisting requests.
In that regard, we wish to acknowledge and thank Ms.
Kimberly Prost for her tireless efforts, including her
active outreach activities and in keeping the Security
Council apprised of her Office’s activities. The Office
has only been operational a short time and yet has
established a substantial caseload, resulting in 13
individuals and 23 entities being delisted. Without the
Ombudsperson’s recommendations, such individuals
may well have remained inappropriately subject to the
effect and stigma of sanctions.
Australia was particularly pleased with the
strengthened role of the Ombudsperson provided by
resolution 1989 (2011), which served to increase the
transparency of the listing and delisting processes. In
terms of delisting, the changes ensure that greater
weight
is
given
to
the
Ombudsperson’s
recommendations through the Committee process. That
strengthens the independence of the Office and also the
ability of the petitioner to be heard. Due process is also
strengthened by the emphasis given in resolution 1989
(2011) to the provision of reasons by the Committee,

12-33504

S/PV.6767

such as when the Committee has decided to reject a
delisting request.

we are determined to contribute to all actions
undertaken by the United Nations in their support.

As a practical matter, Australia believes that the
delisting process can work effectively only if the
Ombudsperson has the relevant information needed to
enable her to make an informed recommendation to the
Committee. Recommendations should be made on the
basis of complete information. Providing a petitioner
with detailed reasons as to why their delisting request
was accepted or denied is fundamental to ensuring that
due process is followed. Australia has, along with a
number of other States whose representatives spoke
today, concluded arrangements with the Office of the
Ombudsperson to share confidential information. We
urge all Member States to consider entering into
similar arrangements and to cooperate fully with any
requests for information by the Ombudsperson.

In particular, we are continuing our close
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). At the national level, the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate has prepared a list of
recommendations and updated its preliminary
implementation assessment of Armenia. Armenia has
already submitted five detailed, comprehensive reports,
and we will continue our constructive dialogue aimed
at the full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Finally, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral last year in his report on strengthening and
coordinating United Nations rule-of-law activities
(S/2011/634), Australia considers that further
consideration should be given to extending the
mandate of the Ombudsperson across other sanctions
regimes. We recognize the role of the delisting focal
points in relation to the other regimes, and we also
recognize that the Al-Qaida sanctions regime is of a
different nature from the others. However, in our view,
we should consider extending the level of protection
provided by the Ombudsperson to the other regimes.
Greater uniformity across the regimes could serve to
improve the overall effectiveness of the United Nations
sanctions system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I thank the members of
the Security Council for the opportunity to participate
in this briefing. Armenia aligns itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union.
However, we would also like to make some remarks in
our national capacity.
We appreciate the efforts of the Chairs of the
Committees aimed at strengthening dialogue and
mutual understanding among States, the United
Nations and civil society in combating the scourge of
terrorism. Armenia is fully committed to working with
the Committees established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1989, and 1540 (2004), and

12-33504

Armenia
has
already
demonstrated
its
commitment to combating terrorism and has lent its
support to the international efforts against it. We are a
State party to United Nations, Council of Europe and
Commonwealth of Independent States counterterrorism instruments, and have enacted the national
legislation necessary to their timely implementation,
while effectively observing the rule of law and human
rights, which are fundamental to the fight against
terrorism. As noted in the report of the most recent
CTC visit to my country, Armenia has enacted
legislation in conjunction with the requirements of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; moreover,
the Armenian Government has introduced further
amendments in connection with counter-terrorism
financing legislation.
Looking at the issue of counter-terrorism from a
regional perspective, and given the geographic position
of the countries in our region, we believe that those
countries could benefit from the establishment of
common mechanisms for developing a more coordinated
approach to combating terrorism. Unilaterally, we have
adopted practical and effective border-control measures,
and have demonstrated a strong interest in acquiring
more technology and equipment of the kind necessary
to further enhance the existing border security regime.
However, the fact that borders with some of our
neighbours are closed has discouraged regional border
security cooperation in that very sensitive geostrategic
area.
In that context, I would like to express our
concern, noting that a number of recent reports by
international and regional organizations clearly reflect
the fact that the territory of our neighbour Azerbaijan is
actively used by various terrorist and religious
extremist groups and structures, and serves as a safe
haven for their criminal activities. Those groups have

37

S/PV.6767

sought to move people, money and weapons through
the Caucasus, and international organizations have
issued alarming assessments of Azerbaijan’s counterterrorism efforts. The close links between the
Azerbaijan authorities and the terrorist groups
affiliated with Al-Qaida who fought in the war against
Nagorno Karabakh in the early 1990s are also widely
known and documented. Because of the transnational
nature of the crime of terrorism and the lack of
regional cooperation, we have to be vigilant and not
allow this situation to continue to be exploited by
radical elements for the purpose of recruitment for
terrorism and provocations.
Lastly, addressing the fight against terrorism from
an international standpoint, Armenia firmly believes
that international and regional organizations must
strengthen their cooperation, including by assisting
with know-how and other related help. In that context,
we would welcome cooperation between NATO and
States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization through bilateral means in areas of
mutual interest relating to the fight against terrorism.
Today, the international community is united in
condemning terrorist acts, providing unique momentum
for a comprehensive approach to cooperating in the
adoption of effective tools and mechanisms for
eliminating terrorism. I assure the members of the
Council of Armenia’s commitment and readiness to
work with the Committees, and I thank the Chairs for
their valuable participation. We look forward to
continuing our work on this important issue.

38

The President: I will now make a short statement
in my national capacity.
It is unfortunate that the representative of
Armenia has attempted to use the opportunity of our
debate to make groundless, propagandistic statements.
It is well known that international Armenian terrorism
has bloody, historic antecedents in the perpetration of
numerous terroristic acts in various countries and the
killing of thousands of innocent people.
I would like to inform the Security Council that
yesterday a letter was sent to the Secretary-General
containing information on facts that attest to Armenia’s
organization and implementation of numerous terrorist
acts against Azerbaijan and other countries. That
information affords Council members and the broader
international community an opportunity to make their
own assessment of the matter and to draw conclusions
about this hopeless attempt by Armenian propaganda to
mislead the United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

12-33504
