S/PV.7884

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7884th meeting

Wednesday, 15 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Arancibia Fernández
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2017/94)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-04078 (E)
*1704078*

S/PV.7884

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Malinga and two of his men were fatally struck during
the exchange of fire that followed, while three Central
African gendarmes were wounded. As a result of the
operation, MINUSCA and the internal security forces
continued to conduct robust patrols and outreach
to communities.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2017/94)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale,
Permanent Representative of Morocco in his capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/94, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central AfricanRepublic.
I now give the f loor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): The Security
Council has before it the report (S/2017/94) of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I should like to begin by giving
the Council a brief overview of the main developments
since the publication of the report.
The security situation in Bangui as a whole has
gradually stabilized over the past few months. On
7 February, Central African internal security forces
supported by MINUSCA launched an operation
in Bangui to apprehend Youssouf Malinga, selfproclaimed leader of a self-defence group that on
several occasions threatened civilians and fuelled
inter-community tensions. Malinga’s bodyguards
opened fire indiscriminately in the course of the
operation, killing two civilians and wounding a child.
2/11

15/02/2017

In contrast to the relative calm in Bangui, violence
associated with the seasonal migration continued in the
north-west of the country. However, it should be noted
that in general the movement of shepherds with their
millions of head of livestock takes place peacefully.
There is also the problem of ongoing clashes between
rival ex-Séléka factions — such as the Front populaire
pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and the
Union pour la paix en Centrafrique — which clearly
continues to undermine the central region, along with
a worrying ethnic connotation. The continuing clashes
are fuelled by power struggles and disputes regarding
control over resources and access to transport
routes — all of which threatens the peace process in
the country. But that also constitutes an intolerable
burden for the population, as well as aggravating an
already alarming humanitarian situation.
It is in that context, and against the backdrop
MINUSCA’s efforts to protect civilians, that on
11 February MINUSCA attack helicopters engaged a
column of approximately 300 elements of the coalition
led by the FPRC moving with pick-up trucks heavily
armed with machine guns. The goal of the operation for
us was to deter the group from crossing a demarcation
line. We had told them and other warring parties
about it in advance, as we wished to prevent a major
conf lict from occurring in the strategically important
town of Bambari, on the Ouaka river. One of the only
bridges over the river is located there, so this was
very important.
As part of its intervention, MINUSCA destroyed
at least four pickups, all this following very strong
warnings from the Mission to both parties to the effect
that MINUSCA was determined to use force to protect
civilians, in line with its mandate and with the appeals
made by the subregion, the African Union (AU) and the
Government of the Central African Republic, which
have continued to call for robust action on our part.
Despite our intervention and our advocacy efforts
with the armed groups, certain coalition elements were
nevertheless able to enter the town of Ippy, which is
further west. Since then we have strengthened our
17-04078

15/02/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

temporary operational bases in the zone and established
a checkpoint north-east of Bambari to prevent any new
movements by the coalition towards Bambari, which,
again, is very strategically important. We deployed two
sections of the Portuguese rapid-intervention force that
has just been deployed to the Central African Republic,
alongside two special-forces detachments around the
town. I would note here that the Government issued a
declaration on 13 February expressing firm support for
MINUSCA’s actions and urging the warring parties to
immediately cease hostilities. The Secretary-General
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the AU representative in Bangui both
issued declarations expressing strong concern at the
continued fighting between armed groups.
This leads me to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) policy. As the Council is
aware, an agreement on a strategy in that respect
was reached with 12 of the armed groups within the
framework of the Consultative Follow-up Committee,
headed by President Touadera. However, the situation
is constrained by the fact that the two principal armed
groups that I have already mentioned, Noureddine
Adam’s FPRC and Maxime Mokom’s anti-balaka
group, remain outside of the framework of the DDR
agreement. Along with the Government, we are
continuing to engage with both groups to try to get
them on board, since it is clear that if there is a DDR
process to which not all armed groups have signed
on, in the absence of a broader agreement aimed at
addressing the legitimate grievances of those groups,
the inclusiveness of the process cannot be guaranteed.
We know from our experience in other contexts that
a DDR process that does not include all warring parties
is likely to encounter major difficulties and be doomed
to failure. We know also that for a DDR process to
have greater credibility, the overall environment must
be secure. In that respect, the two recent events that
took place in Bangui and in the Bambari region remain
causes for concern.
That is why, while continuing to aim for a broad
agreement encompassing all parties, we are continuing
to undertake a series of actions aimed at reducing
the level of intercommunal violence and prolonging
the pre-DDR initiative, which has already mobilized
some 4,000 former combatants. In particular, we are
exploring the possibility of implementing, jointly with
the Government and the World Bank, a pilot DDR
integration project that would ensure the disarmament

S/PV.7884

and demobilization of 480 former combatants, half
of whom would be integrated into the gendarmerie,
following proper vetting procedures, and the other half
involved in social reintegration activities.
All of this, in particular the recalcitrant attitude
of these groups, must be addressed. In that context, I
should like to highlight the initiative just undertaken
by the African Union, ECCAS and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, accompanied
by Angola, Chad and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to promote an African initiative for peace and
reconciliation between the Government and all the
armed groups in the Central African Republic.
The United Nations welcomes and supports
this African initiative, as clearly this is a matter of
collectively paving the way for a resolution of the
conf lict and the lasting peace that the Central African
Republic has so long desired.
I believe that the efforts personally undertaken by
President Touadera vis-à-vis the armed groups should
continue, and all of these initiatives and elements must
be brought together. We must also safeguard the gains
made by the Bangui Forum and continue to work as
proactively as possible towards achieving the goals of
justice and reconciliation. However, the armed groups,
and this is a very clear message that I am addressing
to them, must not forget that the vast majority of the
population of the Central African Republic aspires to
the restoration of peace.
Let us not overlook the fact that we have made
progress, in the framework of a formal dialogue, on all
these initiatives. We deem particularly interesting the
fact that on 30 January the national authorities launched
a national campaign to recruit 500 police officers and
gendarmes. We would note, moreover, that the first
infantry company of the Central African Republic
armed forces, which was trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission, will soon be deployable. In
addition, the appointment of the Special Prosecutor of
the Special Criminal Court, whose selection we were
eagerly awaiting, was announced this very day by the
President; this is a very significant step forward in this
process of ensuring justice for all.
MINUSCA is continuing to adapt to this evolving
situation. We have significantly rearranged our
deployment scheme and have endeavoured to enhance
mobility. In particular, we have reduced the number of
bases so as to ensure greater f lexibility. We now have

17-040783/11

S/PV.7884

The situation in the Central African Republic

15/02/2017

the Portuguese quick-reaction force. An intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance company has been
deployed. The air f leet has been reviewed, with
particular focus on our night medical evacuation
capability. We are also about to deploy a surveillance
drone company provided by the French armed forces; I
believe this will have a strong deterrent effect on those
who continue to create problems on the ground.

probable. And that posed a grave threat to the subregion.
There was the security risk, a variety of destabilizing
elements and extremism in the country and region.
That is why the Council at the time recognized how
urgent it was to act by authorizing the deployment of
MINUSCA, building on the work that had already been
accomplished by the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic.

In that context, we would have hoped to begin to
see some peace dividends. Sadly, they remain elusive,
as the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate;
violence in the provinces is contributing to this state of
affairs. Indeed, 2.2 million people, that is, more than
half of the population, are affected to various degrees
by food insecurity — the highest percentage in the
world. Recent events have also led to the displacement
of another 100,000 persons, which is a problem of
course. It is also an issue for humanitarian actors,
as the environment in the Central African Republic
remains dangerous for them. It should be noted that
31 per cent — practically one third — of security
incidents around the world in 2016 affecting the staff
of non-governmental organizations took place, sadly,
in the Central African Republic.

Although that had its difficulties, I believe it can be
said that the combined efforts of the Mission, the forces
of Operation Sangaris and, at the time, the European
Union-led peacekeeping force made it possible to avoid
additional mass atrocities. Above all, those efforts
also made it possible to avoid the complete collapse
of the Central African State. Constitutional order
has been restored. The Central African Republic is
moving forward under its President and Government.
It has a functional Parliament. The authority of the
State is being strengthened in the provinces. All of
that should be taken into account without, however,
deluding ourselves.

Last November during the conference held by the
European Union, the Central African Republic received
pledges of €2.2 billion, which is significant. Given the
current situation, I believe it is now more important
than ever that the countries and organizations that
pledged funds fulfil their promises and disburse those
funds. On the occasion of that conference, we signed
the Mutual Engagement Framework, also known as the
compact, a significant instrument that the Ambassador
of the Central African Republic recently shared
with the Council. It is a mechanism of extraordinary
importance intended to strengthen the partnership
between the country and the international community.
I am absolutely convinced that it will help us in the
coming period to address the deep-rooted causes of
the conf lict. In that regard, we will continue to do our
utmost to support the authorities and to ensure that this
receives the relevant follow up.
MINUSCA is the Organization’s youngest
peacekeeping operation. Soon three years will have
passed since its inception. It will have been one year
since President Touadera took office. Let us examine
how far we have come. Three years ago the Central
African Republic was on the brink of the abyss.
Genocide was more than possible — it even seemed
4/11

Of course there are problems, but indicators are
pointing generally in the right direction. I will give a
small example. We all know how important agriculture
is to the country. Last year agricultural production
rose 26.3 per cent. That would suggest that farmers
are returning. Moreover, we are seeing displaced
persons returning to some of the regions, beginning
to cultivate their lands once again. The economy has
been stimulated.
We must not stop there. We must learn from past
experience. There is one lesson in particular. Too often
in the past the international community has reacted
only at the height of a crisis. Then, as soon as the
main symptoms have disappeared, the international
community turns its attention away from the country
and the crisis. In such cases, there is the danger of the
resurgence of the crisis, and that must be avoided. We
need to consolidate using all available means. We need
to consolidate the economy and human rights. That is
the purpose of the agencies and international financial
institutions. Clearly for MINUSCA, stability, the
establishment of lasting peace, the progress of national
reconciliation and combating impunity and transitional
justice are crucial. Disarming armed groups and
security sector reform are also essential. Focus should
be placed on the most affected regions.
17-04078

15/02/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

More than ever, MINUSCA and the United Nations
system as a whole must continue to support the people
of the Central African Republic, thereby building a
foundation for sustainable peace and development,
such as established by the mutually agreed priorities
in the compact. The Mission cannot be seen as the only
answer to all the challenges being faced. However,
provided that the established partnerships endure and
grow stronger, and provided that the population itself
is determined, then the establishment of lasting peace
in the Central African Republic is within reach.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladous for his briefing.
I now give the f loor to Ambassador Hilale.
Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): I would like to begin
by congratulating Ukraine on its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. I would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your invitation. It is a pleasure and an honour for me
to brief the Security Council on behalf of the members
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in my capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic Peacebuilding
Commission country-specific configuration.
I would also like to welcome the very detailed
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, on the
situation in the Central African Republic. I also wish
to commend him and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
for their tireless efforts to build peace in the Central
African Republic.
I will brief Council members on current challenges
and opportunities with respect to peacebuilding
in the Central African Republic. As mentioned by
Mr. Ladsous and pointed out in the report (S/2017/94)
of the Secretary-General, the security situation in
the country remains volatile despite the efforts of the
Government and the presence of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Recent clashes pitting the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique, led by Noureddine
Adam, and the Mouvement patriotique pour la
Centrafrique of Al-Khatim Mahamat, against the
Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, led by Ali Darassa,
as well as other clashes — notably those highlighted by
Mr. Ladsous in his briefing this morning — have led
to the loss of hundreds of lives and the displacement

S/PV.7884

of thousands of women, men and children. Those
unacceptable attacks serve to highlight the need to
focus our efforts first and foremost on the stabilization
of the security situation in the country in order to
avoid more loss of life, displacement, and also to avoid
actions that might compromise the progress achieved
thus far in different key areas.
In that regard, the Central African Republic
country-specific
configuration
welcomes
the
commitment of the national authorities to move
forward, and we congratulate them for the adoption of
the national strategy for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation; the national security
policy; as well as the five-year plan for capacity-building
and development of the police and gendarmerie.
Furthermore, the adoption of the strategy for
national reconciliation, as well as the recent vote
by Parliament on legislation for the establishment
of institutions enshrined in the Constitution, will
contribute significantly to the long-term stability of the
country. We have reached a critical juncture where the
leadership of the Government, with the support of the
international community, must be bolstered in order to
build peace and combat the deep-rooted causes of the
conf lict, thereby paving the way for lasting peace in
the Central African Republic.
We would like to congratulate all of the
stakeholders who contributed to the success of the
Brussels Conference for the Central African Republic
held on 17 November 2016. In preparing for that
conference, a meeting of the configuration was
convened on 2 November 2016. During that meeting,
configuration members were briefed by Ambassador
Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the European
Union Delegation to the United Nations; by Mr. JeanChristophe Garret, Director of the country office of
the World Bank for the Central African Republic; and
by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacebuilding Support and Head of the
Peacebuilding Support Office, who also spoke on
behalf of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
During the same meeting, the representative of
the World Bank underscored the excellent cooperation
on the ground generally speaking with MINUSCA, in
particular in preparing for the Brussels Conference. I
also noted that the representative of the World Bank
warned against the risks of underinvestment in security
and disarmament, which he considers as priorities and

17-040785/11

S/PV.7884

The situation in the Central African Republic

necessary for the success of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan.
The Brussels Conference resulted in significant
commitments of more than $2.2 billion of the
$3 billion needed to implement the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan. The Plan includes three key
pillars: promoting peace, security and reconciliation;
renewing the social contract between the State and the
population; and facilitating economic recovery. In that
context, the Central African Republic configuration
will devote a meeting to each of the three pillars,
bringing together all the players concerned in order to
discuss how to best support the advisory council for
the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, which was
established by His Excellency President Touadera.
Our efforts will also be devoted to the successful
implementation of the Mutual Engagement Framework,
a mechanism with which the Peacebuilding Commission
has extensive experience, given that similar agreements
have been implemented in other countries that are on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, such as
Liberia and Guinea. As mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, the configuration encourages the
Government, as well as its international partners, to
make use of the monitoring mechanisms of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and of the Mutual
Engagement Framework in order to promote progress
in different key areas, such as security, reconciliation
and the provision of basic public services.
The ongoing projects supported by the Peacebuilding
Fund are already aligned with the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan and the Mutual Engagement
Framework. In 2016, an initiative to reduce community
violence was implemented by the International
Organization for Migration, under the leadership of
MINUSCA, and provided temporary employment
to approximately 2,000 ex-Séléka combatants and
members of the communities to which they returned. In
addition, the Fund supported the restoration of public
security and basic services, including the rehabilitation
and equipping of administrative buildings in the Obo
and Birao prefectures. A major support package from
the Fund for the fight against impunity, security sector
reform and the promotion of political dialogue will be
deployed in 2017 to help kick-start the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
the Mutual Engagement Framework.
6/11

15/02/2017

With regard to the subregion, which has always
played an important role in the Central African Republic,
the configuration would like to encourage the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union in their recent mediation efforts with a view
to strengthening the dialogue process initiated by the
Government with the armed groups. The configuration
also welcomes the upcoming participation of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the first meeting of the
International Support Group, a mechanism established
to take the place of the International Contact Group on
the Central African Republic.
The configuration would also like to welcome the
African Union Solidarity Conference for the Central
African Republic, which was held on 1 February,
following the twenty-eighth African Union Summit,
held in Addis Ababa. This African Union initiative is
aimed at mobilizing additional support in Africa for
post-conf lict reconstruction and development, as well
as for peacebuilding efforts in the Central African
Republic in line with the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan.
Finally, the configuration will continue to support
the establishment of the special criminal court and to
inform its members through the reference group on the
rule of law in the Central African Republic, with the
support of the Global Focal Point. In that context, the
configuration welcomes today’s appointment of the
Special Prosecutor. We hope that the appointment of
the international magistrates will take place as soon
as possible so that the court can convene as quickly as
possible. We also welcome with gratitude the pledges
to finance the Court’s operations.
I would like to conclude by thanking the
Central African authorities for their support for
the configuration’s activities. I would also like to
thank the members of the configuration and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and his team, as well as the Peacebuilding Support
Office, for their assistance, efforts and support for
the work and contribution of the Central African
Republic configuration.
The President: I thank Ambassador Hilale for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic.
17-04078

15/02/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

I have the honour to brief the members of the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic. In my statement, I intend to ref lect on my
role as Chair since I last briefed the Council on 8 July
2016 (see S/PV.7734), and in doing so highlight the
work of the Committee and the Panel of Experts.
There have been a number of positive developments
in the Central African Republic, many of which have
already been mentioned by Mr. Ladsous, including
progress in disarmament and demobilization and
security sector reform, the improvement in the security
situation in Bangui, and the successful Brussels
Conference in November. However, despite those
developments, renewed violence in the central and
northern parts of the country, as documented by the
Panel of Experts, has reached a scale and intensity
that has not been witnessed since early 2014, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the upsurge
in fighting.
On 5 August 2016, the Committee heard a
presentation from the Coordinator of the Panel of
Experts in connection with the Panel’s midterm report.
The Coordinator observed that ex-Séléka armed
groups remained in control of key parts of central and
eastern Central African Republic and that the rivalry
between the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique armed group of sanctioned individual
Nourredine Adam on one side, and by the Union pour la
paix en Centrafrique (UPC) of Ali Darassa on the other,
have negatively affected the humanitarian situation in
the country. According to the Panel, arms-smuggling
had continued in eastern part of the country through
two routes: Am Dafok, north of Birao bordering the
Sudan; and Bema, south-east of Bangassou bordering
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On 5 August, Committee members also heard
a briefing from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conf lict,
Ms. Bangura, who observed that, throughout the
conf lict, sexual violence had been systematically used
by the armed groups in a climate of total impunity. She
underlined the importance of the timely establishment
of the special criminal court as an accountability
measure in the fight against impunity. The Special
Representative also encouraged delegations to consider
adding names of individuals responsible for acts of
sexual violence to the Committee’s sanctions list.

S/PV.7884

On 23 August 2016, the Committee added two
individuals to its sanctions list, Ali Kony and Salim
Kony, whose father is sanctioned Lord’s Resistance
Army leader Joseph Kony. In that connection, I wish
to thank the Panel of Experts for having submitted
to the Committee four statements of case in 2016 for
possible sanctions designation. Since its establishment,
the Panel has submitted a total of 29 statements of
case. The Committee also has before it the proposed
designations of two individuals which are currently
on hold. I hope that we can move forward on these
proposals in due course.
On 9 September, the Committee held its sixth
formal meeting, convened with the representatives of
the Central African Republic and the regional States
Chad, Ethiopia, South Africa, the Sudan and Uganda,
in connection with the Panel’s midterm report. The
Coordinator underlined that the violent incidents
of June 2016 in Bangui and north-eastern Central
African Republic were a reminder that the security
situation remained fragile. In the north, the violence
was motivated by the desire of various Séléka groups
to control not only transhumance routes and mining
zones, but also oil concessions and related employment
opportunities in private security. The Panel reported
that sanctioned Nourredine Adam’s efforts to reunify
ex-Séléka factions had been unsuccessful, and that
Adam’s FPRC fighters were engaged against the
UPC of Ali Darassa. On the arms embargo, the Panel
encouraged regional States to cooperate with the
Central African Republic authorities on submitting
exemption requests to repatriate military equipment
in their possession that belongs to the Central African
Armed Forces, the Forces armées centrafricaines
(FACA). The Coordinator also highlighted the issue of
reported travel ban violations by sanctioned individuals
Nourredine Adam and François Bozizé, and reminded
regional States to use relevant exemption procedures to
ensure compliance with the sanctions regime.
On 2 December 2016, the Coordinator presented
an overview of the findings and recommendations
contained in the Panel’s final report, noting that
while progress had been made on disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration and
security sector reform, renewed violence in the central
and northern Central African Republic harkened back
to the atrocities of early 2014. Anti-balaka groups
had first moved to Kaga Bandoro and Bambari to
confront ex-Séléka, but lately some had started

17-040787/11

S/PV.7884

The situation in the Central African Republic

cooperating with ex-Séléka in fighting against the
UPC. Inter-Séléka rivalries had further intensified in
Bria and its surroundings. In connection with calls by
several Central African Republic Government officials
to lift the arms embargo, the Panel expressed the view
that the restoration of a single chain of command of
FACA and effective control over national stockpiles
were a precondition to allowing the rearming of
FACA. Furthermore, the Panel reported that weapons
continued to pour into the country via arms trafficking
supply routes from the neighbouring States to the west,
south and northeast.
On 25 January 2017, the Committee held its seventh
formal meeting of the representatives of the Central
African Republic and the regional States — Cameroon,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Republic of the Congo — as well as fellow Committee
members Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa, the Sudan
and Uganda, convened in connection with the Panel’s
final report. The Coordinator highlighted a number
of recent alleged travel ban violations by sanctioned
individuals Nourredine Adam and François Bozizé,
namely, Bozizé’s travel through Kenya on 18 November
2016, and Adam’s travel from the Central African
Republic to Sido, southern Chad, on 30 October 2016,
and from Moundou in southern Chad to Luanda on
14 December 2016. The delegation of South Africa also
provided additional information in connection with its
post-facto travel ban exemption request regarding the
October 2015 travel of Bozizé.
Several of the participating regional States
underlined their inability to control their vast and
porous borders, and encouraged the international
community to provide assistance in order to prevent
the illicit trafficking of arms and ammunition. For
my part, I conveyed appreciation to the delegations of
Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda for having hosted visits
by the Panel in October 2016, and reiterated my call on
all regional States to continue further strengthening
cooperation with the Panel, in particular as regards the
Panel’s visits to Chad and the Republic of the Congo
in the first half of this year. I also encouraged regional
States to consider returning lethal and non-lethal
equipment to FACA and conveyed my readiness to
assist States in preparing the relevant exemption
requests to the Committee. The Committee looks
forward to further information from the delegation of
Cameroon in that regard.
8/11

15/02/2017

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to provide guidance to the Central African
Republic authorities and regional States concerning the
implementation of the arms embargo and, in particular,
by providing detailed information on the relevant
exemptions procedures and the information requested
in the Committee’s guidelines. Let me also note that the
Committee has been actively working with the Panel
of Experts and other stakeholders, and is committed
to continuing the dialogue and discussions with the
Central African Republic Government in the future. I
am convinced that the current security situation in the
centre and north of the Central African Republic, as
well as the abundance of arms in the country, oblige
the Committee and the Security Council to continue
closely monitoring the situation on the ground. In that
respect, I wish to reiterate that the embargo must be
implemented in order to protect the civilian population
from continuing to bear the brunt of the conf lict. In
order to do that, we need to have better cooperation
among regional States to effectively counter illegal
arms trafficking and the recruitment of foreign fighters
by armed groups.
Concerning the travel ban, the Committee and
I myself, in my capacity as Chair, have continued
to actively engage with concerned regional
States — namely, Chad, Kenya, Ethiopia and South
Africa — via letters and during formal meetings,
advising of the crucial importance of ensuring that
all mediation initiatives be conducted in conformity
with sanctions measures, by using appropriate travel
ban exemption procedures in pursuance of resolution
2339 (2017) and the Committee guidelines. Also, as no
feedback was forthcoming, my representative and the
representative of the Security Council presidency for
the month of September engaged bilaterally with the
delegation of Kenya to seek pertinent information with
regard to alleged travel ban violations by sanctioned
individual François Bozizé to Nairobi.
Similarly, the Panel has been actively engaging
with concerned States by providing information on
reported violations of the travel ban and advising on
relevant exemption procedures. I would like to assure
colleagues that the Committee will continue to work
on the matter to ensure the effective implementation
of the travel ban, and in that regard I would like to
echo paragraph 8 of resolution 2339 (2017), urging the
Central African Republic authorities to ensure that
fraudulent, counterfeit, stolen and lost passports, as
17-04078

15/02/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

well as invalidated diplomatic passports, are removed
from circulation.
Concerning the asset freeze, the Panel reiterated in
its final report that the sanctioned individual, Alfred
Yékatom, has continued to receive his salary as a
Member of Parliament, in violation of the asset freeze.
The Panel also emphasized that after having been
listed, Eugène Ngakosset has continued to receive his
salary as an army officer, which constitutes another
violation of the asset freeze. During my visit to the
Central African Republic in May 2016, I outlined the
relevant exemptions procedures to the asset freeze and
underscored the importance of the Central African
Republic authorities working with the Committee, the
Panel and the Secretariat, in that regard. In connection
with paragraph 48 of the Panel’s final report, it is
very important that the Central African Republic’s
Ministry of Finance and Budget issue a directive to
banks operating in the country to freeze the assets of
sanctioned individuals.
In conclusion, I firmly believe that the sanctions
measures continue to be of relevance to the dynamics
on the ground in the Central African Republic. As
Chair, I will do my utmost to ensure that the Committee
continues to be fully engaged in providing guidance with
regard to the implementation of sanctions measures,
including through the consideration of new sanctions
designations. In the Committee’s meetings with
regional States, I have encouraged their representatives
to turn to their capitals to seek confirmation that the
Committee’s sanctions list has been made available
at airports, ports and border crossings, at State and
commercial banks or other financial institutions
and to national and commercial airlines. I will also
work to ensure that the Panel of Experts receives the
information that has been requested from Member
States, particularly the regional States and the relevant
Central African Republic authorities. I am convinced
that cooperation between the regional States and the
Panel is of crucial importance, particularly following
the adoption of resolution 2339 (2017), by which the
Council extended the arms embargo, travel ban and
asset freeze until 31 January 2018, and the Panel’s
mandate until 28 February 2018.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the f loor to the representative of Uruguay.

S/PV.7884

Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express our thanks for the briefings
by Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Ambassador Omar Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission; and you, Mr. President,
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013).
Uruguay recognizes that the events that have
occurred in the Central African Republic over the
past four months ref lect the fact that while in many
ways the Government, with the support of the
international community, is working very hard to
achieve stability and sustainable development for the
country, it is still dealing with serious challenges. We
should emphasize that the Government’s efforts have
resulted in considerable and noteworthy progress.
The agreement between the Government and most of
the armed groups on a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration strategy, together with the adoption
of a national security policy and development of the
internal security forces, is a significant step accepted
by most of the Central African stakeholders, with
the exception of some armed groups. In addition,
the adoption in November of a national programme
for reconciliation and social cohesion will provide a
direction and strategy in areas such as social cohesion,
transitional justice, dialogue with armed groups and
the return and reintegration of internally displaced
persons and refugees.
We realize that such efforts are designed to deal
with the underlying causes of the conf lict, which must
be properly addressed if relapses are to be avoided.
However, we note that unfortunately these advances
have not yet been translated into progress that is
concrete enough to meet the country’s challenges. In
that regard, Uruguay is concerned about the recent
increases in violence mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/94), including sporadic
incidents in the capital of Bangui and attacks on
peacekeepers, along with increasingly frequent and
intense clashes between armed groups outside the
capital, which have killed an estimated 287 civilians.
Another reason for concern is the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. According to the report, half of
the estimated 4.6 million who make up the population
of the Central African Republic remain dependent on
humanitarian assistance. Of those, about 2 million are

17-040789/11

S/PV.7884

The situation in the Central African Republic

facing extreme food insecurity, a significant increase
over the 1.4 million who were in that situation in 2014.
It is therefore crucial to ensure that the international
community continues to encourage and support the
efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic to achieve peace and stability. In that regard,
the mobilization of the international community at
the Brussels conference in November was a strong
expression of international solidarity and a commitment
to learning the lessons of the past and not pulling out
prematurely. We urge the international partners to
make good on their commitments and remain actively
engaged on the issue. Morevoer, the presidential decree
of 5 November establishing the institutional structure
for implementing, overseeing and assessing the Mutual
Engagement Framework and the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan will be a great help in channeling
the efforts of international partners and maintaining a
high-level political commitment between the country
and the international community.
Lastly, I would like to commend the entire staff
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
who play a fundamental role every day in protecting
civilians, promoting and protecting human rights
and international humanitarian law and supporting
development of the country’s national capacities, all in
extremely demanding working conditions.
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of the Central African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I take this opportunity to thank the Ukrainian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s briefing on the Central African Republic and
to commend the delegation on its conduct of what is
a rather packed programme for such a short month.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous; Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and you, Mr. President, for
the clarity and quality of the briefings, which give us
insight into the issues presented by the situation in the
Central African Republic, which continue despite the
great progress that has been made towards stabilization
in various areas.
In the light of today’s briefings, it is clear that
the situation is still fragile and precarious, thanks to
the persistent threats posed by armed groups, which
10/11

15/02/2017

are now fighting among themselves for control of the
country’s mining areas and thus keeping the level of
violence high. The unspoken aim of some of their
criminal activities, particularly among themselves, is
to make the current political process fail and plunge
the country back into crisis.
There are still many challenges to overcome, and it
is time to move from words to deeds. The President of
the Central African Republic has repeatedly outlined
the priorities that must be met in order to restore the
country, and they are cited in the Mutual Engagement
Framework between the Central African Republic and
the international community, whose signing at the
Brussels conference on 17 November was extremely
important for my country’s future. The fact is that the
reconstruction and development of the Central African
Republic are conditional on a restoration of peace,
country-wide security and national reconciliation. To
that end, the President has engaged in an inclusive
dialogue with the various armed groups, aimed at
convincing them of the importance of signing on to
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme as a prerequisite for progress
and with the goal of getting them to commit firmly and
concretely to its success.
I have raised the issue of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation because
previous speakers have sufficiently emphasized other
aspects of the situation and because it is urgent that
we begin that process. Implementing the Government’s
goals and priorities will require the support and
guidance of the international community, which,
through the Security Council, has a key role to play,
as laid down in the Mutual Engagement Framework,
which clearly defines the stakeholders’ responsibilities.
We all believe that implementing the new mechanism
is indispensable if the Central African Republic
is to achieve lasting peace and rapid, sustainable
development. The international community and our
bilateral and multilateral partners must act if we are to
ensure that our hard-won progress is not compromised.
The commitments made in Brussels will enable the
Government to effectively implement its priorities,
which depend to a large extent on mobilizing the
promised funds.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate my gratitude
to all the members of the Council — and especially
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
17-04078

15/02/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV.7884

Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African

The President: I now invite Council members to

Republic, for his personal involvement — for their

informal consultations to continue our discussion on

tireless efforts to enable my country to emerge from

the subject.

this long crisis.

The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

17-0407811/11
