S/2018/1086

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 December 2018
Original: English

Strategic assessment of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
Special report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 28 of Security Council
resolution 2404 (2018), in which the Council requested me to submit, by the end of
November 2018, an assessment of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), including options for a possible reconfiguration of
the United Nations presence in the country and reprioritization of tas ks.
2.
An independent senior expert was hired to conduct a strategic assessment
mission in Guinea-Bissau from 28 September to 4 October 2018. A senior
representative from the Department of Political Affairs and representatives from the
Department of Field Support, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (representing the United Nations
Sustainable Development Group), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
were also deployed to support the independent expert. The strategic assessment
mission met with many national, regional and international stakeholde rs in Bissau
and Dakar, held discussions with UNIOGBIS staff members and the United Nations
country team and visited the UNIOGBIS regional office in Bafatá. The senior expert
also undertook separate consultations with high-level officials from the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the European Union.
3.
The findings outlined in the present report, while informed by the work carried
out by the senior expert and the technical contributions of the United Nations
representatives who participated in the strategic assessment mission, are consistent
with my assessment of UNIOGBIS. The report includes my recommendations for the
reprioritization of tasks and options for the future United Nations presence in the
country.

II. Background
4.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea -Bissau
(UNOGBIS) was established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1233 (1999), in

18-19992 (E)

071218

*1819992*

S/2018/1086

the wake of the 1998/99 civil war, as a special political mission headed by a
representative of the Secretary-General. In 2009, UNOGBIS had up to 32 staff
members, half of whom were international staff.
5.
The structure and mandate of the mission have since evolved. Following the
serious deterioration of the political situation resulting from the assassinations of the
Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, General Batista Tagme Na Waie, and the President
of Guinea-Bissau, João Bernardo “Nino” Vieira, on 1 and 2 March 2009, respectively,
the Security Council established UNIOGBIS to succeed UNOGBIS as of 1 January
2010, through its resolution 1876 (2009), to be headed by a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, supported in turn by a Deputy Special Representative, who is
also the United Nations resident coordinator and UNDP resident representative, and
119 staff members (including 64 international staff members). Since 2010,
UNIOGBIS has consisted of four core substantive units: the Political Affairs Section;
the Security Sector Reform Section, which later became the Rule of Law and Security
Institutions Section; the Human Rights and Gender Section; and the Public
Information Unit, which later became the Information and Strategic Communication
Unit. UNIOGBIS also opened permanent field offices (currently three, with one
seasonal office), which were each to be staffed by one political affairs officer and one
national human rights officer, to support the United Nations country team and provide
the basis for activities carried out by the Organization’s agencies, funds and
programmes in the regions outside the city of Bissau.
6.
Following the military coup of April 2012, throughout the transitional ph ase
until the legislative and presidential elections held in 2014 and during the brokering
of the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the ECOWAS Road Map for the
Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau and its aftermath, the Security
Council approved successive proposals to adjust the configuration and mandate of
UNIOGBIS. Proposals for those reconfigurations were prepared pursuant to a
technical assessment mission in 2013, a strategic assessment mission in 2014 and a
strategic review mission in 2016. In its latest configuration, following the 2016
strategic review mission, the political capacities of UNIOGBIS were strengthened
and United Nations integration on the ground was further enhanced, with the Deputy
Special Representative mandated to oversee all UNIOGBIS programmatic
peacebuilding activities as both United Nations resident coordinator and UNDP
resident representative. Under its 2018 budget, UNIOGBIS maintains 142 positions,
including 63 international staff members, in addition to 15 uniformed personnel.
7.
By its resolution 2404 (2018), the Security Council extended the mandate of
UNIOGBIS until 28 February 2019 and requested the mission to focus its efforts on
three priorities: (a) supporting the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
facilitating an inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation process;
(b) supporting, through good offices, the electoral process to ensure inclusive, free
and credible legislative elections in 2018 within the legally mandated timeframe; and
(c) providing support, including technical assistance, to the national authorities with
a view to expediting and completing the review of the Constitution of Guinea -Bissau.
The Council also mandated UNIOGBIS to carry out the following tasks:
(a) strengthen democratic institutions and State organs; (b) promote and protect
human rights; (c) provide strategic and technical advice and support to the
Government to combat drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, in close
cooperation with UNODC; (d) incorporate a gender perspective into peacebuilding;
and (e) mobilize, harmonize and coordinate international assistance, namely from the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the
European Union, with a view to upcoming elections. Meanwhile, the three paragraphs
outlining the tasks relating to rule of law and security institutions, which had been
included in the mandate of the mission since its establishment, were deleted.
2/10

18-19992

S/2018/1086

III. Findings of the strategic assessment
A.

Situational analysis
8.
To succeed in its overall objective of supporting peace consolidation in Guinea Bissau, UNIOGBIS requires the presence of a political leadership committed to the
consolidation of peace and stability, the strengthening of democracy and the delivery
of good and effective governance on the basis of the observance of the rule of law
and respect for human rights. Such political will appears to be lacking, as the politic al
process in the country has been marked by coups and counter-coups, the targeted
assassination of senior political and military figures and institutional crises generated
by personal disagreements among leading figures of the executive branch of
Government. Thus, although it has avoided widespread violence, gross human rights
violations and a humanitarian crisis, Guinea-Bissau is in a state of chronic political
instability, primarily afflicted by longstanding disputes among political elites that
have been ineffectively litigated by a politicized judiciary in Bissau.
9.
The immediate triggers of the most recent institutional crisis relate to the
decision by the President, José Mário Vaz, to dismiss the Prime Minister, Domingos
Simões Pereira, in 2015. Mr. Simões Pereira is the leader of the ruling African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (Partido Africano para a
Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde — PAIGC), which had won the largest share
of the vote (nearly 48 per cent) during the 2014 le gislative elections. In the months
that preceded the Prime Minister’s ouster, his relationship with the President had
deteriorated, as they disagreed significantly on the management of the country, on the
use of government funds and on certain Cabinet nomi nations. The leaders of various
PAIGC factions and influential businesspersons excluded from government positions,
and consequently from access to State funds, reportedly fuelled the rivalry between
the President and the Prime Minister.
10. Between late 2015 and late 2016, the President appointed and dismissed two
Prime Ministers who were unable to cobble together a majority in the National
Assembly to pass a government programme and the State budget. Ultimately, an
ECOWAS-facilitated mediation process led to the adoption of a six-point road map
in September 2016 and the signature of the Conakry Agreement on 14 October of the
same year. Despite renewed hope for reconciliation and stability, and the international
support generated by the Agreement, its implementation was undermined by the
inability of the Guinea-Bissau signatories to agree on the implementation of two key
provisions: the appointment of a consensus Prime Minister and the modalities for the
reintegration of 15 dissident PAIGC parliamentarians ba ck into the party.
11. Despite intense diplomatic efforts by ECOWAS, with support from the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union and
the United Nations, the signatories of the Conakry Agreement did not implement any
of its provisions for nearly two years. After repeated calls by ECOWAS for the
appointment by the President of a consensus Prime Minister went unheeded, on
4 February 2018, the subregional body imposed targeted sanctions against 19 political
stakeholders deemed to be obstructing the implementation of the Agreement. The
stigma associated with that action prompted internal dialogue initiatives, facilitated
by the Bishop of Bissau, who was assisted through the good offices of Angola and
UNIOGBIS.
12. After nearly three years of institutional paralysis, ECOWAS achieved a
breakthrough at its extraordinary summit held in Lomé on 14 April 2018. During the
summit, President Vaz agreed to appoint Aristides Gomes as Prime Minister and to
schedule the next round of parliamentary elections for 18 November 2018. On the

18-19992

3/10

S/2018/1086

same occasion, the President of the National Assembly pledged to convene a plenary
parliamentary session to extend the mandate of the current legislature and nominate
the members of the National Electoral Commission. Since then, most key provisions
of the Conakry Agreement have been, or are in the process of being, implemented.
The 15 expelled PAIGC members have not yet been reintegrated, however, and no
stability pact has yet been signed. Some of those expelled have since formed their
own political party.
13. At its core, the key drivers of instability in Guinea-Bissau have remained largely
unchanged since the previous strategic review mission to the country, deployed in
2016. Those drivers boil down to the following structural factors: a profoundly
divided political class, driven by narrowly defined and antagonistic group interests;
the growing political influence of a parallel economy based on narcotics trafficking;
the absence of the State, especially in rural areas, and the fact that, where present, it
is largely ineffective; the generalized lack of respect for the rule of law; violations of
human rights and widespread impunity therefor; a general atmosphere of resignation
with regard to poverty; and lack of access to basic services. In addition, there are
increasingly worrisome signs of the presence of operatives of extremist networks
from the Sahel and elsewhere in Guinea-Bissau.

B.

The role of international partners
14. Over the years, UNIOGBIS has built a solid platform for cooperation with the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the
European Union, as well as with bilateral partners of Guinea -Bissau. Collectively,
those partners have remained actively engaged with Guinea-Bissau stakeholders and
supportive of national reform agendas. International partners, however, have
expressed frustration with the slow progress of reforms and what they perceive as a
limited sense of ownership and responsibility among national counterparts. The
protracted institutional paralysis that lasted from 2015 to early 2018 has not helped
to dispel such concerns.
15. At the political level, ECOWAS engagement with the country has been recurring
and multifaceted, through its liaison office in Bissau, the regular deployment of its
ministerial follow-up committee and joint and individual initiatives led by the
ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau and the Chairpersons of the ECOWAS
Authority. ECOWAS also continues to contribute to security th rough its peace
operation, the ECOWAS mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB), which protects
government institutions and political leaders. Since the deployment of ECOMIB in
2012, the country’s military has maintained a republican stance, according to its
constitutionally prescribed role. There have been no political assassinations or
incidents of serious violence, and the salutary effect of ECOMIB as a deterrent is
widely recognized.
16. Current international assistance has been focused on the provision of tec hnical,
financial and material support towards the organization of credible legislative
elections in 2018. Preparations for elections are underway, although their
organization, like all other electoral processes in Guinea -Bissau, has faced several
challenges. At the same time, there is no guarantee that elections will be a panacea to
the problems affecting the country. The solution may lie in the review of the
Constitution to clarify the division of labour between the two branches of
Government.

4/10

18-19992

S/2018/1086

IV. Assessment of the United Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau
A.

The role of UNIOGBIS
17. The presence of UNIOGBIS is unanimously valued by the Government, civil
society and international partners on the ground. One interlocutor stated that
UNIOGBIS had played a critical preventive role and that without it, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau could have been much worse. Interlocutors also unanimously asserted
that, in the immediate future and during the politically sensitive electoral cycle
expected to last through mid-2019, the joint presence of the mission and ECOMIB
was critical, as that presence was expected to continue to have a dissuasive effect on
potential spoilers. Many interlocutors, however, have called for a lighter United
Nations political footprint in the country after the electoral cycle and a greater
emphasis of international assistance on economic and social development.
18. Beyond its important preventive role, through the good offices and political
mediation of my Special Representative, UNIOGBIS has also had a significant
positive impact on the development and strengthening of the capacities of civil society
organizations, in particular women’s groups that had played a key role in generating
the political will that led to the compromise agreed to in Conakry. UNIOGBIS also
provided critical support to the members of the organizing co mmission on the national
conference on reconciliation, enabling them to better mobilize national and
international attention and resources to reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts.
19. UNIOGBIS has engaged with a broad range of national stakeholders who were
parties to the political and institutional crisis, in order to facilitate sustained,
constructive dialogue and the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
UNIOGBIS engaged with ECOWAS, the European Union and the African Union in
Bissau, as well as the wider diplomatic community, to mobilize their support and
generate collective pressure for the implementation of the Agreement. The mission ’s
efforts included regular consultations and good offices with national political
stakeholders, the provision of financial and logistical support to ECOWAS high-level
missions to Guinea-Bissau and the participation of Guinea-Bissau stakeholders at
ECOWAS summits. However, UNIOGBIS could further strengthen its engagement as
the convener of meetings of the “Guinea-Bissau P5” group, which consists of the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the United Nations.
20. Since April 2018, there have been modest signs of progress towards a national
commitment to countering drug trafficking and transnational organized crime.
Government interlocutors acknowledged the scope of the problem and the role of
some military and security chiefs in the drug trade. Some interlocutors suggested that
other actors, beyond those in the military and security forces, were also involved with
drug trafficking networks, which further undermined government efforts against this
scourge. Still other interlocutors emphasized that the issue had a subregional
dimension, which would require a concomitant response and which should be given
the highest priority on the political and security agendas of ECOWAS, and that more
focus should be placed on the origin of the trade. In a context where powerful
implicated parties do not want effective State institutions, however, UNIOGBIS and
United Nations country team efforts to counter drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime are unlikely to bear the desired results.
21. In terms of priorities for UNIOGBIS, interlocutors frequently cited reforms of
the security, justice and public administration sectors and the continued work of the
mission’s gender and human rights components. Drug trafficking and growing
religious extremism were also identified as areas of concern on which the United

18-19992

5/10

S/2018/1086

Nations, as a whole, should focus. Any effort by UNIOGBIS and other international
partners with regard to those priorities will not succeed, however, in the absence of
strong political will and a sense of ownership on the part of the national authorities.

B.

The United Nations country team
22. The United Nations country team consists of 16 agencies, funds and
programmes, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. United Nations
country team activities are anchored in the Partnership Framework between Gu ineaBissau and the United Nations for the period 2016–2020, which has a total budget of
$341 million. The Framework supports the implementation of the national priorities
articulated in the national development plan, “Terra Ranka”, for the period
2015−2020, which is focused on economic growth and poverty reduction, human
development, sustainable resources management and strengthening the rule of law
and governance. The impact of the Framework to date has been limited.
23. By 2017, Guinea-Bissau had made progress in achieving some of the
Sustainable Development Goals, such as lowering the child mortality rate and
expanding primary education and environmental protections. Still, the country
currently ranks 177th out of 189 countries on the human development i ndex (HDI),
with an index value of 0.455. Almost 70 per cent of the population is defined as living
on the poverty line (under $2 a day) and over one third is extremely poor (living below
$1 a day). The quality and availability of health services remain among the country’s
major problems, as evidenced by the low level of mean life expectancy, estimated at
only 57.8 years of age in 2017. Human development in the country remains
precarious, largely owing to the low allocation of budgetary resources for the
education and health sectors, at 8.2 per cent (2.1 per cent of the gross domestic
product) and 6.1 per cent (1.6 per cent of the gross domestic product), respectively,
of the 2018 State budget.
24. While Guinea-Bissau is not a participant in the “Delivering as one” pilot
programme, the Government and the United Nations country team are committed to
gradually reinforcing the operationalization of that approach. The Partnership
Framework facilitates the connection between UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
country team. UNIOGBIS co-chairs the Framework outcome group on rule of law and
governance. The United Nations has one joint programme, on police, justice and
corrections, implemented by UNDP, UNIOGBIS, OHCHR, UNODC, the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women). The total budget of the joint
programme is $25 million over three years. Since the changes to the mandate of
UNIOGBIS introduced in resolution 2404 (2018), the components on police and
corrections have been dormant, and UNDP has been focusing on justice.
25. The situation in Guinea-Bissau is on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and the Peacebuilding Fund has been a strong supporter of the country.
Since 2008, the Fund has allocated $40 million to peacebuilding programmes there.
Its current portfolio consists of six projects under the Immediate Response Facility,
valued at close to $7.5 million over 18 months. The United Nations entities involved
are UNDP, UNICEF, UNIOGBIS, UN-Women, the United Nations Population Fund,
the World Food Programme and the International Organization for Migration.

C.

Challenges
26. The main challenges encountered by UNIOGBIS in delivering on resolution
2404 (2018) are outlined below.

6/10

18-19992

S/2018/1086

1.

Limited political will
27. Strong national political will for stability is a precondition to achieving progress
towards sustainable peace, stability and development in Guinea-Bissau. It constitutes
the key factor that will allow the various political forces to place the interests of the
nation above their competing group interests, agree on the fundamentals and develop
a common vision for the present and the future of the country. Importantly, it will also
create an environment conducive to maximizing the impact of the international
community’s multifaceted assistance, including the efforts of the United Nations in
the country. However, limited and inconsistent political will among national
stakeholders has regularly stalled progress in the implementation of the institutional
reforms cited in the Conakry Agreement. According to the Agreement, those reforms
should be implemented prior to the holding of elections, but political negotiations and
technical preparations for the implementation of the reforms have been upstaged by
electoral manoeuvring.

2.

Limited absorption capacities
28. Existing national capacities in terms of institutional and p hysical infrastructure
and trained human resources are very low. That situation, compounded by recurring
political and institutional instability, negatively affects the country’s capacity to
absorb technical and financial support delivered by international partners and limits
the potentially positive impact of such support.
29. The United Nations has frequently organized training sessions and workshops
to strengthen the capacities of national counterparts in public institutions. However,
such activities are often implemented in an uncoordinated way, with no link to broader
human resources policies and without prior capacity needs assessments. Furthermore,
attendance at capacity-building training sessions, conferences and workshops may
often be motivated by the prospect of receiving daily subsistence or transportation
allowances, which are provided almost systematically to participants in events
organized by the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau and which may have contributed
to a culture characterized by a “cash-for-workshop” mentality.

3.

Long-term dependency on the mission
30. The work carried out by UNIOGBIS, operating at a strategic level, coordinating
the representatives of the international community in the country and acting as a
deterrent to spoilers, has been extremely valuable. Nevertheless, its presence may also
have contributed to a reduced sense of ownership of the political process among the
leaders of Guinea-Bissau and of their responsibility to move the country forward.

4.

Limited United Nations integration
31. The instruments for integration are formally in place but need to be fully utilized
to promote coherence across the United Nations presence in Guinea -Bissau.
Coordination mechanisms should be used not only for information exchange, but also
for strategic and joint planning and for assessment purposes.

5.

Underutilized regional presence and programmes
32. Ongoing difficulties in implementing reforms at the national level and the
persistent disengagement of governing institutions in Bissau with local communities
in the regions may indicate a need to shift investments to the local level to build
capacities from the bottom up. The mission’s regional presence (Bafatá, Buba,
Bubaque and São Domingos) had previously been focused on tasks relating to rule of
law and security institutions, combined with a public information component and, in

18-19992

7/10

S/2018/1086

Bafatá, a political affairs component that played a role in community-level
engagement. While the mission may have intended to refocus the efforts of i ts
regional offices on political analysis and engagement with regional and local
authorities, the regional offices appear to be underutilized by both UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team. Moreover, the locations of UNIOGBIS regional
offices are not in areas where UNDP, for example, operates. In addition, operating
costs for such regional offices are very high.

V. Reprioritization of tasks and reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau
33. Since the end of the civil war in 1999, there has been no widespread violence in
Guinea-Bissau, nor have there been any humanitarian emergencies or systematic
gross violations of human rights. Nevertheless, the country has been in a state of
chronic political instability that tends to beco me even more volatile during elections.
As the country enters a new electoral period, which is expected to last through
mid-2019, both UNIOGBIS and ECOMIB are perceived as having a dissuasive effect
on spoilers. While all interlocutors urged UNIOGBIS to re main in Guinea-Bissau, at
least until the end of the present electoral cycle, they also recommended that United
Nations support after the elections be focused on increased development assistance
and capacity-building, including the creation of conditions conducive to
implementing the broader reform agenda.
34. Assuming that legislative elections, although delayed, do take place and
political tensions do not reach crisis proportions, a reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS and
a reprioritization of its tasks should be considered, to reflect a more coherent, nimble
and effective peace and security pillar aligned more closely with the development and
human rights pillars. On the basis of that assumption, I would recommend three
phases of intervention, during which the United Nations would focus on good offices
and the coordination of international partners. The United Nations presence would
also implement tasks relating to the protection of human rights; to combating drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, in close cooperation with UNODC; and
to the provision of support to the Government to incorporate a gender perspective into
peacebuilding, with varying degrees of emphasis. The three phases of United Nations
engagement are outlined in greater detail below.

A.

Phase I: electoral phase (until June 2019)
35. During phase I, UNIOGBIS would remain as currently configured and prioritize
support for the holding of legislative and presidential elections. Its activities would
entail increased good offices with national actors and political support to and
coordination with ECOWAS and the other members of the Guinea-Bissau P5 group.
Other components of UNIOGBIS would be geared towards providing support to the
overall good offices function of the mission. They would also help to support
technical-level coordination with the Guinea-Bissau P5 group.

B.

Phase II: immediate post-electoral phase (June–December 2019)
36. The United Nations presence should be focused on the establishment of
conditions conducive for the implementation of the reform agenda. That approach
should include preparations for the UNIOGBIS transition plan, which would be linked
to the development of the new Partnership Framework, in coordination with national
authorities and international partners. The other components of the United Nations

8/10

18-19992

S/2018/1086

presence would promote a “good offices for good governance” approach and provide
strategic advice and support to the Government for the strengthening of democratic
institutions. Further guidance on the specific focus of programmatic engagement,
including potentially prioritizing local and regional engagement if adequate entry
points exist, should be provided in the context of an integrated transition strategy. The
latter should be informed by the recommendations contained in the present report, by
the UNDP mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support strategy, which will be
aimed at identifying priorities to help the country to accelerate progress towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, and by a mapping of the United
Nations country team’s capacities to deliver adequate programmatic support.

C.

Phase III: transition and exit (no later than 31 December 2020)
37. Phase III would entail the implementation of the transition plan defined during
phase II and the gradual transfer of tasks from UNIOGBIS to the United Nations
country team, UNOWAS and international partners. More broadly, investments in
strengthening the capacity of citizens to engage with public institutions and the
Government on peacebuilding, reconciliation, governance and economic
development issues should continue. Consideration should also be given to increasing
the capacities of the United Nations presence to design and implement peacebuilding
programmes focused on civil society and grass-roots organizations.
38. The reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS should take place after the completion of the
electoral cycle, namely, as of phase II. I recommend establishing a streamlined good
offices special political mission in Bissau, focused on facilitating the political process
and led by a special representative at the assistant secretary-general level. To facilitate
the implementation of this recommendation, an integrated component could be
established to help to incrementally build up the capacity of the United Nations
country team, while gradually drawing down the mission until its final exit no later
than 31 December 2020. I would also recommend that the UNIOGBIS drawdown,
initiated pursuant to Security Council resolution 2404 (2018), commence with the
immediate closure of its regional offices.

VI. Conclusion
39. I welcomed the opportunity to assess UNIOGBIS at the request of the Security
Council. Support for the electoral process remains a key priority for the United
Nations, in line with Security Council resolution 2404 (2018). While progress has
been made by the State authorities since the resolution was adopted in February 2018,
maintaining the current strength and mandate of UNIOGBIS unt il June 2019 will
ensure that the mission has the full capacity to support the electoral process, including
by providing good offices to national actors and coordinating efforts with the Guinea Bissau P5 group.
40. Considering the significant investment that the United Nations has made in
Guinea-Bissau, including through the presence of a political mission for two decades,
it is imperative to ensure that the UNIOGBIS exit process is managed in a way that
would help to maintain the gains achieved thus far. I believe that the best way to meet
this goal is to establish a streamlined good offices special political mission following
the end of the electoral cycle. Such a “streamlined UNIOGBIS” would prepare a
transition plan that would clearly identify the progra mmatic tasks to be handed over
to the United Nations country team and the timing for doing so. Moreover, the
transition plan would be prepared in close collaboration with the national authorities,

18-19992

9/10

S/2018/1086

the United Nations country team and international partners, thereby ensuring full
ownership by all stakeholders.
41. Given the key role of ECOWAS in support of the political process in Guinea Bissau, and considering the mandate of UNOWAS, I have requested my Special
Representative for West Africa and the Sahel to increase the engagement of the
UNOWAS regional office in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, UNOWAS will work
together with UNIOGBIS to ensure that ECOWAS and individual regional leaders
keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau on their agendas, not only during the critical
electoral period, but also beyond that period, when the country will need assistance
from the international community to implement a reform agenda. UNOWAS will also
help to promote more prominent discussions within ECOWAS on regional issues of
importance for Guinea-Bissau, such as drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. Upon the exit of UNIOGBIS, UNOWAS would take over the good offices
functions.
42. In a context of economic austerity, it will be important for the United Nations
to remain engaged in Guinea-Bissau, throughout the transition and exit phase and
beyond, to help to mobilize the international community in support of the institutional
reform agenda. In that regard, the role of the Peacebuilding Commission will be
indispensable. The United Nations could also invest in better aid coordination and
resource mobilization capacities in Guinea-Bissau. That would dovetail with the
expected reinvigoration of the role and capacities of the office of the resident
coordinator, in line with General Assembly resolution 72/279.
43. I would like to express my gratitude to the senior expert, João Honwana, for
leading the assessment and to my Special Representative for Guinea -Bissau and Head
of UNIOGBIS, José Viegas Filho, for his leadership of the mission, as well as to all
United Nations personnel in Guinea-Bissau for their support for and participation in
the process. I would also like to thank all interlocutors who provided their views on
the role of UNIOGBIS. In developing my recommendations, consideration was given
to the priorities of Guinea-Bissau stakeholders and to the concerns of regional and
international partners. Looking ahead, the ongoing partnership between the
Government and the United Nations, in whatever form that may take on the ground,
will be crucial to ensuring the support of the international community for
peacebuilding and the implementation of key reforms in Guinea -Bissau.

10/10

18-19992
