United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9096th meeting

Tuesday, 19 July 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Almeida Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lamce
Ms. Huang Lijin
Mr. Samson
Mr. Diaba
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Sharma
Ms. Trant
Ms. Momanyi
Mr. De La Mora Salcedo
Mr. Von Tetzschner
Mr. Kuzmenkov
Mr. Azzam
Ms. Ghazi-Bouillon
Ms. Kroeker-Maus

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493)
Letter dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/540)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43186 (E)
*2243186*

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): At the outset, we would
like to thank the Brazilian presidency for organizing
this open debate. We also want to thank Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Catherine Russell, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and Patrick Kumi for their insights.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, and would like to add the following remarks
in its national capacity.
Slovenia remains deeply concerned about the
appalling and continued high numbers of grave
violations and their negative trends, especially the rise
in abductions. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/493) reveals the scale and severity of grave
violations committed against children in contexts of
armed conflict in 2021. Children killed and maimed,
images of schools and hospitals attacked and other
blatant violations of international law have become
devastating everyday realities. That is unacceptable
and must stop. During these times of heightened
global insecurity, we have to address the consequences
that armed conflicts have for children worldwide,
including most recently as a result of the Russian
aggression against Ukraine. Forcibly displaced and
stateless children are at higher risk of being trafficked,
abducted, recruited or sexually abused. We remain
deeply concerned about the high level of conflictrelated sexual violence frequently used as a weapon of
war. The scale of this grave violation against children,
both girls and boys, is often underreported and is still
met with widespread impunity. Accountability for such
heinous crimes against children is imperative.
As we reflect on the 25 years since the establishment
of the children and armed conflict mandate, we should
also recognize the robust tools we have developed to
support its implementation. It is crucial to make use
of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, including
the listing mechanism in the Secretary-General’s
2/45

19/07/2022

annual reports on children and armed conflict, whose
independence, impartiality and credibility remain
crucial. Despite many efforts by the international
community in the past 20 years, attacks on schools
continue in many parts of the world. That impedes
children’s healthy development and exposes them to
violations of all kinds. The Safe Schools Declaration is
an important tool for protecting schools against attacks.
Schools must remain safe havens for children.
The integration of child-protection measures into
peace processes and the protection of their rights in
those processes are vital to creating conditions for
sustainable peace. Reintegration programmes are
crucial. Children associated with armed groups should
be treated primarily as victims of violations and not
as perpetrators. If properly reintegrated into societies,
children themselves can act as powerful agents for
change and contribute to peacebuilding efforts. We call
on all who have not yet done so to consider ratifying
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, and joining the Paris Principles and
Commitments, the Safe Schools Declaration and the
Vancouver Principles.
Slovenia is firmly committed to promoting the
rights and well-being of children, including children
affected by armed conflict. Child protection has also
been a long-term priority of Slovenia in the field of
humanitarian aid and post-conflict assistance. We
have continued to support projects implemented by the
Slovenian organization ITF Enhancing Human Security
in Moldova, Jordan, Lebanon, Armenia, Madagascar,
Egypt and Palestine, including Gaza and the West Bank.
Since 2017, our efforts have also helped to provide
education for more than 41,000 Syrian refugee children
in Jordan and have responded to the needs of Ukrainian
refugee children in Poland and Slovenia.
We join the calls to prioritize the protection of
children in armed conflict and to ensure that United
Nations mechanisms are adequately financed and
monitored in that respect. In view of that, we have
provided additional voluntary contributions to support
UNICEF programmes for children in Ukraine and the
activities of the International Committee of the Red
Cross addressing sexual violence in Nigeria. Slovenia
just recently announced its first voluntary contribution
to the Trust Fund for Children and Armed Conflict.
In conclusion, violations against children require
immediate and strong responses and actions on our
part. And since we just celebrated Nelson Mandela
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

International Day yesterday, allow me to conclude
by borrowing his words: “There can be no keener
revelation of a society’s soul than the way in which it
treats its children.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lõuk (Estonia): We thank Brazil for convening
this high-level meeting and the briefers for their
presentations. We also thank Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter and her Office and UNICEF, as well
as all child-protection actors, for their tireless work.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The children and armed conflict mandate,
including its Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, is
a unique and essential part of the Security Council’s
work to ensure peace and security, and it should be
utilized accordingly. The significant and devastating
impact of conflicts on children is clear. The number
of verified grave violations last year reached nearly
24,000. Those violations destroy lives and communities,
fuel conflict and have an impact on international peace
and security that lasts for years.
The reasoning for the relevance of the children
and armed conflict mandate is clear; action by the
Council, the United Nations system and national actors
must follow. That includes promoting compliance
with international law and ensuring accountability
for violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including through
international mechanisms such as the International
Criminal Court and the exercise of universal jurisdiction.
It includes the incorporation and use of criteria related
to children and armed conflict in sanctions regimes. It
includes political, financial and operational resources
for United Nation child protection activities. It includes
focusing attention on the violations against children,
with the urgency they deserve, in every single Security
Council discussion of a country situation on its agenda.
That is what Estonia aimed to do during its Security
Council membership.
We welcome the steps being taken to further develop
the analysis of the gender dimensions of children and
armed conflict. The rise in the proportion of grave
violations against girls, including sexual violence
and abduction, is alarming and requires the Council’s
attention. We condemn the restrictions on and attacks
against girls’ education, including in Afghanistan.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

We cannot turn back the clock on the rights of girls
anywhere.
The Secretary-General has designated Ukraine as a
situation of concern with immediate effect. That follows
the long trail of blood left by the Russian Federation
in Ukraine and the cruel and targeted attacks against
civilians, including children. The pattern of the killing
and maiming of children, sexual violence, denial of
humanitarian access, deportations and illegal adoptions,
and deliberate attacks on schools and hospitals
perpetrated by the Russian Federation, are grave
violations against children. We call on the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the monitoring and reporting of
violations against children in Ukraine without delay,
along with the necessary child protection capacity in
Ukraine. We also call on him to engage closely with
Ukraine through his Special Representative.
We call for accountability for the violations
perpetrated against children in Ukraine, just as we
have continued to call for accountability in Syria, Iraq,
Mali, Afghanistan and in other situations reflected in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493). For
its part, Estonia will continue to support, including
financially, the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General as well as UNICEF in their daily
crucial work to protect children around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I deliver this statement
on behalf of Norway, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark.
Allow me, at the outset, to thank Brazil for
organizing today’s open debate as well as to express
our particular appreciation, admiration and sincere
gratitude to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Gamba
de Potgieter, and her Office for their important work and
tireless commitment to ending the six grave violations
against children in armed conflict.
We are deeply alarmed by the scale and scope of
grave violations against children, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493). The
Nordic countries strongly condemn all the incidents of
the grave violations described in the report. Specifically,
the dramatic increase in sexual violence, particularly
against girls, is deeply concerning, as is the increase in
abductions and attacks on schools. Those are all likely
to lead to other forms of grave violations.

22-431863/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

We call upon all parties to armed conflict to fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international refugee law, in order to prevent and end
grave violations against children. We must prioritize the
protection of the rights and well-being of all children in
armed conflict.
Nearly 37 million children are displaced
worldwide — the highest number ever recorded — and
that shocking figure does not include the children
displaced in 2022, including as a result of Russia’s illegal
war of aggression against Ukraine, which has placed
Ukrainian children at increased risk of separation from
their families, forced deportations, trafficking and
sexual and gender-based violence. We call on Russia to
end its violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law in Ukraine, including
grave violations against children.
Refugee, internally displaced and stateless children
are particularly vulnerable to grave violations. The
Security Council must play a more effective role in
preventing displacement around the world. Governments
must strengthen the protection of, and access to services
for, refugee, migrant and displaced children.
The denial of humanitarian access and life-saving
assistance heavily affects children, which is quite
simply unacceptable. We once again call on all parties
to conflict to ensure safe, rapid and unhindered
access for humanitarian actors, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, and to guarantee
respect for humanitarian principles.
The impact of armed conflict on education
presents urgent humanitarian, development and social
challenges. Access to safe, quality and conflict-sensitive
education can help protect children and young people
from death and exploitation. For girls in particular,
education also reduces the risk of child marriages and
early pregnancies.
In the Sahel, for example, where 60 per cent of the
population is under the age of 18, an entire generation
risks being left behind. Across the region, close to 8,000
schools are closed due to violence. As a consequence,
we have seen an increase in child recruitment, child
marriages and early pregnancies among school-age
girls. As in other contexts, education is crucial for
breaking the cycle of conflict.
4/45

19/07/2022

We call on all States to endorse and implement the
Safe Schools Declaration and resolution 2601 (2021)
and to realize all children’s right to education.
Crises exacerbate already existing gender
inequalities. While boys are also impacted, girls are
particularly vulnerable to sexual violence, forced
marriage and exploitation. As we know, the figures
represent only the tip of the iceberg. We must
prioritize and invest in preventive actions to combat
the underlying reasons for gender inequality. Conflictrelated sexual violence continues with complete
impunity in many places and is used to punish, terrorize
and destroy populations.
Therefore, we must increase our funding for
the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence,
especially in conflict-affected settings. The Security
Council must also consider incorporating conflictrelated sexual violence as a designation criterion for
targeted sanctions. We must redouble our efforts to
eliminate abductions of children, not least boys, for
recruitment and use by armed groups, and we must
support children who are affected. Failure to do so has
immediate and long-term consequences for stability
and security.
To effectively reintegrate children and build
lasting peace, it is crucial to fight impunity and use
all the mechanisms at our disposal. All Member States
working on counter-terrorism, peace and security must
develop immediate and effective mitigation strategies
to prevent and respond to the six grave violations
against children. To address the needs of children in
conflict and post-conflict settings, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund and their
strategic cooperation with UNICEF are critical.
Finally, we must establish credible systems of
accountability and support existing international
mechanisms to prosecute perpetrators of the six grave
violations against children. That entails dedicated
and gender-responsive and child-specific expertise in
international investigations and continued support for
the International Criminal Court and other judicial
mechanisms. The accountability and reintegration
mechanisms must have a survivor-centred approach.
True justice involves reparations and access to
gender- and age-responsive specialized services. That
includes sexual and reproductive health and rights
services, medical, mental health and psychosocial
support services, and legal and livelihood support for
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

survivors of the six grave violations as well as for their
families, whose trauma may endure for years.
The Nordic countries remain committed to doing
our part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I would like to thank Brazil
for organizing this annual open debate on children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of
UNICEF for their informative briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and with
the statements to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect. I would like to add the
following remarks in my national capacity.
As shown by this year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/493), all over the world children
continue to be disproportionately affected by
armed conflict, suffering violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. That has been
even more evident in the past few months since the
unlawful and indiscriminate attacks by the Russian
armed forces on homes, educational facilities and
hospitals in Ukraine have made children front-line
targets for widespread killing, trafficking, sexual
violence, abduction and other violations. In that regard,
Italy welcomes the inclusion of Ukraine as a situation
of concern in the report.
In line with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, children, regardless of their legal status, have
the right to enjoy their childhood in stable and peaceful
societies where they can feel safe, learn and become
actors for positive change, peace and sustainable
development. In these challenging times, schools and
leisure facilities play a life-saving role, as they provide
children with psychological and physical support
as well as social protection, offering them hope for
a better future. Attacks on schools and children’s
facilities constitute one of the six grave violations
committed against children during armed conflict,
seriously jeopardizing their immediate and long-term
health. The fact that armed conflicts are overlapping
with other ongoing crises, especially the coronavirus
disease pandemic and climate change, is further

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

exacerbating children’s vulnerability and emphasizing
the importance of protecting those living in emergency
situations. Furthermore, forced displacement exposes
the most vulnerable to a higher risk of being recruited,
abducted, trafficked, sexually exploited or subject
to other harmful practices, including early and
forced marriage.
If we are to break the cycle of violations affecting
children, we need a systematic and coherent approach,
from prevention to accountability to reintegration.
That requires, first and foremost, the widest possible
support for the Safe Schools Declaration, in order
to mitigate the consequences of armed conflicts for
education, students and educational personnel, as well
as educational infrastructure. In that regard, Italy
reaffirms its support for the Declaration and calls on
all Member States to endorse and fully implement it.
Secondly, we also endorse the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on
peacekeeping and preventing the recruitment and use
of child soldiers, conscious as we are of the crucial
importance of integrating those principles into the wider
peacekeeping agenda. Our interventions should aim to
provide a child-rights-based response to the problem,
bearing in mind the best interests of children in all
aspects of their lives and treating children formerly
recruited by armed groups primarily as victims.
Thirdly, when we see that children displaced by
armed conflicts are deprived not only of their homes
and families but also of a chance to learn and play, we
cannot just limit ourselves to condemning these attacks.
All the perpetrators of grave violations against children
must be held accountable, regardless of whether they are
State forces or non-State armed groups. In that regard,
we reaffirm our strong support for international justice,
monitoring and accountability mechanisms, including
the work and the independent role of the International
Criminal Court.
Lastly, exposure to the cruelties of war and the
battlefield has a serious and often irreparable impact
on the physical and psychological well-being of
children involved in armed conflicts. We must engage
in reintegration programmes and foster the crucial role
of the Peacebuilding Commission, including through
psychological support, education and training.
Yesterday, for all these reasons, together with
Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and in

22-431865/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

co-sponsorship with Brazil, Canada, Kenya, Qatar and
Malaysia, we organized a high-level event in the margins
of today’s open debate on the theme “Strengthening,
monitoring, reporting and response to the abduction
of children”, in order to present the United Nations
guidance note on abduction, which we have supported
and hope will offer concrete solutions to the issue of
closing child-protection gaps.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Germany thanks
the Brazilian presidency for convening this
important debate.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the statement made by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.
We thank Special Representative Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, UNICEF Executive Director Catherine
Russell and Patrick Kumi for sharing their valuable
experiences and recommendations.
Germany is deeply concerned about the shocking
number of almost 24,000 grave violations committed
against children in the past year, as outlined in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493). That number is
all the more worrisome because we know that many more
violations go unreported. We remain very concerned
about the situations in Syria, Afghanistan, Mali and
the broader Sahel region, Myanmar, Yemen and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also welcome
the decision to include Ukraine, Ethiopia, Mozambique
and the central Sahel region as new situations of
concern. A timely, complete and evidence-based listing
of perpetrators in all those situations of concern will
further advance efforts to achieve accountability and
compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and child-protection norms. Accountability
must rank high on the agenda to protect children.
Among other things, we call on the United Nations and
all Member States to increase their efforts to protect
children affected by Russia’s ongoing war of aggression
on Ukraine, including through specialized services,
monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
Germany would like to highlight four crucial
points for future action. First, we are appalled by the
increasing number of abductions and cases of sexual
violence against children, with an increase of more
6/45

19/07/2022

than 20 per cent in comparison to 2020. Girls in
particular remain at a higher risk of being abducted
and are experiencing unacceptable levels of sexual and
gender-based violence. Germany will continue to push
for a sufficient level of gender-sensitive financing for
child-protection capacities in United Nations peace
operations. We are also deeply concerned about the
increasing reports of abductions of Ukrainian children
by and to Russia. We call on United Nations agencies
to scrutinize the reports with a view to including the
results in the Secretary-General’s report next year.
Secondly, the annual report shows that stateless,
refugee and internally displaced children are at a higher
risk of facing one or multiple grave violations. We urge
continued engagement with all the relevant United
Nations agencies. As the second largest contributor
to both the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and UNICEF,
Germany will continue its close cooperation on the
issue with UNHCR and UNICEF.
Thirdly, we should prioritize the reintegration of
children formerly associated with armed forces. For
several years now Germany has supported the work
of the non-governmental organization Watchlist on
children in detention and has contributed to projects that
advance the reintegration and education of former child
soldiers. We call on all actors to adhere to handover
protocols that give guidance for the swift transfer
of children from security forces to civilian childprotection actors, including with support in the areas of
mental health and psychosocial help. Providing access
to safe and inclusive education, including in emergency
contexts, with a particular focus on girls, refugee
and internally displaced children and children with
disabilities, must remain a priority for reintegration.
Lastly, we encourage the Security Council to
include the perspectives of representatives of children
and young people in its briefings on a regular basis. We
also advocate for a stronger focus by the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund on topics
related to children and armed conflict.
Promoting children’s rights is a key pillar of
Germany’s human rights policy. We encourage all
who have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration, as well as the Paris and Vancouver
Principles, and to ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
Germany will remain committed to advancing the
children and armed conflict agenda in all the aspects
that were mentioned today.

and a comprehensive national strategy for the protection
of unaccompanied minors. The protection of conflictaffected girls is also addressed in my country’s first
national action plan on women and peace and security.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.

In addition, another national action plan on
the protection of children from sexual abuse and
exploitation has been announced. The Greek authorities
operate both at land and sea borders with the utmost
attention to the protection of human life and with full
respect for persons, including children, who may be
entitled to international protection.

Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I would like to thank the
Brazilian presidency for organizing this timely meeting.
Greece aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add the following additional remarks in its
national capacity.
Unfortunately, the situation of children in armed
conflict remains of grave concern. As of the end of
2021, the more than 36.5 million children that have
been forcibly displaced face a high risk of being further
victimized and subjected to sexual violence or to
recruitment and use as child soldiers.
In order to address those multifaceted challenges,
the international community must take action in a
coordinated manner, while demonstrating solidarity
and promoting burden- and responsibility-sharing
among all relevant stakeholders. In that respect,
improving reception conditions, as well as accelerating
asylum procedures for refugee and asylum-seeking
children and their families, in addition to ensuring
non-refoulement, are indispensable. Unaccompanied
minors require special attention in order for their
protection to be guaranteed.
In that respect, all children should be registered
at birth. Ensuring birth registration for every forcibly
displaced child provides the basis for the recognition
and protection of that child’s human rights. It prevents
statelessness. It is the foundation of respect for their
human dignity. In that regard, host countries should
strive to integrate children on the move and their
families. Meaningful access to basic services such as
health care and education should be a sine qua non
element of integration strategies. At the same time,
voluntary repatriation should always be facilitated in a
safe, dignified and sustainable manner.
Greece places particular emphasis on the protection
of children in armed conflict, through the adoption of
national legislation as well as through the ratification of
the relevant Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Moreover, Greece is implementing
its first national action plan on the rights of the child

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
commitment to joining hands with all partners in an
effort to protect the rights of conflict-affected children
and build a peaceful, inclusive and resilient future world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of
55 Member States and the European Union, which this
year is co-chaired by Costa Rica, Croatia and my own
country, Botswana.
The Group would like to thank Brazil for organizing
today’s important open debate. I would also like to
extend our gratitude to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Catherine Russell,
and youth activist Patrick Kumi for their highly
informative briefings.
As highlighted by the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/428) on the responsibility to protect,
children and young people are uniquely — and
often disproportionately — affected by conflict and
atrocities. Today millions of children around the world
face the risk of mass atrocities; their safety, protection,
dignity and welfare are fundamental to the objectives
of the responsibility to protect. Depending on the
circumstances, the six grave violations against children
during situations of armed conflict, as identified by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, may amount to either
atrocity crimes themselves or an indication that an
atrocity crime may have been committed.
Over the past 16 years, the United Nations has
verified 266,000 cases of grave violations against

22-431867/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

19/07/2022

children in more than 30 conflict situations. While
those cases were verified through the 2005 United
Nations-led Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, the
actual figures are most likely much higher, according
to UNICEF.

found responsible for such violations and abuses that
accurately reflects the data collected and verified by
the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism should be
published in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
report every year.

Among the six grave violations, the abduction
of children is one of the most difficult to document.
Where it constitutes an atrocity crime, abduction may
be punishable under the Rome Statute. Moreover, we
are especially concerned by the drastic increase in
child abductions and the unlawful recruitment and use
of child soldiers, including girls. We encourage the
United Nations to also further investigate allegations
of cross-border abduction and child trafficking for
adoption purposes.

Thirdly, it is important that all existing mechanisms
for monitoring, reporting and responding to violations
against children be strengthened, including the child
protection capacities of United Nations peace operations
and political missions and the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict.

We firmly condemn such illegal acts — wherever
they occur — and welcome the recently presented
guidance note on abduction made by the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. We hope it will
contribute to the prevention of child abduction.
The Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect would like to stress the following points.
First, children and young people face distinct
atrocity risks. The international community should
therefore ensure that every aspect of atrocity
prevention — from planning to implementation to
monitoring and evaluation — is guided by the general
principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Furthermore, children and young people can and
should play critical roles in informing early warning
and capacity-building and developing more cohesive,
inclusive and resilient societies. Those roles will
contribute to the prevention and resolution of conflict and
peacebuilding. Ensuring the meaningful participation
in conflict resolution and atrocity prevention of
children and young people, including those who have
experienced atrocities in the past, means recognizing
the role that they can play, not just as beneficiaries of
interventions but also as partners in peace.
Secondly, all perpetrators of the six grave violations
against children must be held accountable. The United
Nations Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism and the
Secretary-General’s annual report and its annexes are
essential for ensuring accountability and preventing
further violations against children. Those tools will
remain powerful only if they maintain their credibility.
A single, complete evidence-based list of all those
8/45

We would like to encourage the Secretary-General
to alert the Security Council whenever there is credible
information that parties are committing any of the six
grave violations against children by including such
situations of concern in his annual children and armed
conflict report.
Fourthly, appropriate legislative and institutional
arrangements are essential for comprehensively
addressing violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law against children and
young people. We encourage States that have not yet done
so to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. We also acknowledge the efforts of
Member States that have endorsed the Paris Principles
and Commitments, the Vancouver Principles and the
Safe Schools Declaration.
Lastly, Member States should bring to justice all who
are responsible for crimes involving violations against
children, including any atrocity crimes, through prompt
investigations and, where appropriate, prosecutions. In
that context, we encourage Member States to support the
accountability measures for perpetrators listed in the
annex to the Secretary-General’s report, based on the
findings of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Camelli (spoke in French): I have the honour
of speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Andorra, Georgia, Monaco
and San Marino, align themselves with this statement.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

First and foremost, I would like to thank Brazil
for organizing today’s open debate and the briefers
for their poignant interventions this morning. We are
appalled by the unacceptably high levels of grave
violations against children, especially girls, outlined in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493). We
urge the parties to the conflict to put an end to those
violations as soon as possible and for States to bring
the perpetrators to justice. In that regard, we support
cooperation with international justice mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court. While
the EU remains committed to addressing the impact
of conflict on children worldwide, we would like to
highlight the five following specific situations.
First, we are horrified by the impact on children of
Russia’s illegal war of aggression on Ukraine. Children
have been killed and maimed and schools and hospitals
attacked, all in blatant violation of international law.
We are alarmed by the reports of forcible deportations
of children to Russia. We welcome in that regard
the decision to designate Ukraine as a situation of
concern with immediate effect. We call for increasing
the reporting and monitoring of this without delay,
in accordance with the children and armed conflict
mandate, and urge the United Nations and all Member
States to redouble their efforts to protect the children
affected by Russia’s illegal aggression. Russia must put
an end to the war.
Secondly, in the light of the developments in the
Tigray region and in Cabo Delgado, we also welcome
the addition of Ethiopia and Mozambique as situations
of concern with immediate effect.
Thirdly, the situation of children and the interlinked
conflicts affecting communities in the Sahel, the Lake
Chad basin region and the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo are also of particular concern to us. We
urge all the armed forces involved to fully comply with
international humanitarian law.
Fourthly, we also call on the Myanmar Armed
Forces and its security forces to bring an end to the
continuing arrests of children, parents and relatives
of opponents.
Fifthly, we must once again condemn the Taliban’s
persistent and unacceptable refusal to provide
secondary education to Afghanistan’s young girls and
urge it to ensure equal access to education.
The EU reiterates its call for prioritizing the
protection of children in armed conflict and ensuring

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

that the relevant United Nations mechanisms and peace
operations are adequately financed and equipped to
achieve that. We urge the Security Council to engage
closely and regularly with the Special Representative,
including on specific country situations, in order to
ensure that those deliberations accord the protection
of children the importance it deserves. We value the
findings of the Study on the evolution of the Children
and Armed Conflict mandate 1996-2021 and of
UNICEF’s report, published in June. We call on the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
develop a guidance note on monitoring, reporting,
advocacy, accountability and dialogue with regard to
the denial of humanitarian access for children. The EU
remains committed to doing its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): I would first like
to thank the Brazilian presidency for convening today’s
important debate. We fully support the statements made
by the observer of the European Union and on behalf of
the two Groups of Friends — of Children and Armed
Conflict and of the Responsibility to Protect. Although
much has already been said, I would like to add a few
remarks in my national capacity.
Today’s open debate could not be timelier, as we
are currently witnessing many horrendous armed
conflicts around the world in which children continue
to suffer disproportionately. Wars are fought in urban
areas, among civilian populations, basically blurring
the lines between the battlefield and places that should
not be targeted, such as homes, schools, hospitals
and other critical civilian infrastructure. And it goes
without saying that they have both immediate and longterm negative effects on children. When such violations
against children occur, the international community
must act. We must never give up on calling for
increased compliance with international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law and child-protection
norms. We must strive to strengthen accountability for
all serious violations committed against children.
The Czech Republic, along with several other
countries, has joined a statement condemning Russia’s
illegal actions against the children of Ukraine. Its
unprovoked and unjustified military aggression against
Ukraine grossly violates the rules of international law.
It inflicts severe physical and emotional suffering on
the Ukrainian population, including children. Russia’s
illegal and forced displacement of Ukrainian children

22-431869/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

from their home country, with those displaced being
orphans, children deprived of parental care and
children whose parents have died as a result of Russia’s
war against Ukraine, is a flagrant and cynical violation
of the rights and freedoms of children. More than
182,000 children have already been forcibly displaced
from Ukraine to Russia. There is now an abundance
of alarming evidence of inhumane acts perpetrated
by Russian troops, including sexual violence
against children, which we deplore in the strongest
possible terms.
We call on the international community to make
every possible effort to stop Russia’s illegal actions as
an aggressor State, hold it to account for its deliberate
and unconscionable actions and protect the rights of
children forcibly displaced from Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium): At the outset, I would like
to thank Brazil for organizing today’s open debate. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter, Ms. Russell
and Mr. Kumi for their work, both here in New York
and on the ground.
While we have come far in the past 25 years, the
report presented today (S/2022/493) shows that ending
the thousands of documented violations of children’s
rights in conflict requires a clear focus and attention on
the part of all of us. Conflicts are increasingly prolonged
and fought in urban areas, blurring the lines between
battlefields and critical civilian infrastructure, which is
often deliberately attacked, with immediate and longterm negative consequences for children’s survival and
well-being. The children and armed conflict mandate
has achieved important progress in the protection of
children over the past 25 years. It has proved that it
has sufficient instruments at its disposal, and they have
made an existential difference in so many young lives.
Belgium therefore confirms its unwavering support to
the mandate, including the integrity and impartiality of
its listing mechanism.
We would like to make the following remarks on the
occasion of the publication of the Secretary-General’s
annual report on children and armed conflict.
First, the report’s accurate reflection of the
worsening situation for children, especially in Ukraine,
is a timely and important signal that illustrates the
dramatic impact of hostilities on children in Ukraine,
10/45

19/07/2022

Ethiopia, Mozambique and the central Sahel region. We
are particularly worried about the increasing number of
acts of sexual violence committed against girls.
Secondly, Belgium supports a rigorous, objective
and transparent process to ensure that parties are
listed and delisted consistently across all country
situations. Holding the perpetrators of such violations
accountable increases the costs of non-compliance with
international law, deters future violations and better
protects children.
Accountability is essential for protecting children
in war and ending grave violations. The listing and
delisting of perpetrators in the Secretary-General’s
annual report remains a unique and powerful
tool for promoting compliance with international
law. It is therefore extremely worrisome that the
perpetrators could not be identified for 15 per cent of
those violations, making subsequent accountability
extremely challenging.
Thirdly, the children and armed conflict mandate
does not operate in a vacuum but in a broader framework
of standards and norms that provide specific protection
to children. That framework, which we must all
uphold by defending it rigorously and committing to
its obligations, includes the Geneva Conventions, the
Rome Statute and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the most-ratified human rights instrument in
the world.
Fourthly and finally, Belgium continues its call
for an increased child-protection capacity in United
Nations peace operations and political missions,
including through financial, political and operational
support to fully deliver on child protection mandates.
Let me conclude by thanking the Secretary-General
profoundly for the presentation of his annual report
on children and armed conflict, as well as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba de
Potgieter for all her work on the protection of children
in an increasingly complex context of war. The numbers
in the report are again very sobering. The violations are
still horrific, and the task of preventing them remains
vast. Yet the challenge is always in the moment, and the
moment is now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to thank Brazil
for convening this debate and all of the briefers for their
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

remarks. I would also like to reaffirm Poland’s strong
support for the Special Representative’s mandate and
thank her for all her efforts to put an end to violations
and abuses against children.

away the rights that women have fought for over the
past two decades. We in the international community
have not done enough to make the Taliban abide by
its obligations.

Poland remains firmly committed to protecting
children in armed conflict. We strongly condemn
all violations and abuses against children. Parties to
conflict should cease violations against children and
show compliance with international humanitarian
law, international human rights law, international
refugee law and international child protection norms.
For millions of children around the globe, living in a
conflict-affected area is tantamount to being deprived
of one’s childhood and basic human rights, including
the right to the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health and to education, which we recently
discussed with Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter in a conference
at the Polish Mission.

We underline the importance of mainstreaming
children’s rights in the areas of early warning,
conflict analysis, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
transitional justice and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. The most constructive way to
empower young people and ensure that they are not
radicalized is to invest in high-quality education.

Given the return of war to European soil caused by
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, as well as other
ongoing crises described in the Secretary-General’s
annual report for 2021(S/2022/493), we must continue
to scale up our efforts. The Office of the Prosecutor
General of Ukraine reports that nearly 1,000 children
have suffered as a result of massive Russian military
strikes. Just this past week, Russian missiles that struck
the city of Vinnytsia killed at least 23 people, including
three children. Across the country, hundreds of schools
have been destroyed by Russian shelling and air strikes.
We therefore welcome the decision to include Ukraine
as a situation of concern in the next report and call
for additional reporting and monitoring in accordance
with the children and armed conflict mandate, without
further delay.
We would like to turn the Security Council’s
attention to the thousands of Ukrainian children
transferred to Russia against their will. Such actions
constitute a violation of both the Genocide Convention
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The
international community should do everything in
its power to hold the perpetrators accountable and
protect Ukrainian children’s right to identity, including
their nationality.
We are also deeply disturbed by the tragic
situation of women and girls in Afghanistan. The
Taliban’s leaders have not only failed to keep their
promises — as they are blocking girls’ access to secondlevel education — but also openly stated that they have
shut schools indefinitely. The Taliban is stripping

We strongly condemn attacks against students,
teachers and schools, as well as the use of schools for
military purposes. Appropriate and timely reintegration
support is crucial for the future of children who were
formerly associated with armed groups. Poland is
proud to be a member of the Steering Committee for
the Global Coalition for Reintegration, as well as the
Group of Friends of Reintegration, and we are eager to
further engage in the activities of those forums.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Košuth (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity of observer, and with
the statements made on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict and the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect. I would like to
add a few remarks in my national capacity.
We commend Brazil for convening today’s
very timely open debate and thank today’s briefers,
including Mr. Kumi, for their powerful presentations.
We also highly appreciate the important role that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF play in
child protection and the promotion of children’s rights.
Despite a slight decrease in the number of grave
violations against children as compared to 2020, the
figures and trends in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/493) remain very alarming. The
ongoing killing and maiming of children, as well
as their recruitment and use as soldiers, the denial
of humanitarian access to them and the continued
dramatic increases in abductions, sexual violence
and attacks on schools and hospitals, are extremely
concerning. Even more sadly, the figures in the report
are by far not comprehensive, given the absence of data
from Ethiopia, Mozambique and Ukraine.

22-4318611/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

As a neighbouring country directly affected by the
situation in Ukraine, Slovakia welcomes its designation
as a situation of concern with immediate effect and its
inclusion in the next report of the Secretary-General.
Russia’s brutal aggression has officially led to hundreds
of children being killed and injured, hundreds of schools
and hospitals destroyed or damaged and two thirds of
Ukraine’s children forced to flee their homes — and all
of them adversely affected. And we know that the real
figures are much higher.
We cannot overlook those facts at today’s open
debate, since we once again witnessed Russia’s attempts
to divert attention from its atrocious violations of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
It is crucial to recall that it is Russia that bears full
responsibility for this child crisis. Had it not been for
its illegal and unjustified invasion of Ukraine, none of
this would be happening.
We therefore once again call on Russia to cease all
its military activities in Ukraine and immediately and
unconditionally withdraw all its troops and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. Slovakia does
its utmost to ensure the well-being of almost 173,000
child refugees who have crossed our borders so far
and to protect their rights, in particular their right to
education, and we will continue to do so.
Slovakia fully endorses the recommendations
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report and would
like to complement them with a call for action in
three particular areas: the adoption of a robust
legal framework, full compliance with obligations
under international law and effective accountability
for violations.
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, the Paris Principles, the Vancouver
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration are all key
instruments that have been adopted at the international
level. Slovakia has ratified, endorsed and implemented
all of them. We call on those States that have not yet done
so to take that action as a matter of priority. Moreover, in
order to further strengthen the legal framework and fill
the gap in international criminal law, we urge States to
finally make meaningful progress towards establishing
a new convention on crimes against humanity this year.
At the domestic level, it is crucial to ensure the
criminalization of grave violations, the adoption of
12/45

19/07/2022

effective national frameworks for reintegration and
assistance to child victims, and proper cooperation with
international and regional accountability mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court. However,
even these robust frameworks will not bring an end
to children’s suffering without full compliance and
effective accountability for violations. We therefore
reiterate our strong call to all the parties to any armed
conflict to fully respect international humanitarian
law, human rights law and international refugee law.
Wherever there are violations, accountability must be
ensured and the perpetrators brought to justice.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I want to assure you
that Slovakia, in its capacity as Vice-President of the
Executive Board of UNICEF and currently serving as
its interim President, will spare no effort to help save
children’s lives in conflicts across the globe, protect
their rights and enable them to fulfil their potential,
despite their dire circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Fepuleai (New Zealand): New Zealand
would like to thank Brazil for organizing today’s
important open debate. We also want to express
our gratitude to Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Catherine Russell,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Patrick Kumi,
Executive Director of Similar Ground, for their highly
informative briefings.
It has been 26 years since the release of the
Graça Machel report (A/51/306), which drew global
attention to the devastating impact of armed conflict
on children. The Secretary-General’s latest report on
children in armed conflict (S/2022/493) makes it clear
that children and young people are uniquely and often
disproportionately affected by conflicts and atrocities.
New Zealand thanks and commends the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict for their tireless work and
advocacy. We are all horrified by the way children are
used, abused and manipulated, with their lives upended
and their futures destroyed. The Secretary-General’s
report is harrowing reading. We would like to highlight
a few issues that demand urgent attention.
Both schools and hospitals have special protections
as civilian objects under international humanitarian
law. Yet in its latest report, the United Nations verified
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

116 attacks on schools and hospitals. New Zealand has
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, as have 113
other Member States, and we urge others to do the same.
In 2016, at the initiative of New Zealand and four other
elected Security Council members, the Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), on health care in armed conflict,
which unequivocally condemned attacks on healthcare workers and facilities. That resolution has a very
simple message, which is that the wounded and sick,
medical personnel, facilities, transport and equipment
must be respected and protected. The delivery of
medical assistance must not be obstructed. Yet attacks
on hospitals have continued, with children frequently
among the casualties. Russia’s illegal and unprovoked
attack on Ukraine has seen further egregious examples.
Those attacks are an affront to our common humanity
and must stop.
Girls in situations of armed conflict face unique
risks. In 2021, almost one in three child victims of
grave violations were girls, a sharp increase from 2020.
In total, 98 per cent of sexual violence was perpetrated
against girls, while 30 per cent of abductions affected
girls, another significant increase from 2020. Sadly,
we know that those numbers are just the tip of the
iceberg and that the true numbers are far greater. New
Zealand will continue to advocate strongly for the
rights of children, especially girls, to be protected in
armed conflict.
Finally, we note that climate change is driving
conflict through competition for scarce resources. It
is inevitable that this will have negative consequences
for children. Climate change is the most pressing issue
for our region, the Pacific, and we remain deeply
concerned about the effects it is already having on
children. Adding conflict to that mix is not a welcome
development. We commend the Special Representative
and the Secretary-General for committing to further
investigate the links between climate change and
conflict and their impacts on children.
In conclusion, let me reiterate New Zealand’s full
support for the work of the Special Representative and
her Office, the rigour and integrity of the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism and the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive reporting and recommendations. We
urge all Member States to continue to support their vital
work and to help them translate the global consensus
on the need to protect the rights of children in conflict
settings into a much better reality than the one we
see today.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Brazil’s presidency of the Security Council for the
month of July. We support your tireless efforts at the
helm of the Council and wish you every success.
The protection of children in armed conflict is a
vital issue if we wish to create balanced generations
that can build a more stable and prosperous future
for conflict-affected countries. The international
community should approach the issue of children in
armed conflict very carefully by working to create a
new reality for such children that includes breaking
the cycles of violence, addressing its negative effects
on children and dealing with related problems that
have the potential to create an environment that fosters
extremism and violence. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the following points.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia believes that the
protection of children in armed conflicts worldwide
is the shared responsibility of the entire international
community. Upholding it requires a collective response
and concerted efforts to address the consequences and
causes of armed conflict. My country has joined many
international frameworks in that regard. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2022/493), and in particular the
section related to the coalition’s cooperation with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
despite our reservations regarding the number of
incidents that have been attributed to the coalition.
The report underscores the coalition’s commitment to
supporting legitimacy in Yemen and the protection of
children. We also support the continuing important
measures being taken to enhance child protection in the
conflict in Yemen, based on the relevant international
terms of reference. The coalition is in fact a model
for other international coalitions when it comes to
protecting children in armed conflict.
In that regard, we reaffirm our support for
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, as well as her
positive role in protecting children at the international
level. We hope that her constructive cooperation with
the coalition will continue with a view to developing
protection mechanisms for children related to armed
conflict in Yemen. The report showed an increase from

22-4318613/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

the previous year in the number of violations against
children committed by the Houthi militias, including
recruitment, killings, maiming and abductions.
The Houthi militias continue to perpetrate the most
atrocious crimes against children in Yemen. They
violate children’s rights, including by herding them
into stadiums and buildings with the aim of influencing
their ideas in order to incite them to commit terrorism
and spread extremism and to prepare them to be sent to
fight on the front lines.
We would like to stress here that all current and
future references in the reports related to the Houthi
militias should be followed up by the Houthis with
genuine implementation, commitment and positive
efforts on the ground regarding Yemeni children. So far
all the evidence has repeatedly shown that the Houthis
are not serious about this and have persistently violated
all agreements.
In conclusion, Saudi Arabia underscores the
importance of strengthening international cooperation
in addressing and responding to the suffering of
children in armed conflict. We very much hope to see
more children back in the classroom, which is where
they really should be.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I would like to
thank Brazil for organizing today’s important open
debate. My appreciation also goes to the SecretaryGeneral for his annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2022/493) and to all the briefers for their
valuable contributions.
Children always deserve better, whether in times
of peace or in times of armed conflict. It is in that
strong belief that I wish to underscore the following
three points.
First, Thailand supports the call by the SecretaryGeneral for all parties to conflict to adhere to
international law and principles in order to protect
children and ensure their rights. That should cover
access to education, health care, social services and safe
spaces, which are especially important during a global
pandemic that has aggravated the vulnerabilities of
children, including those in armed conflict situations.
Thailand also supports the continued efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to engage with concerned
14/45

19/07/2022

States and parties to protect children from harm and
exploitation. Children should not be made part of
conflict. In that regard, we welcome the release of
more than 12,000 children by armed groups and armed
forces last year, which is a testament to the value of a
constructive approach that produces concrete outcomes.
Secondly, we must continue to mainstream child
protection across the peace continuum, including in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts to achieve a
sustainable peace. Their security is an important part
of human security. To mainstream child protection,
Thailand encourages greater consultations among the
Security Council, host countries, troop- and policecontributing countries and other stakeholders on the
need to have a clear mandate on child protection in all
relevant United Nations peacekeeping operations.
That mandate must be accompanied by adequate
and timely resources as well as enhanced capabilities at
United Nations Headquarters and missions. In addition,
Thailand supports greater interaction between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission to
identify ways to effectively address the needs of children
in armed conflict and post-conflict situations and to
promote synergies in those efforts. That should include
contributions by peacekeepers as early peacebuilders.
That leads me to my third and final point: enhancing
multi-stakeholder partnerships in finding pathways
towards sustaining peace, which is also in line with
Thailand’s long-standing humanitarian tradition. For
our part, Thailand has been working closely with all
partners in reducing the statelessness of children
concerned to enable their eventual reintegration into
their societies. Thailand stands ready to share our best
practices in that regard, as well as our home-grown
development approaches, which could contribute to the
efforts to address conflicts at their root cause and in
turn make peace more sustainable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala would like to thank Brazil for convening
today’s open debate to discuss the theme of children
and armed conflict, as children are the world’s most
affected and vulnerable segment of society. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary General
for her briefing, as well as Ms. Catherine Russell for
UNICEF’s contribution to providing vital humanitarian
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

supplies and essential services to vulnerable children
and families.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2022/493) and express our concern about the
continued reports of killings and maiming of children,
as well as the recruitment and use of children as soldiers.
Millions of children around the world have been forcibly
displaced owing to armed conflict. Many of them
become stateless — migrants and refugees — and like
internally displaced persons, they are at greater risk of
being subjected to trafficking or sexual exploitation
and experiencing physical or psychological trauma and
they lack access to medical care and services to meet
their needs. In addition, it is urgent that unimpeded and
unhindered humanitarian access to them be granted.
Four months and 23 days have passed since the
start of the Russian Federation’s illegal, unjustified
and unprovoked invasion of the sovereign territory of
Ukraine, during which time it has indiscriminately
shelled areas, destroyed critical infrastructure and
killed civilians, including women and — of most
relevance to today’s debate — children.
The proliferation of small arms in conflicts
has devastating effects on the lives of children and
contributes to a lack of protection before, during and
after armed conflicts. Because small arms are light and
easy to handle, children can operate and repair them
with little training. As a result, those weapons facilitate
the use and targeting of children in war, contributing to
an environment in which they are the victims of human
rights violations, forced displacement, psychosocial
trauma and other grave abuses. Those weapons have
claimed more lives than they have ever saved.
It is therefore important for States to ratify
international instruments such as the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, as well
as the Arms Trade Treaty, and to ensure the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
Guatemala greatly values the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the benefits
disbursed by its Peacebuilding Fund. The PBC plays its
role by achieving positive outcomes among its different
country configurations, in particular by supporting
capacity-building for adequate demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration at the community

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

level, while taking into account specific needs and
the impacts on affected children. We believe that we
need to strengthen the inherent space for the PBC and
its crucial contributions to the consideration of draft
resolutions of the Council. We must also take into
account the mandates of the Office of the Special
Representative and related partners in the context of
the PBC’s unique platform for peacebuilding in postconflict States in order to lay the foundation for future
generations to enjoy the dividends of peace.
We recognize the valuable work of the Council in
seeking the protection of children in armed conflict and
respect for and compliance with international norms. We
urge all States to continue fulfilling that commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Australia thanks Brazil for
convening today’s important debate, which coincides
with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We would like to thank
the Special Representative, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter, for her leadership and dedication to children
affected by armed conflict around the world. We also
thank her team for producing the Secretary-General’s
annual report (S/2022/493).
In the past 25 years, more than 170,000 children
have been freed from armed forces and groups and
reintegrated into society — thank goodness. That has
been achieved with the help of child protection advisers,
joint and national action plans and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration — all guided by the
United Nations children and armed conflict efforts.
That demonstrates the critical role of the children
and armed conflict mandate, which continues to have
Australia’s full support.
Sadly, despite that success, conflict continues to
take a devastating toll on children each and every day.
The Secretary-General’s report details 23,982 — let me
say that again, 23,982 — grave violations committed
against children in the past year alone, especially the
violations of killing and maiming, recruitment and use,
and denial of humanitarian access.
The well-being of children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Syria and Yemen
continues to be of great concern. We encourage the
signing and implementation of joint and national action
plans with the United Nations to end and prevent grave

22-4318615/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

violations in those countries. We must also highlight the
plight of children in other conflict situations, such as in
Myanmar, where an accurate picture of the extent of
violations against children is sadly difficult to obtain.
However, I must say that the inclusion of Ukraine,
Ethiopia and Mozambique as new situations of concern
for the next report is a sobering reminder that the rights
of children across the world need our active attention
and protection more than ever.
Australia is particularly concerned by the increase
in grave violations against girls, who, in addition to
becoming casualties of conflict, are disproportionately
subjected to abduction and sexual violence, and such
incidents are vastly underreported. Conflict also
displaces children from their homes and disrupts their
education, development and well-being.
It is our shared responsibility to prevent further
harm to and the exploitation of children in conflicts.
All parties to conflict must comply with international
obligations and commitments to protect children,
including international, humanitarian and human rights
law. All parties must take action to protect children in
accordance with the principles of precaution, distinction
and proportionality. We must prioritize gender- and
age-responsive interventions with the interests of the
child at the centre.
Australia supports increased child-protection
capacity in United Nations peace operations and
special political missions and increased support for the
United Nations Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism
to inform response and prevention efforts.
As an international community, we must do more
to end grave violations against children and to shield
current and future generations of children from the
impact of armed conflict. In doing so we strengthen the
foundations for a sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Bae (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s open debate.
I would first like to express my delegation’s support
for Special Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter
and her Office.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
children and armed conflict mandate, and while we can
point to some notable accomplishments, the sustained
16/45

19/07/2022

high numbers of violations, including the killing,
maiming and abduction of children and the recruitment
of child soldiers, is very alarming.
Despite the efforts of the Special Representative’s
Office and country task forces, which allowed for
the release of more than 12,000 children from armed
groups and forces last year, it is our belief that we can
do much more to protect children in armed conflict.
Against that troubling backdrop, I would like to make
the following points.
First, we call for all parties to conflict to fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law. In
addition, ensuring accountability and ending impunity
for violations against children is crucial. To facilitate
that process, we urge Member States to accede to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and to consider endorsing and implementing
measures for child protection. It is imperative that all
parties release all abducted children in their custody
immediately and unconditionally.
Secondly,
safe,
timely
and
unhindered
humanitarian access as well as access by children to
services and protection must be ensured. The lives of
children depend on such measures. In addition, schools,
hospitals and their personnel must be protected at all
times. Attacking such facilities aggravates the difficult
situation of children, which has been impacted by the
coronavirus disease and conflict.
Thirdly, my delegation reiterates the significant role
played by the United Nations, including peacekeeping
operations and UNICEF, in child protection. We strongly
support United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions in their efforts to facilitate
a protective environment for children affected by
armed conflict.
My Government has been working with UNICEF
for education, reintegration and assistance programmes
for girls and boys in many fragile regions of the world,
including Afghanistan, and we assert our willingness
to continue that cooperation.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its commitment to
working with the United Nations as well as all Member
States with a view to better protecting children from
the scourge of armed conflict.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It gives
me pleasure to welcome Ambassador Fernando Simas,
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil, and to
thank him for presiding over this important meeting
on the situation of children in armed conflict and
protecting them from all forms of grave violations.
I should also like to thank all briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.
The Government of the Sudan stresses its ongoing
endeavours to protect and promote children’s rights,
especially those in areas affected by armed conflict.
My Government continues its efforts to reintegrate the
armed movements and groups signatories to the 2020
Juba Peace Agreement into the road map on protecting
children from violations, in line with the implementation
of the joint plan between the Government of the Sudan
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict,
signed in 2016. In order to achieve those endeavours
and efforts, the Government has established a number
of structures to prevent such violations, as follows: the
reconfiguration of the high-level Sovereign Council,
presided over by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
the Ministry of Social Development; the membership
of the Ministry of Defence; the Secretariat General of
the National Council for Child Care and other relevant
ministries, as well as partners of peace signatories to
the Juba Peace Agreement and the UNICEF Executive
Director in the Sudan.
The establishment of a number of technical
committees that provide training and capacity-building
for the child-protection units and mechanisms affiliated
with the armed forces reflects the positive steps taken
and the tireless efforts made to provide protection and
promotion for children’s rights in conflict-affected
areas and prevent any grave violations against them.
Turning to legal protection, the law provides for
mechanisms to protect children survivors of violence
and sexual abuse. Units for the protection of families
and children were established, as well as children’s
prosecutors and courts. The National Council for Child
Care has formed a special prosecution unit to combat
violence against children and has taken measures to
protect children from sexual violence.
With respect to the segment on the Sudan in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/493), dated 23 June

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

2022, I would like to reiterate that the Government
of the Sudan is fully committed to promoting and
protecting children’s rights and preventing any grave
violations against them in areas of armed conflict. We
stress the implementation of the 2016 national plan to
protect children. I would also like to refer to our efforts
to revitalize and reactivate the plan to prevent any grave
violations against children, which led to the delisting of
the Sudan from the 2018 list of child violations.
In that vein, my Government would request a
more meticulous approach and greater objectivity
in that type of report, free of any generalizations or
inaccurate information, with a focus on supporting
the Government’s efforts to prevent and stop any
intercommunal conflicts that could lead to such
violations against children. There is a need to assist
the Government to dispose of any explosive remnants
of war, which are the main cause of the death and
maiming of children. The Government should also
be supported in its negotiations with other armed
movements non-signatories to the October 2020 Juba
Peace Agreement, so that we can ensure the protection
of children in the context of peacekeeping operations.
To conclude, the Government of the Sudan
encourages and welcomes the field visits by Ms. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter and her team. We stress our
continued cooperation and coordination on all matters
related to child protection and the prevention of any
forms of grave violations against them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to thank Brazil for having convened
this open debate and the Secretary-General for his
report (S/20220/493), which has served as a basis for our
discussions. I also wish to thank Special Representative
Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and her entire Office
for the tireless work that they do on all aspects of the
children and armed conflict agenda.
Spain aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
In the past 10 years, it has become progressively
more difficult to access children to protect them.
Today this access is more difficult than ever. The
Secretary-General himself acknowledges in his report
that this cannot go on. The international community
as a whole must — we must all — work urgently and

22-4318617/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

19/07/2022

in a coordinated manner to ensure safe, rapid and
uninterrupted humanitarian access to children.

conflict to comply with international humanitarian law
and with the substance of resolution 2286 (2016).

The coronavirus disease pandemic has unleashed
very real and very negative consequences that have
affected millions of children around the world. Their
access to safe education has been hampered; essential
protection, vaccination, nutrition and food services
have been disrupted; and the risks of violations of their
rights have increased, including the six grave violations
documented in the report of the Secretary-General.

Finally, in relation to the protection of victims, it is
essential that peace operations improve and expand the
mandates for the protection of children. The Security
Council and its members have the opportunity to
enhance protection mandates, including by appointing
protection advisors and expert teams. Council members
can count on Spain’s support for this essential work.
Spain welcomes action plans and dialogue with State and
non-State actors to prevent and reduce grave violations.

Allow me to share a few brief reflections related
to three areas that directly affect children in conflict
situations. First, with regard to education, of particular
concern is the fact that 50 per cent of refugee and
displaced girls who were forced to leave schools during
the pandemic or who are forced to leave schools in
conflict situations, will never return to school. Many of
these girls face, inter alia, early marriage and pregnancy,
trafficking, sexual and gender-based violence.
Access to safe education is the best way to ensure
the protection and future opportunities of children in
complex emergencies and situations of armed conflict.
Spain has signed the Safe Schools Declaration and
its guidelines. Following the holding of the third and
fourth Safe Schools Conferences, in Spain and Nigeria,
respectively, we convene an annual virtual seminar on
the implementation of the Declaration, which is open to
the States that have subscribed to it.
Resolution 2601 (2021) was an important step
forward in this area. Let us not forget that. I would
like to take this opportunity to invite all States that
have not yet done so to sign the Declaration, but I
would especially like to invite all Member States that
sponsored resolution 2601 (2021) but have not yet
signed it to do so.
To those countries that, like Spain, have signed
the Declaration, I would like to convey our support
for working together on its implementation. We hope
and wish that the Transforming Education summit that
the Secretary-General has convened for 19 September
will be instrumental in strengthening the humanitarian
protection of schools, children and teachers at the
highest level.
Secondly, with respect to health, the protection of
children’s health is a basic right, and attacks against
their health are a very serious violation committed
against children. Spain calls on all parties to armed
18/45

The report of the Secretary-General clearly indicates
that parties to armed conflicts must commit to handing
over child soldiers and prisoners to associations in
charge of their protection. For Spain, the protection and
redress of victims’ rights is fundamental. We recently
made a voluntary contribution of €150,000 to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to enable it to strengthen the mechanisms for
reintegrating child soldiers, guarantee their rights and
ensure their participation in the design of reintegration
plans and programmes.
With this contribution, Spain also wishes to
convey its commitment to the mandate of the Special
Representative and especially to the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism, which is a mechanism
that allows for investigating facts and documenting
grave violations against children with independence,
impartiality and credibility. It should be a model and
an example for future United Nations mechanisms
investigating violations of international humanitarian
law. That is why Spain considers it essential that the
results of this Mechanism be adequately reflected in the
annual reports. It is one of the best instruments available
to the Secretary-General to enforce international law,
influence the conduct of parties to conflict, including
non-State actors, protect children and prevent the six
grave violations against them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important annual meeting. Of
course, I thank the Special Representative Gamba de
Potgieter for her briefing, as well as the other briefers
for their remarks.
Keeping civilians safe, starting first and foremost
with our children, in both peacetime and war, is
a matter of utmost importance. The protection of
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

life — even more so, the protection of a child’s life — is
a fundamental aspect of Israel’s ethos. Child-protection
and prevention policies are one of the most integral parts
of our soldiers’ training, and this training is translated
into practice on the battlefield, at times when Israel is
forced to defend its citizens, including children, against
those who seek our destruction.
One of the central challenges faced by Israel is
combating terror. Whether it is Iran’s terror proxy
Hizbullah to our north, Hamas to our south or
Palestinian incitement and terrorism from Judea and
Samaria, what they share is the relentless drive to
violently murder Israelis. Israeli children are the targets
of Palestinian terror. They are struck with rocks and
firebombs while on car rides or on hikes. They are
maimed by rockets while running to nearby shelters.
They are hit by machine gun fire while walking down
the street.
Israeli children are not just legitimate targets of
Palestinian terror; they are primary targets. But it goes
deeper than that. Israel uses missile-defence systems to
protect our children, yet those who seek our destruction
use their children to protect their missiles. While Hamas
fires rockets at Israeli schools, it uses Gazan schools as
rocket launchpads and cover for terror tunnels. They
use their own children as human shields.
Targeting kindergartens, playgrounds and private
homes is a war crime. Doing so while hiding behind
civilians is a double war crime. This cannot be tolerated.
Beyond purposely using Palestinian and Lebanese
civilians as human shields, these terrorists also
deliberately and actively recruit and train minors to
commit heinous terrorist attacks. My children, along
with the children of many others in this Chamber,
are now at summer camp. Yet while our children are
playing sports, Hamas is teaching children in Gaza how
to assemble assault rifles.
But for Palestinian children, summertime is not
the only time that they are taught to commit jihad. The
Palestinian leadership continues to espouse hate in both
textbooks and across social media. From glorifying
terrorists to inciting violence against Jews, the minds
of young Palestinians are being poisoned.
With all of that being said, I will now make one
thing abundantly clear: this phenomenon is not a
one-off event. Using children as human shields and
recruiting them as terrorists and fighters is a central
part of the Palestinian terror and radical Islam’s modus

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

operandi. Hamas, Hizbullah and other groups like them
want to drive up Palestinian and Lebanese casualties.
Do participants know why? It is in order to delegitimize
Israel’s basic right to defend itself from their terror.
For those terrorists, children are simply another tool
to be disposed of in their mission to annihilate Israel.
Horrifyingly for them, a win is when they can drive up
the body count of civilians and then brazenly campaign,
primarily here at the United Nations and in the media,
to convince the world to blame Israel — all in order to
cripple Israel’s right of self-defence.
Sadly, this report (S/2022/493) adds fuel to the
terrorist fire by counting civilian casualties almost
completely divorced from their context. Israel, a lawabiding, democratic State, does everything in its power
to protect all civilians. Yet terror groups, which openly
violate international law, purposely drive up civilian
casualty rates, including among their own children,
all while pointing the finger of blame at Israel. Any
comparison between murderous terror groups and a
democratic State committed to the rule of law has no
place in the Security Council or anywhere else.
Israel agrees that everyone in this Chamber has a
duty to protect children in times of peace and in times of
war. We commend the efforts of Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter and her team to protect children
across the globe. However, we must be careful never
to draw conclusions based on numbers alone. Those
who are fully responsible for civilian casualties must
be held fully accountable. The Security Council
must place the full blame where it belongs — on the
shoulders of Hamas, on the shoulders of Hizbullah
and on the shoulders of radical Islam. There has been
enough playing into the hands of terrorists. The lives of
children are too precious for that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Brazil for convening
this important meeting. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the report
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493).
For 20 years, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict has been guiding the efforts
of Member States to ensure the rights of children to
special protection, as well as their right to education in
conditions of peace and security. However, the number
of attacks on schools is rising. Refugee, internally

22-4318619/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

displaced and stateless children affected by violent
conflicts are often denied of their rights, even to go
to school.
The situation faced by children in Ukraine since
the Russian invasion is particularly worrisome. Japan
made a contribution of $14.2 million to UNICEF in
March and an additional $10 million in April to ensure
child protection and education for children affected by
the war.
Lost educational opportunities will have lasting
negative impacts on future generations and on the
future of every nation. We must not forget that education
needs to be maintained at all costs, even during
conflict and other dire situations, as education can be
a life-saving intervention and can provide hope for the
future. In that regard, it was a privilege for me to sign a
note with UNICEF last week to provide approximately
$9 million to support quality education and promote
access to education in Burkina Faso. The international
community needs to continue to do more to protect and
empower our children and our future.
I would like to emphasize that, in an age of
uncertainty and complexity, the best way forward is
to invest in people. Providing quality education is a
powerful tool to prevent and mitigate conflicts and crises
and to promote peace and sustainable development. I
am expecting that today’s open debate will feed into our
ongoing discussions and generate further momentum
towards the Summit on Transforming Education
in September.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Andorra.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Brazil, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council for the month of
July, for organizing this open debate on children and
armed conflict, and for the attention that the Council is
giving to this topic. I thank the briefers — Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, Ms. Catherine Russell and
Mr. Patrick Kumi — for their contributions.
Andorra associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict and with
that of the European Union.
Although we learned of some progress this
morning, at the national level we are very concerned
about the serious situation that persist. The Secretary20/45

19/07/2022

General’s 2021 report (S/2022/493), whose data is
fully verified, shows an increase in the most serious
violations. To simply give some figures, the number
of abductions of, and cases of sexual violence against,
children have increased by more than 20 per cent and
attacks on schools and hospitals by 5 per cent.
We take this opportunity to call on all parties
involved in armed conflicts to respect international
humanitarian law, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol, the Vancouver
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration in order
to protect children from the most serious violations,
while paying particular attention to girls, children with
disabilities and displaced children.
My country has always been committed to the
protection of children’s rights, with a specific focus
on education as an essential element of every person’s
development. Resolution 2601 (2021) clearly set out that
framework. In September, the Summit on Transforming
Education will open new spaces its implementation:
children cannot be left behind; and nothing should
prevent them from accessing their right to education,
even more so in times of crisis.
I would like to mention Andorra’s actions regarding
the protection of refugees, refugees, children from
Ukraine, who have been educated since their arrival,
integrated into extracurricular activities and received
psychological and mental health care.
We need to put children back at the centre of our
discussions, our decisions and our policies. All children
are children, and they must be treated as victims
in conflicts, not as the ones responsible for adult
decisions. We need to raise our voices to make their
reintegration a priority to help to create the necessary
settings and mechanisms.
The most serious violations against children in
armed conflict involve perpetrators who must be
held accountable for their actions. In those extreme
situations, where children are at their most vulnerable,
their abuse cannot go unpunished.
We would like to especially commend the efforts
of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
on the work done in recent years for children and their
reintegration and for its holistic approach in taking into
account the conditions that affect children, particularly
the work done alongside UNICEF. It is essential to end
violations of children’s rights in armed conflict. How
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

the verification and negotiation work is immense and
needs strong support.
We are aware of the difficult conditions in which
the children and armed conflict team operates. I would
like to congratulate it and all the actors on the ground
for their tireless dedication.
This year, we are celebrating 25 years since the
establishment of the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. On that anniversary, Andorra was honoured
to host the visit by Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter
for the first time.
Andorra supports the work of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
are committed to it with the same dedication. We
encourage the Security Council in its initiatives and
actions for the lives of children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this important meeting.
I would like to add the following brief remarks. First,
my delegation stresses that Syria’s national legislation
has been framed by the principle of the protection of
children under the provisions of our Constitution. The
Syrian Government’s national plan on the protection of
children is based on its comprehensive understanding
of the current challenges and willingness to address
the consequences of the terrorist war imposed on
Syria, while ensuring the security and prosperity of
all Syrians.
Secondly, in line with its commitments to
upholding international human rights law, over the past
10 years the Syrian State has adopted a number of laws
and legislation on child protection and child care. In
2013, a law that includes an amendment to the penal
code was adopted to criminalize child recruitment and
children’s participation in combat. We also adopted a
national plan to address the issue of victims of child
recruitment. Last year, we adopted a law on the rights of
the child to promote the role of the State and its various
institutions in protecting and focusing on the welfare of
children, in order to ensure their cultural, psychological
and socioeconomic development and rehabilitation and
create the conditions they need to contribute in every
aspect of development.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, our children have regrettably fallen victim
to various countries’ well-known aggression against
Syria. They have suffered and continue to suffer from
the unilateral measures imposed on us. Many have
been subject to recruitment by terrorist organizations
and separatist militias that have forcibly involved them
in the scourge of war. All such actions represent grave
violations of children’s rights. Children under the yoke
of the Israeli occupation in the occupied Arab territories
in Palestine and the Syrian Golan also continue to suffer
as victims of Israel’s various violations.
Fourthly, the situation in north-eastern Syria in the
Al-Hol camp, which is under the control of separatist
militias that are proxies for the United States occupation
forces, is a pertinent example of the suffering that
children are enduring. Many children in the camp are
at serious risk of being indoctrinated into extremist
takfiri ideology, which will turn them into time bombs
and pose a threat to security and stability in the region
and beyond if the issue is not immediately addressed.
Addressing the problem of foreign terrorists’
families, including women and children, requires
genuine political commitment on the part of their
countries of origin, which should guarantee the
repatriation, rehabilitation and reintegration of every
family member. My delegation calls on the countries
concerned to follow the example of the successful
experiences of a number of countries that have genuinely
assumed their responsibilities and have repatriated
their citizens in coordination with the Government of
Syria, not through suspect deals with terrorist entities
or separatist militias.
Fifthly and lastly, my delegation stresses the
importance of dissociating the issue of promoting
the protection of children around the world from all
political considerations. We want to underline that
effectively reintegrating all children suffering from
the impact of various conflicts requires serious and
organized engagement aimed at motivating them to
return to school, rehabilitating schools that are affected
and providing them with an environment conducive
to enabling them to become a pillar of sustainable
development in the post-conflict period. They must
also become a major part of the foundation underlying
social cohesion and sustained peace. My delegation
calls on UNICEF and other relevant United Nations
agencies to play an effective role in returning those
children to a normal life and helping them overcome
the negative effects of years of conflict.

22-4318621/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia would like to
thank Brazil for organizing this important meeting.
We also want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and
the other briefers for their valuable contributions to
this debate.
Malaysia is committed to promoting and
safeguarding the rights and well-being of children in
armed conflict, which was reflected in our initiative
in introducing resolution 2225 (2015). While the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493)
reports a decrease in the number of grave violations
in comparison with the 2021 report (S/2021/437), the
number remains alarmingly high at more than 20,000
cases. We are appalled by the spike in the cases of
abduction, which have increased by more than 20 per
cent compared to last year, with a 41 per cent rise in
the abduction of girls. It is also alarming to note that a
total of 36 parties to conflicts around the world — State
and non-State actors alike — have failed to put in place
measures to improve the protection of children pursuant
to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Those distressing trends demand concerted action
on the part of all the parties concerned. Malaysia
commends the work of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and of UNICEF in publishing
the guidance note on abduction in April. It will help
country task forces with monitoring and reporting,
as well as their equivalents in non-monitoring-andreporting-mechanism situations and their partners in
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions.
That in turn will help to strengthen monitoring,
reporting and responding to the abduction of children in
armed-conflict settings. In that regard, I would like to
focus on three central aspects that Malaysia considers
of particular importance.

19/07/2022

operations and special political missions and that data
and capacities related to child protection are preserved
and transferred during mission transitions.
Lastly, it is important that all States become
party as soon as possible to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and that they
endorse and implement the Safe Schools Declaration
and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Malaysia reiterates the importance of a reporting
mechanism that is credible, independent, impartial,
objective and transparent. We regret that Israel, the
occupying Power in Palestine, is not listed in the annex
to the report, despite its indiscriminate killing of and
violence against thousands of Palestinian children in
the occupied Palestinian territory. We emphasize the
need to hold Israel accountable for its apartheid crimes
and grave human rights violations and support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation for listing Israel
in annexes to future reports.
Children are society’s most precious asset, as they
are our future. Let us all work together to ensure that
children around the world affected by armed conflict
are given the enormous consideration and attention that
they truly deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Khandamishvili (Georgia): At the outset, I
would like to extend our sincere gratitude to the Brazilian
presidency for convening today’s open debate on this
critically important topic and to thank the briefers for
their comprehensive and sobering presentations.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the European Union (EU) in
its capacity of observer and would like to make some
additional remarks in its national capacity.

First, it is crucial to develop practical guidance on
data collection involving the denial of humanitarian
access. Such efforts will help standardize and support
the work of the country task forces on monitoring and
reporting for the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism.

As we speak, children in conflict continue to
experience extreme levels of violence, killing and denial
of humanitarian access. We are gravely concerned
about the findings contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/493) concerning the increasing numbers
of those killed, maimed or recruited.

Secondly, we echo the Secretary-General’s
proposal that the Security Council ensure that childprotection provisions and capacities are included in
all relevant mandates of United Nations peacekeeping

In that context, let me underline the vital
importance of upholding international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and the relevant
international legal frameworks, such as the Convention

22/45

22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as
well as the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
As we gather here, Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified
and premeditated full-scale military aggression against
Ukraine continues, causing enormous human suffering,
civilian casualties and forced displacement. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as of 12 July a total of 343 children
had died during Russia’s military attack on Ukraine.
However, the real numbers could be higher.
We condemn Russia’s military aggression against
Ukraine in the strongest possible terms, which is a
flagrant violation of international law and represents
an assault on the key principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter
of Paris for a New Europe. We reiterate Georgia’s
strong solidarity with the Ukrainian people and
reaffirm its unwavering support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, within
its internationally recognized borders.
Unfortunately, Russian aggression and occupation
are well known to Georgia. The fundamental rights of
the conflict-affected children in the Russian-occupied
regions of Georgia, Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, continue
to be violated by the occupying Power exercising
effective control on the ground. Among the major
concerns are restrictions on the freedom of movement,
access to health care and social services and the
prohibition of education in the native language, thereby
depriving up to 5,000 children each year of the right to
education in their mother tongue and other basic rights.
That pressure on ethnic Georgians living in the
Russian-occupied regions of my country, coupled
with other gross human rights violations and ethnic
discrimination, creates the risk for another wave of
displacement. Many schoolchildren and their families
are forced to leave their homes and move to the territory
controlled by the Government of Georgia in order to
have the possibility of studying in their native language.
In that regard, let me stress that the Russian
Federation, the Power exercising effective control
on the ground, as clearly demonstrated by the recent
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights, bears
full responsibility for the violations of human rights

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

and fundamental freedoms in both occupied regions
of Georgia.
Against that background, while we reiterate our
full commitment to the protection of children’s rights,
we call on the international community to urge Russia
to cease its provocative and destructive actions in the
occupied regions of Georgia and start the fulfilment of
its international obligations — first and foremost, the
EU-mediated 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement.
Children are agents for peace and change. The
international community has a moral responsibility
to guarantee their rights and make conflict prevention
a priority. All perpetrators of violations of children’s
rights must be held accountable, as there can be no
peace without justice.
Georgia will remain committed to upholding
international law and continuing its close cooperation
with the United Nations system to keep child
protection a high priority, both at the national and
international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Ferreira Silva Aranda (Portugal): I would like
to thank Brazil for convening today’s important debate.
We welcome the reports of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/493) and UNICEF on children and armed
conflict. We would also like to express our particular
appreciation for the tireless efforts of Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter and her team. We also acknowledge
the intervention by Patrick Kumi and encourage
the Security Council to ensure the regular, safe and
meaningful participation of children in these briefings.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of the European Union, in its capacity
of observer, as well as with the statement made on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, and would now like to make the following
remarks in its national capacity.
This year, we celebrate both the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the mandate of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and the twentieth anniversary of the entry into
force of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Under the purview of that mandate,
we have created a number of robust initiatives, such as
the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, the Security

22-4318623/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and the Secretary-General’s annual reports.
Under the Optional Protocol, we have prohibited
the military conscription of children and the military
recruitment of children under 16. Other tools, such
as the Paris Principles, the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use of Child Soldiers and the Safe Schools Declaration,
build on the work done under the mandate and the tenets
of the Optional Protocol. Portugal calls on all States to
ratify and fully implement those instruments.
Nonetheless, in spite of those developments, we
need to look at the shortcomings and consider how
we can overcome them. The Secretary-General’s most
recent report provides us with a sombre picture of what
happened last year, and UNICEF shows beyond a doubt
that, over the past 16 years, grave violations against
children have increased year over year.
That is only the tip of the iceberg. If the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict had greater capacity
in human resources, the number of verified grave
violations would exceed those that were reported.
Situations such as those in Ukraine and Afghanistan are
cause for great concern. To date, Portugal has received
351 children fleeing Afghanistan and 12,846 children
fleeing Ukraine.
Portugal will continue to pay special attention to
the provision of education in emergencies. That remains
one of the top priorities of our humanitarian agenda.
Education is critical for children in conflict settings.
It is the very foundation of tolerance and peace — the
cornerstone of sustainable development. Confronted
with the fact that 872 schools and hospitals were
attacked last year, we all must do more. We condemn
all attacks on education and the military use of schools,
as well as all threats to students and teachers, including
military action to prevent girls from attending classes.
We call for the full implementation of resolution
2601 (2021). The international community must ensure
that violations of international humanitarian law and
grave violations against children do not go unpunished.
Full accountability is required. We must all work
together to ensure the protection, promotion and
realization of the human rights of all children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
24/45

19/07/2022

Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Brazil for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and organizing
today’s timely debate. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate Albania on its successful presidency of
the Council last month.
We thank the briefers and commend the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, as well as that of UNICEF Executive
Director Catherine Russell, and assure them of our
full support.
As Vice-President of the UNICEF Executive Board
for this year, I and my country, Lebanon, attach great
importance to today’s open debate. The report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2022/493) paints a grim picture. The number
of violations reported against children in conflict
situations over the past year is terrifying. Almost
24,000 verified grave violations were committed
against children in conflict situations in 2021 alone. It
is heartbreaking to see that 2,500 children were killed
and 5,555 were maimed in conflicts — and those are
only the ones that were reported.
The UNICEF report 25 Years of Children and
Armed Conflict: Taking Action to Protect Children in
War also concurs with those statistics and highlights
that between 2016 and 2020, a staggering average of 71
verified grave violations against children per day were
committed by parties to conflict. During the launch
of the UNICEF report, Executive Director Russell
observed that between 2005 and 2020, the United
Nations verified more than 0.25 million violations
against children in situations of armed conflict.
In Afghanistan alone, almost 33,000 children have
been killed or maimed over the past 20 years, according
to Save the Children. The Secretary-General’s report
noted that 2021 was the deadliest year on record for
Palestinian children since 2014, with 78 killed and
a further 982 injured by Israeli soldiers. In Syria,
according to Ms. Michelle Bachelet, the Human Rights
Commissioner, 27,126 children were killed between
March 2011 and March 2021. Thousands of children are
killed or abused every day in the more than two dozen
conflicts around the world.
Girls deserve our particular attention today.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report and in
Ms. Gamba de Potgieter’s briefing today, the number
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

of girls who have been killed or maimed or subjected to
abduction and sexual violence has increased. In some
contexts, such as Afghanistan, for example, the situation
of girls is particularly dire. The denial of their basic
rights, including the right to education, is unacceptable.
Many girls are also being forcibly married so that the
family has one less mouth to feed.
We have to admit that we have failed to protect
children around the world, despite all of the conventions,
legislations and action plans that are supposed to protect
them — especially in conflict. We have failed not
because those conventions are not well-written or lack
the seriousness that the matter warrants, but because
there is no will to implement them. The Convention
on the Rights of the Child is the most widely ratified
treaty in history. It has been ratified by a staggering
196 countries. And while we must acknowledge that it
has made a difference, it is not enough of a difference to
protect children in conflict from being the first victims.
We need to find strong instruments for
implementation that can transform those conventions
from legal documents into living practice in every
corner of the planet where there is a conflict. The
conventions need teeth to be able to succeed in their
mission. We need to be creative and more serious in
implementing the humanitarian conventions and
laws that protect children. Some people describe the
United Nations annual so-called list of shame of those
responsible for grave violations against children in
conflict as a useful tool for preventing violations.
Those who violate the rights of children, who kill,
maim or recruit children and abuse them have no shame.
They cannot be shamed; they have to be held responsible
and designated as child killers and abusers so that
even if they run, they cannot hide from international
justice. We need to deny impunity to those who violate
the rights of children. We need accountability for the
perpetrators and justice for all the children who have
suffered at their hands.
The current status quo is not tenable anymore.
Children should be made off limits to warmongers.
Children need pens, not guns; warm beds, not bullets in
their heads; and schools, not bombs in their playgrounds
and backyards. Children need peace. That should be our
absolutely top priority here at the United Nations and
elsewhere around the world. The Council is where the
solution starts and the problem ends. It has the power
and should exercise it for the sake of the children.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Ms. Mocanu (Romania): Romania adds its voice
to those of previous speakers in thanking Brazil for
convening this open debate, but also in condemning
the unprecedented levels of serious violations against
children described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493).
And we appreciate the hard work done by Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter and her Office.
Children are the most innocent victims in conflicts,
and unfortunately we read and hear almost every day
about horrific stories that affect them, whether in
Africa, Latin America, Asia or even Europe. Many
of the Security Council’s debates and consultations
deal with such stories — perhaps more often than
intended — and it continues to be the Council’s duty to
make every effort to alleviate the horrendous tragedies
that children are subjected to. Romania acknowledges
and expresses its deep appreciation to all childprotection actors — those from the United Nations in
particular, but also from civil society — who work
to protect children and support their resilience and
recovery during periods of conflict and violence, and
primarily in their aftermath.
By the end of 2021, the total number of people
worldwide who had been forced to flee because of
conflicts, violence, fear of persecution or human rights
violations had risen to nearly 90 million, according to
the annual Global Trends report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. Children accounted
for 41 per cent of all forcibly displaced people. The
Russian military aggression against sovereign Ukraine
pushed the already growing numbers of displaced people
to more than 100 million. As a neighbour of Ukraine,
Romania has done its utmost to ensure protection for
all Ukrainian refugee children, including those who
are unaccompanied. Currently, of the total number
of Ukrainian refugees entering Romania, 25 per cent
are children. Ukrainian children under the protection
of Romanian social services, or those living in host
communities with family members or caretakers, can
benefit from counselling services tailored to their
specific needs, including trauma care provided by
child-protection specialists.
The Romanian authorities treat the issues of
abduction and trafficking in human beings as seriously
and responsibly as possible. Since the outbreak of
the war in Ukraine and the inflow of refugees, our

22-4318625/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

authorities have focused close attention on such issues.
We have been working and continue to work together to
tackle them, including with the United Nations agencies
present in the field. We are making efforts to bridge the
gaps that have been identified so as to strengthen our
capacity to protect children affected by war.
In line with resolution 2601 (2021) and as a supporter
of the Safe Schools Declaration, the Government
of Romania has taken steps to create a climate of
normality in terms of facilitating access to education
for refugee children fleeing the war. Ukrainian children
and students are entitled to education free of charge in
both Ukrainian and Romanian as a measure to ensure
their integration. Teachers also received training in the
provision of social and emotional support for Ukrainian
children and communicating with their parents in order
to facilitate integration, as well as psycho-pedagogical
assistance and counselling.
Five months after Russia’s unjustified and
unprovoked military aggression against Ukraine began,
the Romanian authorities are now focusing on a longterm approach to protecting the rights of Ukrainian
refugee children. In that sense, preparations for the
next school year are in place. and complementary
early-education activities at kindergartens, nursery
schools and day-care centres will be organized at the
community level alongside already existing measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): I would like
to convey the State of Palestine’s congratulations
on Brazil’s able leadership of the Security Council
this month and to thank you, Sir, for convening this
important high-level debate on children and armed
conflict. I also express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and Special Representative Gamba
de Potgieter for the annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2022/493) and their advocacy and efforts to
protect children.
While there is hardly a child not affected by the
coronavirus disease pandemic and the global food crisis,
the impact has been most severe on children living in
conflict, refugees and internally displaced and stateless
children. The Council bears a great responsibility for
safeguarding the rights of the child, protecting children
and holding accountable the perpetrators of violations
of children’s rights.
26/45

19/07/2022

In occupied Palestine, Palestinian children are being
systematically targeted by Israel’s occupation and by its
military forces and settler militias. They continue to be
killed and maimed, detained and imprisoned, forcibly
transferred and displaced, banned from returning to
their towns and villages, with millions forced to remain
refugees. Palestinian children, including girls, continue
to experience violent arrest raids and abduction from
their bedrooms in the middle of the night, traumatized
by violent military interrogations without the presence
of their parents or legal counsel, as well as attacks on
their schools, delays in or deprivation of their access
to medical care and constant harassment, intimidation,
violence and abuse by the Israeli occupying forces
and settlers. Those are all in flagrant violation of
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law.
Israel’s targeting of Palestinian children in their
homes, schools and streets in the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, amounts to
a structural pattern of abuse deliberately aimed at
intimidating children and their families and causing
trauma and insecurity to the whole of Palestinian
society. The Israeli representative’s remarks, claiming
that we purposely expose our children to such horrors,
are dehumanizing and offensive and must be rejected.
Even as the Special Representative and others
stress the important role of child-protection partners
on the ground, civil-society organizations in Palestine,
such as Defence for Children International, are labelled
terrorist organizations and banned by Israel in attempts
to undermine their monitoring, reporting and advocacy,
as well as to conceal the facts of Israel’s gross violations
of children’s rights in the occupied Palestinian territory.
As indicated in the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General’s report, last year, among the
nearly 3,000 grave violations recorded, Israel killed
78 Palestinian children, six of them during its 11-day
aggression against the Gaza Strip in air strikes targeting
densely populated neighbourhoods. Since the start of
2022, Israel has killed at least 16 Palestinian children
in a pattern of extrajudicial and wilful killings. Such
shocking and deplorable facts cannot be ignored.
In Masafer Yatta, 1,200 Palestinians are at
imminent risk of forced eviction and displacement by
the occupying Power. Among them, 580 Palestinian
children are threatened with the loss of their homes,
access to water, primary health care and schools,
in grave breach of international humanitarian law,
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

thus representing a war crime. That scenario repeats
itself over and over again in East Jerusalem and the
Jordan Valley. An entire nation continues to suffer
dispossession, displacement and the denial of rights. As
I address the Council today, no Palestinian is safe, no
Palestinian child is safe.
The passage of 25 years since the adoption of the
mandate on children and armed conflict has proved that
listing and delisting remains the most powerful tool of
accountability and an effective deterrent and guarantee
of child protection. In that regard, we take note of the
Secretary-General’s warning that Israel is to be listed
should it repeat its 2021 attacks against Palestinian
children in 2022. However, we must reiterate our calls
on the Secretary-General to list Israel now for the
war crimes it has been methodically and constantly
committing against Palestinian children year after year
in order to hold Israel fully accountable for its appalling
record on child rights.
We have heard today over and over again that
accountability is essential for protecting children,
and we call on the Security Council to stand against
impunity. We urge it to pursue accountability measures
without delay and to act now to ensure international
protection to Palestinian civilians, in particular
children, including through continued and enhanced
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its vital
child-protection services and assistance to refugee
children, in order to spare them more loss and suffering.
International law and the Council’s resolutions provide
the tools for accountability and protection; we implore
the Council to use them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Yoseph (Ethiopia): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your successful presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I would also like to
acknowledge the attendance of the Vice-Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Brazil, His Excellency Ambassador
Fernando Simas, and thank him for making time
to appear in person and lead the discussion on
this important agenda item. I also thank Special
Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, UNICEF
Executive Director Catherine Russell and Mr. Patrick
Kumi for their briefings this morning.
Children are the first to suffer and the primary
victims of the devastating short- and long-term impacts

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

of any conflict. Cognizant of that gruesome fact,
Member States have adopted several binding legal
instruments on the protection of children in armed
conflict. My country, Ethiopia, is a State party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, as well as the African Charter on the Rights
and Welfare of the Child. In line with the prescriptions
of those instruments, our laws and policies provide
full protection for children based on specific and
local circumstances.
In the past two years, Ethiopia has been faced
with extraordinary challenges owing to the terrorist
attack waged against the Ethiopian National Defense
Force and the continued targeted and orchestrated
attacks against civilians in various parts of the country.
Humanitarian challenges have been exacerbated as a
result of the extreme drought that we continue to face
in some parts of the country.
The Government of Ethiopia, in parallel with
its law-enforcement operations, has made concerted
efforts to ensure full humanitarian protection with
a special focus on children in areas affected by
instability. Owing to those efforts and cooperation with
international partners, we are addressing the special
nutrition, protection rights and needs of children.
We have also applied a clear path for accountability
for violations of rights, including those of children. The
Ethiopian Human Rights Commission and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights conducted investigations and issued a joint
report. Based on the accepted recommendations of
that report, the Government took a series of measures
to ensure accountability and redress. In both the
humanitarian and human rights sectors, the United
Nations has been an instrumental partner, and we have
the highest regard for that partnership.
On the content of the report presented this
morning, we thank Her Excellency Virginia Gamba for
her efforts to be transparent in compiling the report.
However, we would like to underscore that the report
came out inaccurate and unbalanced despite her efforts
to follow a constructive approach. Our request to be
heard and to have the facts reflected went unaddressed,
for no reason. We regret that approach, which will only
undermine the efforts made by Member States.
In the past two years, we have been flagging to
the United Nations several signs of selectivity and

22-4318627/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

partiality in the consideration of human rights issues.
The use of children as fighters and human shields
for the declared objective of protecting the rapacious
political interests of a terrorist group is ignored. The
publications by Western media of gruesome pictures
of children carrying weapons glorifying their sacrifice
received no condemnation. Some United Nations
specialized agencies could have revealed those broaddaylight violations instead of harbouring a United
Nations official who on record condoned the use of
child soldiers by a terrorist group.
If the work of the Special Representative is to
follow a credible and constructive path, the concerns
of Member States must be respected and incorporated,
and the process has to be fully transparent and
consultative. I would like to underscore for the record
that cooperation with Member States is critical for the
effective protection of children in vulnerable situations,
including conflict.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Ethiopia’s
commitment to the protection and well-being of
children and to the fulfilment of its obligations under
domestic and international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the Permanent Mission of Brazil for
having convened this timely debate. We also thank the
briefers for their important statements. Moreover, Chile
endorses the statement made by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict.
Chile expresses its concern at the 23,982 grave
violations against children verified by the United
Nations in 2021: killings, maimings, the recruitment of
children and the denial of humanitarian access were the
most frequent violations recorded. Children are the ones
who suffer disproportionately from the consequences
of conflicts despite the fact that they have nothing to
do with their causes or continuation. Consequently,
protecting them and safeguarding their rights is a moral
imperative for the international community.
In that light, Chile, as a signatory to the Safe
Schools Declaration, reiterates the importance of
protecting schools from attacks in order to guarantee
the right to quality education for children, so that they
can be agents of change to halt cycles of violence and in
28/45

19/07/2022

so doing contribute to placing their communities on the
path towards lasting peace.
Against that backdrop, we appeal to all parties
to conflict to respect international law, including
international humanitarian law, and to refrain from
attacking infrastructure critical to civilians in conflict
situations. We urge parties to conflict to accede to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and practical protection instruments, including
the Paris Principles and Commitments, the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Vancouver Principles. In addition,
we highlight the importance of implementing a gender
approach to child-protection mandates to prevent
and address the occurrence of one or more of the six
violations from a trauma-informed approach, based on
the needs of children.
Chile also strongly condemns the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war. In this context, we wish
to recognize that children, particularly those associated
with armed forces or armed groups and former child
soldiers, should be treated as victims. We therefore
recognize the need to provide them with support for
their reintegration into society and to heal the trauma
caused by their painful experiences, including through
mental health and psychosocial support services.
Urgent action is needed to ensure that all children,
particularly stateless, refugee and displaced children,
are better protected from grave violations and abuses,
including recruitment, trafficking and detention. In this
regard, we reiterate the importance of the independence,
impartiality and credibility of the Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism established by resolution
1612 (2005).
Most important, we owe it to these brave children
to continue to seek solutions. We must continue to
strengthen an integrated and synergistic response that
contributes to building resilient societies that support
children from the origins of conflict through repairing
the cycles of violence, hopefully enabling them to move
from being victims to being agents of change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

I would like to highlight several elements in my
national capacity. First, I would like to thank Brazil for
spearheading this year’s open debate on children and
armed conflict and for including the topic of children as
a centrepiece of its presidency’s human rights agenda.
Bulgaria would also like to thank today’s briefers,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, UNICEF Executive
Director Catherine Russell and Patrick Kumi for their
insightful and sobering briefings.
I would like to pay tribute to all those working
in the field for the protection and promotion of the
rights of the child in the context of armed conflict.
Their work is invaluable. In this regard, we welcome
the active engagement with parties to conflict, leading
to the release of 12,214 children from armed groups
and forces.
According to the recently published report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/493), children in armed
conflict were subject to a deeply concerning number
of grave violations in 2021, such as recruitment and
use of children, maiming and incidents of denial of
humanitarian access as well as killings. An accounting
of the price children are paying for Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine has not yet been formally included in
the report, but we welcome the inclusion of Ukraine
to the list of concerning situations. We are looking
forward to thorough reporting and monitoring by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
that issue.
The Russian Federation’s illegal, unjustified
and unprovoked aggression against Ukraine has
not spared children. We are deeply alarmed by the
attacks on children’s homes and schools, as well as
hospitals and orphanages. In this regard, members of
the Group of Friends of Children and the Sustainable
Development Goals, which is co-chaired by Bulgaria,
presented a joint statement deploring in the strongest
terms the aggression by the Russian Federation and its
implications for all children in Ukraine.
The staggering number of children on the move
as a result of the war is also quite disturbing. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees estimates that there are millions of refugees
fleeing to host countries, almost half of whom are
children, while more than 7 million people are also in
vulnerable situations, as they are displaced internally
within Ukraine. We are greatly concerned with the
reports on forcible deportation of children to the

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Russian Federation since the beginning of the Russian
aggression against Ukraine.
It is particularly alarming that, according to the
report of the Secretary-General, attacks on schools
worldwide continue to increase. Inclusive education
is at the top of Bulgaria’s human rights agenda, and
we also promote it through our official development
assistance. Moreover, we call on Member States to
endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s call for
the Security Council to ensure that child-protection
provisions are included in all relevant mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. Furthermore, Bulgaria urges
Member States to support the Vancouver Principles,
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict and implement the Paris Principles and
Commitments. Prevention of the six grave violations
is key when it comes to children in armed conflict,
but long-term recovery and inclusive reintegration
programmes for children are indispensable, and we
call upon the international community to support this
critical agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, let me
congratulate Brazil for its very successful presidency
of the Security Council this month.
We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and the entire Brazilian delegation for organizing
this year’s annual debate of the Security Council
on children and armed conflict. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter, and the other briefers for their insightful and
important briefings.
In a world that is still afflicted by the coronavirus
disease, by protracted and new conflicts and by a food,
fuel and finance emergency, it is evident that we must
do more to protect our children and ensure their safety,
welfare and prosperity. Millions of children are trapped
in wars and conflicts across the world, while some fall
victim to widespread violence against civilians. Many
children become casualties of calculated and targeted
actions against them. Still others suffer the trauma of
sexual violence or the multiple deprivations of armed
conflict, including hunger and disease.

22-4318629/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/493) portrays a sombre picture. It notes overall
23,982 verified grave violations against children.
Indeed, the killing and maiming of children remained the
most verified grave violation against children, followed
by the recruitment and use of children in conflicts and
the denial of humanitarian access to children.
Children also suffer immensely in situations of
foreign occupation. Nowhere is this trend more visible
than in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir. The most
recent report of the Secretary-General has expressed
deep concerns about the continued grave violations
against children in occupied Jammu and Kashmir. The
report has urged the Indian Government to undertake
preventive measures to protect children, including by
ending the use of pellets against children and their
illegal detention in occupied Kashmir and in various
faraway prisons across India.
Despite the persistent concerns raised by multiple
United Nations special rapporteurs and mandate
holders of the Human Rights Council and by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, the human rights
and humanitarian situation of children in occupied
Kashmir has continued to deteriorate, especially since
5 August 2019, when India unilaterally and illegally
passed legislation to annex the occupied and disputed
state. An estimated 13,000 Kashmiri children and
youth have been arbitrarily captured by the 900,000
members of the Indian occupation forces in Jammu and
Kashmir. Children and youth are routinely detained
and subjected to torture and ill treatment in order to
elicit intelligence or to extract confessions that they are
associated with the Kashmiri groups struggling for the
self-determination that has been promised to them by
the Security Council.
The administration of Indian-occupied Jammu and
Kashmir itself admitted to the Indian Supreme Court
that, in August and September 2019 alone, 144 children
were detained. The youngest of them was 9 years old.
During 2021, more than 210 innocent Kashmiris,
including women and children, were killed in fake
encounters and staged cordon-and-search operations.
Thousands were arbitrarily detained, and hundreds
of houses were destroyed as part of collective
punishments inflicted on the Kashmiri communities.
Many participants might have seen — and, if not,
must see — the gut-wrenching picture of a 3-year-old
30/45

19/07/2022

Kashmiri boy sitting in shock on the dead body of his
grandfather after he had been killed by Indian forces.
The list of such horrifying crimes is long. Last year,
the Government of Pakistan released a comprehensive
and well-researched dossier covering accounts,
corroborated by audio and video evidence, of 3,432
cases of war crimes, including against women and
children, perpetrated by senior officers of the Indian
occupying forces since 1989.
We will share that evidence with the Security
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and we urge that those responsible
be held accountable. We also urge the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
continue to closely monitor, and report on, the situation
of children in Indian-occupied Kashmir.
Pakistan fully supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to deal
with situations of children in armed conflict. The
legal parameters of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General’s mandate must be scrupulously
respected. The singular focus of that mandate is to
address the conditions of children in situations of
armed conflicts. It does not extend to the consideration
of violence within Member States, which is within their
national jurisdictions.
On the basis of that understanding, my delegation
will further enhance its engagement with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Security Council’s Working Group.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset. I would like to thank Brazil for convening
this important meeting to discuss children in armed
conflict. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and his Special Representative
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter for their efforts to
protect children in areas of armed conflict. This topic
constitutes a priority for the Yemeni Republic given
that it is a country that suffers from armed conflict.
The Yemeni Government welcomes the delisting of
the Yemeni armed forces from annex II to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict
covering 2021 (S/2022/493), which is long overdue.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

We also welcome the commending of the efforts
of the Yemeni Government to protect and ensure the
rights of Yemeni children through engagement with
the United Nations at all levels in order to end all
forms of violations against children in Yemen and to
prevent their use and recruitment in armed conflict.
The Yemeni Government, based on its responsibilities,
spares no effort in maintaining and protecting the
rights of children. Despite difficult circumstances and
challenges as a result of the conflict, the Government
took many steps and measures in that regard, which we
list as follows.
The Yemeni Government ratified a number of
treaties and international instruments and took a
number of measures to ensure the protection for children
in armed conflict. First and foremost among those
initiatives, in 2012 the Yemeni Government ratified
the Paris Principles to protect children from illegal
recruitment and their exploitation by armed groups. In
2014, the Government signed with the United Nations
a joint action plan to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children by the Yemeni armed forces. In
2017, we ratified the Safe Schools Declaration in order
to prevent the use of schools for military purposes and
to protect them from the impact of conflict. In 2018, we
also signed a road map in addition to the protocol on the
release of children in armed conflict. In March 2018,
the Deputy Supreme Commander of the armed forces
issued a military circular to the effect that the armed
forces of Yemen must abide by the national regulations
and legislation, which are in line with international
laws and instruments that criminalize the recruitment
and use of children in conflicts. In that circular, there is
a demand to abide by the protocol on releasing children
who are arrested during armed operations and to hand
them over to the civilian bodies that are in charge of
protecting children and rehabilitating and reintegrating
them into society, together with the King Salman
Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre.
Over the past two years, the Yemeni Government
has consolidated its cooperation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. That close
cooperation yielded a number of field visits and
rehabilitation and training workshops and sessions,
while also activating focal points and resuming the
meetings of the joint technical committee. We reiterate
the importance of continuing that collaboration in
order to protect all Yemeni children from all forms
of violations.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

The Yemeni Government continues to take a
series of measures in order to protect children from
the impact of conflict as part of its commitments and
in partnership with the United Nations. We continue
to provide care and protection for children who are
victims of conflict, and we provide them with various
forms of aid and assistance, particularly emergency aid.
We continue to train Government officials on means
of protection, the latest of which was implementing
a training programme for a group of seven officers,
training them on the protection of children in conflict.
In turn, they trained 203 non-commissioned officers in
various military zones. We also undertook a number
of other measures that fit the reality of the war while
focusing on its causes. The latest of those efforts was
the launching of a child protection campaign in Aden
in the month of May, which coincided with a visit to
Yemen by the team from the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
We welcome the recognition in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of those efforts by the Yemeni
Government, which resulted in the delisting of the
Yemeni armed forces from annex II. However, we
regret that the report did not mention all the statistics
and information on the grave violations perpetrated
by Houthi militias in recruiting thousands of children
in so-called summer camps, which is one of the
largest campaigns of child recruitment witnessed by
humankind. The Houthis seek to brainwash children
by teaching them about violence, hatred, radicalization
and rejection of others while pushing them into the
battlefields. Children in areas under the Houthis control
suffer from their crimes and their disregard for the life
and future of those children, who die either as recruits,
human shields or mine victims. They also die as a result
of explosives planted by Houthi militias, which kill
Yemenis, including children, on a daily basis or result
in permanent disabilities.
Among the broadest and gravest violations by the
Iranian-supported Houthi militias are those perpetrated
against children, including girls, by using them in,
and recruiting them for, armed conflict — killing
them, maiming them, abducting them, exposing them
to sexual violence and using them as human shields,
as well as attacking schools and hospitals and using
them for military purposes. All of that is in addition
to denial of humanitarian aid to those in need. Those
militias also devote weekly sessions and lectures for
pupils, trying to incite them to enlist and choose war
and jihad while exposing them to motivational videos

22-4318631/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

in order to incite children and encourage them to go
to war. That was detailed in the reports of the Panel of
Experts of the Sanctions Committee in its 2021 report
(see S/2022/50). Lately, Houthi militia leaders have
stopped the teaching of Yemeni school curricula in
primary schools and, instead, focused exclusively on
material that serves their agendas, goals and outcomes,
which poses a serious threat to the current and future
generations in Yemen and to the security and stability
of the region.
In conclusion, the Yemeni Government reiterates
its eagerness and readiness to continue to collaborate
and support United Nations efforts, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
country team in Yemen in ending the violations of
children’s rights and their use in armed conflict.
We call on the international community and
the Security Council to exert pressure on the Houthi
militias to stop their crimes and violations against
children in areas under their control. We also express
our hope that the next report of the Secretary-General
will provide more details and information on violations
perpetuated in areas under Houthi control and will
propose practical and effective measures to stop grave
violations against children in Yemen.
We further call on the United Nations and
international partners to support the Government
in helping to rehabilitate children affected by the
conflict, establishing effective programmes for
children’s reintegration in society in order to ensure
their mental and psychological well-being and creating
an environment conducive to ensuring children’s
education and the preservation of their rights so that
they can enjoy peaceful and stable life, as other children
do throughout the world.

19/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. In addition, we see the repatriation
and reintegration of children as important aspects
of that agenda. My country fully subscribes to the
Secretary-General’s appeal to the countries concerned
to take steps towards the voluntary repatriation of
children, including those with alleged links to Da’esh.
The report of Secretary-General (S/2022/493)
reveals once again that the plight of children continues
unabated in many parts of the world. As for Syria, the
destructive war that the Al-Assad regime has waged
against the country’s own people has had a staggering
impact on children and has left the lives and the future
of a generation of Syrian children hanging by a thread.
The crimes of the regime are not the only threats that
the children of Syria face. The well-documented crimes
of the terrorist organization the Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) and its Syrian branch, the Democratic
Union Party (PYD) and the Kurdish People’s Protection
Units (YPG), continue to be a source of grave concern.
The so-called Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF),
the YPG/Women’s Protection Units, the Internal
Security Forces, the Kurdish Revolutionary Youth, the
Patriotic RevolutionaryYouth Movement and the socalled self-administration mentioned in the report are
all elements of one and the same terrorist organization:
the PKK/YPG. In nearly 2,000 attacks in the past two
years, PKK/PYD/YPG have killed almost 400 Syrian
civilians, including children. In addition, the PKK/
YPG and the so-called SDF continue to abduct children
and forcibly impose military training in camps.

Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): We would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s open debate, and we
commend the United Nations work in taking forward
the children and armed conflict agenda.

We have shared with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-Genera1 evidence of
those violations. In their attempt to spread their separatist
ideology, the PKK/YPG and affiliated elements also
use tactics such as imposing arbitrary school curricula
and arresting, dismissing or mistreating teachers
who oppose them. While we support United Nations
efforts to document the crimes of the PKK/PYD/YPG
and other terrorist groups, we must stress the need to
demonstrate a unified front against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

Yet we need to step up our efforts to ensure that
United Nations country task forces on monitoring
and reporting on grave violations against children be
provided with the adequate resources to fulfil their
mandates. We concur with the call of the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that child-protection provisions and
capacities are included in all relevant mandates of

The belief that a terrorist organization would
be bound by commitments under an international
legal framework is an illusion. We would also like
put on the record our country’s stance concerning
the incorrect references in the report to my country’s
counter-terrorism operations in Syria and Iraq. All
those operations are conducted as part of Türkiye’s

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.

32/45

22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

legitimate right to self-defence, in full compliance with
international law and international humanitarian law
and in line with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Those operations exclusively target terrorists,
with the utmost attention and care being devoted to avoid
causing any harm to civilians or civilian infrastructure.
My country supports the United Nations agenda
addressing the situation of children in armed conflict,
and we will continue to work closely with the Office
of the Special Representative to ensure that all the
information to date is correct and complete.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): We thank the
presidency of Brazil for organizing this open debate.
We also thank the briefers for their insightful remarks
and the work they do for children.
Armed conflict uproots children from their families,
communities and other support systems. Refugee,
internally displaced and stateless children deserve our
protection. This year, the Philippines acceded to the
1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,
which reflects our commitment to achieving legal
protection for all, including children. It is critical that
more countries do the same.
Nationally, our law on children in situations of
armed conflict recognizes the equal rights of girls and
boys, including those who have been displaced, to obtain
the documents necessary to enjoy their legal rights. The
law also ensures children’s right to education. Paired
with the National Policy Framework on Learners and
Schools as Zones of Peace, those measures ensure the
safety of students and schools, as well as the continuity
of education in situations of armed conflict.
We know that education helps address the root causes
of child recruitment. To that end, our Department of
Education has established a national peace framework
to promote a culture of peace in the education system.
In addition, the Council on the Welfare of Children
teaches child-protection actors about the law on
children in situations of armed conflict.
Those actions have better equipped our police and
armed forces to rescue children from violent groups
and refer them to agencies that facilitate reintegration.
Rescued children are provided with health services,
protection, social support and access to justice.
Importantly, those services are child-specific and

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

gender-sensitive. The Government is not alone in its
efforts. It actively involves civil society organizations,
including reintegrated former child combatants.
We emphasize the importance of collaboration.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2022/493), which is mandated
by the Security Council, can be an effective resource
when there is active communication with national
agencies during the drafting process. Coordination and
referral mechanisms between Governments and United
Nations country teams should be actively utilized. Joint
strategic plans, such as the joint strategic plan of the
armed forces of the Philippines and the United Nations,
are also promising.
We join the Security Council in condemning the
following six grave violations against children: the
recruitment and use of children, the killing and/or
maiming of children, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, the abduction of children, attacks on schools
and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access.
The Philippines is committed to keeping children
away from armed conflict, rescuing those exploited
by armed groups and giving such children the chance
to recover and be positive agents of change in their
communities. Our commitment is manifested in our
concrete actions and policies and our unwavering
determination to forge a future in which children are
free to simply be children. The battlefield is no place
for children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking Brazil for convening
this important meeting. I also congratulate Brazil on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We wish its delegation every success in
managing the work of the Council. I would like to
thank Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Catherine Russell,
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their important
briefings and for their support to children in Iraq and
around the world. I also want to thank Mr. Patrick Kumi
for his important and valuable participation in today’s
meeting and remarkable courage. And I thank the
members of the Council for their considerable support
to my country’s Government in promoting security
and stability for all Iraqi people, especially children.

22-4318633/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

Children are the reason we are meeting today, to
discuss their plight and seek solutions to their suffering
by ensuring that their voices are heard at the highest
levels of global decision-making.
Before addressing the issue of the suffering of
children in Iraq, I would like to remind everyone of
the extraordinary scale of the reprehensible criminal
attacks perpetrated by Da’esh on Iraq and on every
sector of our population, regardless of age or gender.
Even symbols of the heritage and history of humankind
did not escape the abuses of that terrorist organization,
which has mustered considerable military resources
and numerous foreign terrorist fighters from the
four corners of the world. In addition, its impressive
propaganda and media machine targeted everyone
through intimidation. It has brutal methods of killing,
recruitment and the use of human shields and banned
weapons. It has planted mines and bombed houses,
schools and institutions. The list of its abuses is long.
I would like to point out that the war waged by the
Iraqi people and their security forces has been the first
line of resistance in defending the country, a war to
defend dignity, freedom, democracy, human rights and
our children’s right to a decent life. I stress that this
defensive war was waged by Iraq and all our friends
in the region and around the world, in cooperation
with the international community, which has provided
support to Iraqi security forces. That support led to the
formation of the Global Coalition Against Da’esh, led
by our States and institutions that support its planning,
financing and training.
Wherever it occurs and regardless of the
circumstances, war is always harrowing for those who
must endure it — men, women, the elderly, young people
and children. Those children are the primary victims.
Iraq regards children as victims and indeed as some
of the worst-affected victims. They need assistance,
rehabilitation and education so that they can rebuild
their self-confidence and reintegrate into society. My
Government, in cooperation with the United Nations
and civil-society organizations, has therefore made
every effort to seek all possible solutions and to adopt
legislation on children’s rights aimed at saving children
and ensuring their future. If we lose our children’s
future, we lose the future of an entire generation. We
will never be able to compensate for that loss at the
human, social and economic levels. In that regard,
I would like to thank the States that have repatriated
their children from Iraq and to call on other countries
34/45

19/07/2022

with children in Iraq to cooperate with us and repatriate
them as soon as possible.
I want to stress that Iraq remains committed to
cooperating with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to establish and implement
an active and clear action plan to put an end to the
recruitment and use of children in Iraq. We know that
the Secretary-General’s report of 23 June (S/2022/493)
does not include any cases of recruitment or use of
children by the Iraqi Government. In that regard, I want
to stress that previous cases were individual ones that
could not be considered part of a systematic effort.
My Government is working to develop legislation on
issues relating to children and the protection of children
in Iraq, in line with our national and constitutional laws
and pursuant to our international obligations. To that
end, we believe that an in-depth study that includes
the views of various specialists, eminent persons
and experienced individuals from our society, as
well as those of victims, will be the best way to draft
applicable legislation that can truly deliver justice for
children, ensure their protection and contribute to
their development. It will require considerable time
and effort, as well as awareness-raising campaigns,
to ensure that we do not implement solutions that
could lead to further crises that in turn could end in
disaster, and our Government, in cooperation with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq, UNICEF,
the International Organization for Migration and the
United Nations Development Programme, as well as
civil-society institutions and other stakeholders, is
working to that end.
I would like bring up the following crucial topics
for the Council’s consideration.
First, we urge Member States to assist us with an
extremely complex issue that we are using all possible
national means to resolve. We are trying to clear Iraqi
territories of mines and explosive ordnance that were
planted by Da’esh, particularly in rural areas and near
residential centres and schools. They continue to claim
lives, maim children and hinder the return of displaced
persons, as well as the country’s general development.
I should point out that in cooperation with the United
Nations Mine Action Service, the Government has
implemented a strategy for Iraq for the period from
2020 to 2023. However, the programme needs further
cooperation and funding, as well as capacity-building,
in order to remove those mines and explosive ordnance
from contaminated areas.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

Secondly, as it has everywhere else in the world,
the coronavirus disease pandemic has had an enormous
negative impact on the work of Iraq’s institutions. It has
restricted people’s freedom of movement and affected
the delivery of humanitarian aid to displaced persons,
as well as hindering the implementation of a number
of recovery projects in areas with displaced persons.
The support provided to Iraqi national institutions in
the form of training and investments can therefore
contribute greatly to assisting the local population and
reducing the administrative burden while achieving
more effective results.
We also emphasize the need for legislation that
supports the voluntary return of citizens, as well as
their participation in reconstruction efforts, within an
established time frame for the resumption of normal
life in all facilities and in all areas of activity.
Thirdly, we listened to the statements delivered
by the representatives of other States, which included
important remarks and proposals. In that regard, I
would like to stress the specificity of each State and
its people. We recall the need to listen to the States
directly concerned when it comes to issues relating to
their children and means of their protection, including
the development of special political missions and
peacekeeping operations on a case-by-case basis.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that peace is the
best and most effective plan to protect children and
ensure development, reconstruction and reform and to
put an end to impunity. We must continue to cooperate
as Member States and as the international community
in order to enhance the paths of peace at all times.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Ms. Rizk (Egypt): At the outset, I would like to
thank Brazil for organizing this important annual open
debate on children and armed conflict. We would also
like to thank the briefers for the information and input
they provided at the beginning of the meeting.
Egypt notes with concern the exacerbation of
the negative impacts of armed conflict on children,
particularly during the past two years, as they are
compounded by the repercussions of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the current food crisis. In that
regard, Egypt believes that the current situation
requires more international cooperation and stronger
measures to urgently respond to the negative impacts

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

of armed conflict on children, which deprive them of
their human rights.
As we have reiterated on numerous occasions, I
would like to convey Egypt’s readiness to cooperate
in order to ensure the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian assistance in that domain. We also
strongly support all efforts to strengthen the protection
of children and end the violations committed during
armed conflict, especially crimes committed by
terrorist organizations.
We take note with appreciation of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/493), some of which Egypt has
already implemented.
Egypt is already a State party to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
the provisions of which are further reflected in our
national legislation.
In addition, respect for international humanitarian
law, including the protection of children in armed
conflict, forms part of the curriculum provided by
the Egyptian Ministry of Defense to its personnel,
especially those deployed to peacekeeping operations.
The content of that curriculum is prepared in
collaboration with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the National Council for Childhood and
Motherhood, as part of Egypt’s commitment to ensure
the protection of the rights of the child.
Egypt is also actively engaged with both the African
Union and the League of Arab States in enhancing
regional cooperation towards the protection of children
in armed conflict.
Let me conclude by reiterating Egypt’s commitment
to continue backing all efforts at all levels to protect
children and to end and prevent violations against them
in situations of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank Brazil
for convening this open debate. This year marks
25 years since the establishment of the Security
Council’s children and armed conflict mandate. This
meeting provides an opportunity for the Council to
take stock and deliberate on ways to strengthen that
important mandate.

22-4318635/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

The current global climate is characterized by
protracted and new conflict situations, which adversely
affect vulnerable groups, especially children, women
and young people. Often neglected and with their
safety and livelihoods disrupted, they are left to
protect themselves without any means, which leaves
them vulnerable and exposed to the consequences of
armed conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2022/493) paints a bleak picture
of the state in which children find themselves. Their
conditions have been compounded by the prevailing
coronavirus disease pandemic, which has hampered
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals and reduced child protection initiatives. The
grave violations identified in the report that children
continue to endure are distressing. It therefore remains
imperative for the Security Council to continue to
consider practical actions to strengthen the protection
of children affected by conflict.
South Africa has noted that, as reflected in
the study conducted by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, some progress has been made
in strengthening the agenda. We therefore applaud
the continued engagement of the United Nations and
parties to conflict in their efforts to implement action
plans for protecting children in armed conflict. The
continuation and strengthening of those efforts by both
State and non-State actors must be encouraged.
South Africa maintains its view that child protection
policies and programmes should be innovative and
responsive. That requires comprehensive engagement
with children regarding their own experiences, which
should inform the design of programmes in peace
processes, especially those aimed at protection and
reintegration. The convening and advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission can contribute towards
building and sustaining peace in the context of child
protection programmes. The effective use of the
Peacebuilding Fund could potentially serve a valuable
purpose in that regard.
The report of the Secretary-General provides
concrete recommendations for addressing outstanding
challenges. It is the responsibility of the Security
Council to take positive action in that regard. The
Council must continue to ensure that child-protection
provisions and capacity are included in all relevant
mandates of peacekeeping and special political
36/45

19/07/2022

missions. South Africa further supports the SecretaryGeneral in his call for engagement with all stakeholders
to prevent grave violations, including engagement with
regional organizations on prevention modalities and
the need to strengthen monitoring and reporting on
children and armed conflict.
I conclude with two points.
First, in order to address the plight of children in
armed conflict, there must be a commitment to a broad
strategy on conflict prevention, which should address
the root causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive
manner and create an environment conducive to the
protection and promotion of children’s rights.
Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions must be commended for their
continued efforts to deliver on their child protection
mandates. Their work in data collection and verification
contributes significantly to reporting on violations
against children in armed conflict and monitoring the
implementation of such plans, which we hope will serve
as a deterrent. It is therefore important that sufficient
resources be provided to enable peacekeeping missions
to effectively achieve their child protection mandates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Ahangari (Azerbaijan): We thank Brazil for
convening this open debate on a very important topic.
As children continue to be targeted by grave
violations, ensuring their effective prevention and
protection and ending impunity remain constant global
challenges and ongoing imperatives.
First and foremost, ensuring full compliance
with international humanitarian law is key to the
effective protection of children in armed conflict.
Of equal importance is ensuring accountability for
violations, since wrongful acts left unpunished often
serve as a catalyst for the resurgence of conflicts and
the commission of new crimes. As recommended by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2022/493), it is
also important to prioritize efforts to clear explosive
remnants of war, improvised explosive devices and
mines in order to eliminate their impacts on the
protection of children.
The 30-year occupation of Azerbaijan’s territory
by Armenia, which has been accompanied since the
early 1990s by numerous war crimes and the forced
displacement of hundreds of thousands of our citizens,
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

is a sorry example of how children are affected by the
devastating effects of conflict. The war claimed the
lives of hundreds of Azerbaijani children, while 92
children were taken hostage and some 3,500 children
lost either one or both of their parents.
Approximately 1,500 secondary schools and
preschools were destroyed or substantially damaged.
Another act of aggression committed by Armenia
during the fall of 2020, including through missile
strikes on residential areas in the cities of Ganja and
Barda, resulted in the deaths of 12 children and injuries
to 16.
As the 44-day war put an end to the occupation,
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the liberated
territories is a top priority for Azerbaijan. However,
challenges remain. The most pressing is the presence of
landmines, which impedes reconstruction efforts and
the safe return of internally displaced persons.
In the post-conflict period, more than 200
Azerbaijani citizens, including young people, have been
killed or maimed by mining explosions, as Armenia has
failed to share accurate and comprehensive information
about the landmines that it laid on Azerbaijan’s
territory. Additionally, the fate of almost 4,000 citizens,
including 71 Azerbaijani children, who went missing
in connection with the conflict remains unknown. We
expect the Armenian side to clarify the whereabouts of
those missing persons.
At the same time, Azerbaijan initiated the process
of normalizing inter-State relations with Armenia
based on mutual recognition and respect for each
other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
their internationally recognized borders. Azerbaijan
is determined to strengthen security and stability and
advance post-conflict peacebuilding, reconciliation,
reintegration and development in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I thank the Brazilian
presidency for having convened today’s debate. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Gamba de Potgieter; the UNICEF
Executive Director, Ms. Russell; and others for their
insightful presentations this morning.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Botswana on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children are always affected uniquely and
excessively in conflict situations. Despite the continual
efforts of the United Nations, including the Security
Council, there has been a steady increase in the number
of children killed or maimed by explosive remnants
of war, improvised explosive devices and mines. It
is unfortunate that children continued to suffer a
high number of grave violations in armed conflicts,
including 23,982 verified grave violations, in 2021.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2022/493). We commend
the engagement of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the country task forces with
parties in conflict, which resulted in the release of 12,214
children from armed groups and armed forces. We also
commend the work of the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism and the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict.
Bangladesh is committed to protecting civilians,
including children, in armed conflict. Bangladesh is
the leading troop- and police-contributing country, and
our peacekeepers have been serving in many difficult
situations to prevent children from being killed,
maimed or affected by sexual violence. They have also
acted to protect schools and hospitals from attack and
to prevent the military use of such infrastructure.
We have been providing shelter to more than
1 million Rohingyas for the past five years. More
than 50 per cent are children who faced atrocities
and persecution in Myanmar. Despite the enormous
challenges, we have been providing for their basic
needs, including educational opportunities through
5,617 learning centres. We have also introduced a
Myanmar curriculum on a pilot basis.
Regrettably, there has been no progress in
Myanmar aimed at creating an environment conducive
to the return of those children. We urge the Council to
take concrete measures to ensure a prosperous future
for Rohingya children in Rakhine state, including their
full repatriation.
Allow me to highlight
particular importance.

a

few

points

of

First, the protection of children in armed conflict
is the primary responsibility of the State. However,
the responsibility of other parties is also critical. We
must work to strengthen engagement with all parties to
ensure their accountability under international human

22-4318637/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

rights and humanitarian law. An amendment of national
legislations is also required.
Secondly, peacekeeping mandates to protect
children in armed conflict should be strengthened
further with adequate capacities and resources. We
thank the Secretary-General for his recommendations
in that regard.
Finally, we reiterate our call to enhance coordination
among all stakeholders of United Nations peacebuilding
activities. We also emphasize the synergies between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund to ensure a preventive and protective approach.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union and would
like to deliver a statement in its national capacity.
Lithuania would like to thank the Brazilian
presidency of the Security Council for having organized
this very important debate. We would also like to
express our appreciation to the Special Representative,
Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and to the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Catherine Russell, for their
presentations. Special thanks go also to Mr. Patrick
Kumi for his powerful story.
The recent annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493) reveals
the unacceptable: nearly 20,000 children were affected
by grave violations during the 2021 reporting period.
We have witnessed how cross-border conflicts and
intercommunal violence have affected children,
particularly in the central Sahel and Lake Chad basin
regions. We have also witnessed how coups d’état
and takeovers have aggravated the already difficult
situation of children in Afghanistan, Burkina Faso,
Mali, Myanmar and the Sudan.
We all know that the impacts of armed conflict
and violence are particularly devastating for children,
with, inter alia, interruptions to education and healthcare services and a heightened risk of conflict-related
sexual violence. During the reporting period, the
scale and severity of grave violations against children
remained very concerning, including an increased
number of children recruited and the use of children
by parties to armed conflict. In particular, Lithuania
is appalled at the fact that this year, once again, two
types of violation showed a sharp increase: abduction,
38/45

19/07/2022

and rape and other forms of sexual violence, both rising
by 20 per cent. That is utterly disturbing, especially
given that sexual-violence cases are usually greatly
underreported. Children with disabilities and displaced
children were particularly vulnerable.
We are also extremely concerned by the fact that
next year’s report will be even worse and the number
of children suffering from armed conflict will clearly
grow. As already indicated in the report, the high
intensity of Russia’s war in Ukraine will be added to
the list of situations of concern. Since Russia launched
its illegal, unprovoked and unjustifiable aggression
against Ukraine, we have seen that children are not
exempt from being killed, injured or forced to flee. On
the contrary, as UNICEF has stated, at least two children
have been killed every day, with many more injured.
According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, more than 300
children have been killed and another 500 injured,
mostly owing to the use of explosives in built-up
urban areas. For nearly five months, Russia’s armed
forces have been continuously attacking Ukrainian
cities, intentionally targeting civilians and civilian
infrastructure, and killing and injuring thousands of
civilians, including children. Russia must stop the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas and attacks on
civilian infrastructure. We are very concerned about
the growing evidence of violence perpetrated by the
Russian military forces, including sexual violence,
against children. Lithuania therefore expects that
all violations against children by Russia will be duly
documented and reflected in next year’s report.
Lithuania is very concerned about reports that
Russia is modifying its existing legislation to facilitate
fast-track and simplified adoption procedures for
forcibly transferred and evacuated Ukrainian children
in Russia. Let me reiterate that UNICEF, as has been
mentioned in the Council more than once, is of the
view that that adoption should never occur during or
immediately after emergencies. Children separated
from their parents during a humanitarian emergency
cannot be assumed to be orphans, and the Russian
Federation must ensure that family reunification and
the best interests of the child are the guiding principles.
The unlawful transfer, deportation and adoption of
Ukrainian children during and right after the war may
constitute a breach of international law, including the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Moreover, forcibly transferring children of one national
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

group to another group is mentioned as one of the criteria
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, and can therefore be seen as a
genocidal method.
We urge Russia to unconditionally withdraw
all its troops from the entire territory of Ukraine.
Lithuania strongly condemns Russia for all violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including war crimes. All atrocities
and all violations must be thoroughly investigated, and
all perpetrators must be held accountable.
In Lithuania’s statement last year, we said that the
report of 2020 (S/20021/437) should be a wake-up call
and that the responsibility of protecting children, their
dreams and their tomorrow lies on our shoulders (see
S/2021/617, annex LII). We are clearly failing to live up
to our commitments, as we are forced to add new armed
conflicts to the list of children suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): I would like to thank the
presidency of Brazil for convening today’s highlevel open debate on children and armed conflict. We
welcome this year’s focus on the protection of displaced
children, their abduction and their reintegration. I am
also grateful to all the briefers for their insightful
briefings. I particularly thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Mrs. Gamba de
Potgieter, for this year’s report on children and armed
conflict (S/2022/493).
The situation of children in armed conflict
continues to be a great concern to all of us. The number
of grave violations against children remains high. We
are saddened by the tragic loss of more than 8,000
children’s lives as a result of killing and maiming.
On the other hand, we are encouraged by the release
of more than 12,000 children from armed groups as a
result of the United Nations engagement with parties to
the conflicts.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in
the report, while the coronavirus disease exacerbated
the vulnerabilities of children, military coups have
worsened their situation, including in Myanmar.
In our country, while supporting the United
Nations-led Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, the
National Unity Government of Myanmar is committed
to promoting and protecting the rights of the child and is

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

cooperating with the relevant United Nations entities in
that regard. The National Unity Government developed
a set of guidelines on prevention and the protection of
children affected by armed conflict in Myanmar and an
implementation plan, in accordance with international
laws and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In March this year, the National Unity Government
submitted to the United Nations a report on its efforts
to promote and protect the rights of the child, especially
in situation in armed conflict, as well as the guidelines
on children and armed conflict.
After the military perpetrated the illegal coup
in Myanmar in February 2021, the illegal military
effectively destroyed the rule of law by lawlessly
arresting, torturing and killing civilians, including
children, in cold blood. Even with the elected civilian
Government and Parliament in place, the military
was the main perpetrator of grave violations against
children. After the coup, no legal protection in place was
able to protect Myanmar’s children from the violence
by the military, which has no regard for domestic or
international law.
The impact of conflict on children in Myanmar is
indeed severe, deeply disturbing and heartbreaking.
In this year’s report, the United Nations verified
503 violations against 462 Myanmar children. They
attacked schools and hospitals 17 times, used 52
schools and hospitals for military purposes and denied
humanitarian access. Those verified accounts in the
report do not necessarily represent the full scale of
attacks and violations by the military against children.
The military took children hostage to force their
parents or relatives to surrender. Nearly 7.8 million
children remain out of school; and 250,000 out of more
than 1 million internally displaced persons in Myanmar
are children.
Children retaining safe access to quality education
is another important matter. There is no doubt that
attacks on schools and hospitals have destructive effects
on children and society in every way. To that end, the
military has deliberately deprived children of their basic
human rights to health, education and development.
In addition to the displacement of children within
the country, many children, together with their parents,
escaped from Myanmar to neighbouring countries
to seek refuge. We are greatly concerned that they
are now at high risk of becoming victims of human
trafficking. Therefore, we are seeking the protection of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner

22-4318639/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

19/07/2022

for Refugees (UNHCR) for them. Many of them are
still awaiting effective actions from UNHCR. I hereby
appeal to the international community to look into that
matter seriously and in a timely way and to help them.
Children must be protected under every circumstance.
Every child deserves a future.

Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Catherine Russell, for their comprehensive and
enlightening insights. I also wish to take this opportunity
to also thank Mr. Patrick Kumi for sharing with us his
heart-rending and deeply moving testimonial.

In conclusion, as we speak, the war that the
Myanmar military has waged on its own citizens,
including children, continues. Unless the international
community takes concrete action to protect Myanmar
children from the ongoing grave violations, we risk
having a lost generation of children due to the conflictinflicted consequences. Needless to say, the key root
cause of children’s suffering in Myanmar is the military
junta’s brutal attempt to do anything to assert control
over the population, who resoundingly continues to
resist its illegal coup. With their culture of impunity, the
military forces have proved that they are not reluctant to
go to extreme lengths, including by blatantly violating
both domestic child rights law and the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. In that situation,
the international community needs to protect children
in Myanmar, who have been victims of the military
junta’s widespread and systematic attacks against the
civilian population.

Since its creation 25 years ago, the mandate
of children and armed conflict has contributed
tremendously to persuading the international community
to develop powerful international instruments and
national strategies and action plans for the protection
of children in situations of armed conflict. That has
indeed led to progress in protecting children from the
impacts of wars and conflicts, notably with the adoption
of international standards for the protection of children
and the implementation of strategies and programmes to
protect war-affected children. In addition, more than 30
action plans to end and prevent grave violations against
children have been signed around the world, and 170,000
children have been released from armed groups.

In that regard, I wish to urge the Security Council
to take swift and decisive action, in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and the children and armed conflict resolutions, to
end military violence against children, stop military
use of schools and hospitals and release all arbitrarily
detained children. The Council must also do everything
that it can to bring perpetrators of grave violations
against children to justice and to help aid workers get
safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to children in
need, especially those displaced by conflict, not only
in Myanmar but also in other conflict situations. The
Council must act now.
The full version of my statement was sent via the
e-statement link.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Ms. Moutchou (Morocco): At the outset, my
delegation would like to thank Brazil, as President of the
Security Council for the month of July, for organizing
this open debate on the very important issue of children
and armed conflict. We would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
40/45

However, we unfortunately continue to witness
serious violations of children’s rights in many contexts,
including in several humanitarian situations in which
armed groups abduct children, separate them from
their families and recruit them with total disregard for
their fundamental rights. Those children are abducted
to be exploited as combatants, spies, messengers,
transporters of ammunition or sex slaves. Many serve
as human shields or suicide bombs. They are robbed
of their childhood and treated barbarically. Some are
drugged before being abducted, kidnapped, separated
from their families or sent to fight. They become
dependent on those who abduct them. They are forced
to commit atrocities, sometimes against their own
families. Often, the abduction and forced recruitment
of children by armed groups is a means of terrorizing
civilians and blackmailing them. Most of the time,
those children face generic violence, including early
and forced child marriage and sexual exploitation and
abuse. They are targeted for abduction because they
are easy to manipulate. They can be easily enlisted as
child soldiers. They are not aware of the dangers they
will face. They have not fully acquired a real notion of
right and wrong. Those who are released after being
abducted therefore continue to struggle with the impact
of their traumatic experiences on their psychological
development. We ask how we can expect them to fully
recover, overcome their suffering and be able to restart
their lives. They need support and follow-up as an
urgent priority.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

International humanitarian law and international
human rights law provide extensive protection for
children. In addition, the Paris Principles, the Vancouver
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration, as well
as all the recently formulated reports and guidelines,
including the guidance note on abduction, which was
released only yesterday, offer an exhaustive global,
universal and inclusive protection framework addressing
all situations. The problem is not the instruments. They
exist. The problem is Member States and armed groups’
implementation and compliance with them. It is also
crucial to focus more on prevention, accountability and
impunity. Member States, civil society and national
human rights institutions should work together to
protect all children and ensure monitoring, reporting
and responding to all forms of violence against children
and urgently addressing the six grave violations of
children’s rights.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

We also thank the Secretary-General for his most
recent report (S/2022/493) on children and armed
conflict. In that regard, we share the serious concern
about the fact that despite a slight decrease in grave
violations compared to 2020, alarming trends remain,
together with increases in other related areas. For
example, kidnappings and cases of sexual violence
increased by more than 20 per cent, and attacks on
schools and hospitals increased by 5 per cent in a
context of school closures owing to the pandemic, the
military use of schools, insecurity and disregard for
children’s rights to education and health care.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its three Optional Protocols, the
Paris Principles, the Safe Schools Declaration and the
Vancouver Principles, Morocco is and will remain
fully committed to the protection and promotion
of all children’s rights and will avail itself of every
opportunity to reaffirm its unwavering commitment,
which is what we did during our three-year term as
President and Vice-President of the UNICEF Executive
Board. And we will continue to do so in all other
relevant forums.

Argentina has been an active and strong supporter
from the start of the Safe Schools Declaration,
endorsed at the Oslo Conference on Safe Schools, in the
understanding that education is critical to development
and the full enjoyment of human rights. Continued
access to safe education is crucial as a protection
mechanism for children and youth in armed conflict, as
it enables them to reach their potential and contribute
to building stronger communities. In that regard, we
call firmly for immediately ending grave violations
against children, promoting the implementation of
all necessary measures to prevent such violations and
providing children with humanitarian assistance that
will meet their needs, based on a human rights-based
approach and treating children as victims of such
violations, while ensuring that their perpetrators are
held to account.

Lastly, we reiterate our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her active commitment
throughout her mandate, and we also want to take this
opportunity to thank UNICEF, as well as all the United
Nations entities and those who selflessly endeavour
to promote and protect the rights of children around
the world, despite the difficulties, with the ultimate
objective of leaving no child behind.

We also applaud and support Special Representative
of the Secretary General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter
in the important work she is doing. We must work for
a renewed and broader approach to reintegration, not
only in terms of immediate humanitarian assistance,
but also as a long-term commitment to ensuring that
children’s reintegration programmes look towards the
future, involve all of society’s stakeholders and focus
on children’s specific needs.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the Government of Brazil, through its
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Fernando Simas
Magalhães, for convening this debate on such a critical
topic. We are also grateful for the briefings by Special
Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, UNICEF
Executive Director Catherine Russell and Mr. Patrick
Kumi, whose recommendations we also value.

In conclusion, we must conceive concrete actions
while incorporating the cross-cutting principle of
leaving no one behind. Argentina reiterates the urgent
need to agree on and implement concrete measures.
That task must be carried out within a framework of
absolute respect for international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international
refugee law. Only by working towards a humanitarian
approach to development and peace can we achieve a
sustainable outcome ensuring respect for human rights
and the successful reintegration of all children.

22-4318641/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Sahraoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
Brazil on its able leadership of the work of the Security
Council this month. I also want to thank our briefers,
Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1 Gamba
de Potgieter, Ms. Catherine Russell, Executive Director
of UNICEF, and the civil-society representative for
their insights.
More than 25 years after the publication of Graça
Machel’s report (A/51/306), the protection of children
in armed conflict remains a priority. However, we are
seeing an increase in violations against children as a
result of decisions and measures taken by others while
children bear the brunt.
Algeria accords great importance to the protection
of children in conflict areas. As part of an international
group of States, Algeria made a positive and effective
contribution to the Study on the evolution of the Children
and Armed Conflict Mandate 1996-2021, marking the
agenda’s twenty-fifth anniversary. It clarified beyond
doubt that much remains to be done to protect children
in armed conflict and adapt the mandate to the nature
of the various armed conflicts.
The subject of children and armed conflict is
extremely important. We must address the root causes
of conflicts and ensure justice and accountability by
prosecuting all the perpetrators of violations. That is
a very complex task, given the nexus between armed
conflict and organized crime, specifically human
trafficking and human smuggling. That is why we need
to intensify our efforts and cooperation and establish
flexible mechanisms to ensure effective protection
for children.
My country’s delegation would like to contribute
to today’s open debate by sharing with Council
members some ideas that we believe are important in
the light of the questions posed by the concept note
(S/2022/540, annex).
First, the issue of the protection of children should
be given priority by respecting relevant international
instruments and taking urgent and effective steps to
prevent the abduction and recruitment of children. That
priority should be translated into effective policies that
enhance regional and international cooperation.
42/45

19/07/2022

We also need to ensure that children are not
treated as fighters. We should establish and promote
prevention and protection mechanisms and enhance
the legal framework related to children in situations
of armed conflict, including by joining the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
committing to its provisions. Algeria ratified the
Optional Protocol on 6 May 2009.
Peacekeeping operations also play an important
role in that regard, pursuant to Security Council
resolutions. We stress the need to uphold the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism in order to protect children
in armed conflict.
Secondly, with regard to accountability, our
strategy should be to combat impunity pertaining to
the verified and documented crimes against children in
armed conflict, in particular through close cooperation
among Governments and country teams on monitoring
and reporting. We also need to support them by
strengthening capacity-building and providing them
with the necessary funding to allow them to uphold
their mandates.
Thirdly, with respect to addressing the root causes
of armed conflicts, we cannot address the issue of
children and armed conflict without considering the
global picture. That is why we need to find a peaceful
and lasting solution to armed conflicts. It is worth
noting that development and economic issues are
important causes of many conflicts that threaten the
lives of children and jeopardize their future. Therefore,
our approach should go beyond the security and legal
dimensions, while taking into consideration social and
economic considerations.
Fourthly, concerning education, the natural place
for children is the classroom, not on the battlefield or
in situations of armed conflict. Therefore, we should
ensure that children receive education even amid armed
conflicts. Since its independence, Algeria has provided
free education for all people on its territories, including
refugees and the victims of armed conflicts.
Fifthly, we need to develop reintegration policies
that target children who are victims of armed conflict,
in particular those who were abducted. They should
be granted access to medical care and psychological
and social support and should be allowed to resume
their education. We need to adopt sustainable policies
that guarantee children access to basic services. We
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

reiterate, in that regard, that implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is the best way to
sustainably and effectively reintegrate those children,
in particular in post-conflict periods.
I would like to reiterate that grave violations
perpetrated against children in armed conflict are
not inevitable. We should therefore act to uphold the
best interests of children in armed conflict situations.
That would allow us to build a better present and
future in which all children have the right to live in an
environment that enables them to develop and achieve
their goals and aspirations as generations of the future,
without discrimination.
I should mention, in that regard, the crimes
perpetrated against Palestinian children in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Those children are deliberately
and systematically targeted by the occupying forces, in
blatant violation of international law. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, should
honour its commitments and adopt the necessary
measures to guarantee the protection of the Palestinian
people, including children, and should not exclude them
from international protection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): We thank the presidency
of Brazil for convening today’s open debate.
We would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Catherine Russell,
and Mr. Patrick Kumi for their comprehensive briefings.
Children continue to be disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts. We are very concerned about the
high number of grave violations against children, as
reflected in the recent report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493), including
their recruitment and use, their killing and maiming
and the denial of humanitarian access to them.
We
condemn
violations
of
international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law, including attacks on schools, students and
educational personnel, as well as the use of schools
for military purposes. International humanitarian law
and international human rights law shape the crucial
framework for the effective protection of children
in conflict settings. In that context, we stress the

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

imperative of intensifying the efforts of the international
community to address the protection needs of children
residing in conflict areas.
In our region, we continue to face the humanitarian
consequences of the premeditated military aggression
of Azerbaijan in the fall of 2020, amid an outbreak
of the unprecedented global health-care crisis, which
resulted in thousands of casualties, displacements and
the destruction of critical civilian infrastructure and
took a particularly heavy toll on children.
Among the 19,000 displaced people from
Nagorno-Karabakh, 88 per cent of them were women
and children. Deliberate bombardment and shelling,
including by prohibited weapons, such as cluster
munitions, heavily damaged several medical facilities,
including Stepanakert’s maternal and child health
centre. Targeted attacks on educational institutions led
to the destruction of 18 schools and six kindergartens
in Artsakh, thereby depriving 28,000 children of their
right to education.
The violations of international humanitarian law
perpetrated by Azerbaijan have been widely documented
by international humanitarian and international
human rights organizations. In the aftermath of the
aggression, hundreds of cluster bomblets and other
explosive remnants of war, which are spread across
civilian settlements and agricultural lands, continue to
cause serious security risks to the lives of civilians, in
particular children.
The denial by Azerbaijan of the safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for United Nations agencies
to the conflict zone undermines the comprehensive
assessment of humanitarian protection, early recovery
needs and the human rights situation of the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh, as well as the ability to ensure
the protection of the rights of the child and enable
access to inclusive and quality education, health care
and social services.
We are particularly concerned about the
continued involvement of children in State-sponsored
propaganda of hatred on ethnic and religious grounds.
Educational curricula in kindergartens and schools in
Azerbaijan are aimed at indoctrinating children with
Armeniaphobia and inciting violence and intolerance.
The European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance has observed that “Azerbaijan’s leadership,
education system and media are very prolific in
their denigration of Armenians” and that “an entire

22-4318643/45

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

Children and armed conflict

generation of Azerbaijanis has now grown up listening
to this hateful rhetoric”. The opening of the Military
Trophy Park, which propagates vilifying images of
ethnic Armenians and exposes them to children, is yet
another manifestation of the systemic policy aimed at
dehumanizing Armenians.
Armenia reiterates its commitment to the goals,
objectives and principles enshrined in the Safe Schools
Declaration, the Paris Principles and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, which are
crucial instruments for promoting and protecting the
rights of all children, in particular those residing in
conflict areas, and for preventing grave violations.
We fully support the mandate of Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter in streamlining
the agenda of children and armed conflict into the
activities of the United Nations agencies and promoting
cooperation with regional organizations, civil society
and other stakeholders with a view to ensuring effective
protection on the ground.
The President: The representative of India has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Sharma (India): I have been impelled to take
the floor for a second time only because one delegation
has chosen yet again to misuse this forum and the
meeting to make some frivolous remarks attacking
my country. While such statements deserve our
collective contempt and sympathy for a mindset that
repeatedly utters falsehoods, it is important to set the
record straight.
Pakistan has failed to protect the rights of its
minorities, including Sikhs, Hindus, Christians and
Ahmadiyyas. Thousands of women and children,
particularly girls, from minority communities have been
subjected to abduction, forced marriage and conversion
in Pakistan. The entire union territories of Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh were, are and always will be an
integral and inalienable part of India, irrespective of
what the representative of Pakistan believes or wishes.
We call on Pakistan to end its cross-border terrorism
so that our citizens can exercise their right to life
and liberty.
I will stop there, as today’s discussion is extremely
important if we are to strengthen our efforts to protect
children in situations of armed conflict and work to
44/45

19/07/2022

provide them with a future free from violence and
terror, as they deserve.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Rashid (Pakistan): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the floor. The representative of India has made some
familiar but false assertions. Unfortunately, deflection
and disinformation have become a core part of India’s
diplomacy today and obviously the biggest example of
that is what we have just heard — namely, that Jammu
and Kashmir is part of India.
Jammu and Kashmir is not part of India now, nor was
it ever. That is a legal fiction. All United Nations maps
show Jammu and Kashmir as disputed territory. In all
its resolutions on the subject, the Council decided that
the final disposition of Kashmir should be determined
by its people through a United Nations-supervised
plebiscite. India accepted that decision and is bound
to comply with it in accordance with Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Above all, the report
under consideration by the Security Council considers
Jammu and Kashmir to be a disputed territory.
Children have been killed and subjected to
violence in Pakistan in recent years, but that is largely
due to terrorist attacks, while Indian forces have
been responsible for grave violations against children
in Indian illegally occupied Jammu and Kashmir.
The Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan and the Balochistan
Liberation Army are behind those attacks on children
in Pakistan, including the cowardly and unfortunate
terrorist attack on the Army Public School in Peshawar
in 2014, which resulted in the loss of more than 130
innocent children’s lives. We have concrete evidence
that those terrorist organizations were financed and
sponsored by Indian agencies. The captured Indian spy
commander Kulbhushan Jadhav confessed to India’s
support for such terrorist and subversive activities.
Moreover, it is India that has sponsored and
perpetrated terrorism and aggression against all its
neighbours, creating terrorist groups and destabilizing
and blockading neighbours to force them to do its
strategic bidding while sponsoring subversion, sabotage
and terrorism in various parts of Pakistan. I would also
like to bring to the Council’s attention the fact that
there is no terrorism across the line of control in Jammu
and Kashmir. The ceasefire agreed in February 2021
is holding.
22-43186

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

In conclusion, the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is to address
the plight of the children affected by armed conflict
and is most relevant in cases of foreign occupation.
Pakistan will also share detailed information on grave
violations against children in Indian illegally occupied
Jammu and Kashmir with the Office of the Special
Representative and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. The Security Council should seek
accountability for India’s crimes against children in
Indian illegally occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

S/PV.9096 (Resumption 1)

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I would like to reiterate Brazil’s thanks to our
briefers for their important contributions and above all
for the work that they do, as well as for their personal
testimonies. I would also like to thank the Security
Council Affairs Division and the interpreters for their
tireless work throughout a long day.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

22-4318645/45
