S/PV.9320

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9320th meeting

Thursday, 11 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl/Mrs. Chanda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Zabolotskaya
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-13322 (E)
*2313322*

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Ms. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to make a statement regarding
our reservation about the presence in the Security
Council Chamber of the so-called Prosecutor of the
so-called International Criminal Court. We do not
understand why he is being invited to the Security
Council. The International Criminal Court has become
a very obedient puppet of Western countries and is
acting on the orders and in the political interests of
Western countries, while not implementing either
resolution 1970 (2011) or the Council’s requests. His
presence in our building is not only pointless, but it is
also an insult to the Organization.
The President (spoke in French): I take note of
the point of order made by the representative of the
Russian Federation.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Prosecutor Khan.
Mr. Khan: I thank you, Madam President,
for the opportunity today to once again brief the
Security Council.
With the Council’s leave, I would like to start
by expressing my personal thanks to the Permanent
Representative of Libya for his presence in the Chamber.
In my report one year ago (see S/PV.9024), I had the
privilege of addressing the Council and laying out what
I opined was the need of the hour, that is, to have the
International Criminal Court (ICC) be seen as having
2/19

11/05/2023

more impact and being nimbler and results-oriented.
I set out a new plan for action that would hopefully
fulfil the need of the people of Libya, and thereby also
vindicate the demands of the Council when it referred
the matter to the Court in the first place. It is important
to recall that the motivation that led the Council to refer
the matter was not politics, divides or power politics. It
was the need for justice for children and women and men.
Over the past six months, significant progress was
made as a result of more dynamic and field-focused
investigations — a targeted approach to investigations.
I think there is cause for optimism that we are finally
on track. Twenty missions were conducted by the men
and women of my Office during the reporting period.
More than 500 items of evidence of a vast array of
types — audio, video and satellite — were collected,
including testimonial evidence, which has been
scrutinized and preserved.
We have also realized that the International
Criminal Court is a hub; it is not an apex court. We are
working under the principle of complementarity, both
with the Libyan national authorities, as an exercise
of their sovereignty and primary responsibility as a
matter of public international law, as well as by giving
evidence to six national authorities to pursue justice in
their own courts. I think that is a matter of significant
pride for the international community, that is, the fact
that justice in not the preserve of the International
Criminal Court of any one national authority; it is the
obligation of every State Member of the United Nations
to finally, in 2023, realize the obligations that have
been with us since Nuremberg.
We are bringing our Office and the work of its men
and women closer to the people of Libya. In my last
report I mentioned that, in November 2022, I conducted
the first official visit of an ICC Prosecutor to Libya in
over 10 years. I briefed the Council for the first time
from Tripoli. That engagement was accelerated during
the reporting period. We are regularly reaching out to
the Libyan authorities, but also to civil society, victims
and survivors in Libya.
Partnerships are key to justice. If the Council’s
instructions and responsibilities and its referral of
situations to the Court are to be vindicated, it requires
that everybody step up and for every single State to
realize that there is a shared responsibility, much bigger
than the politics of the moment, but to children, women
and men who look to this body for justice and for the
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

rights of the Charter of the United Nations to be properly
vindicated. That must trump politics and short-term
expediency. The partnership has embraced very close
collaboration with the United Nations Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, with which have a very
good partnership and have received information, which
we have also independently reviewed and scrutinized.
I think it is only right and proper to express gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), whose support was critical to my mission
last year. It remains critical in terms of engagement and
ability to be in the field in Libya.
Over the reporting period, we accelerated a
transformation of the Office, including the Libya file, in
that we moved to the cloud and started using Relativity
as a powerful new e-discovery tool that is enhancing our
ability to ingest more information, analyse it effectively
and give it to national authorities, as well as to properly
target investigations and investigate incriminating and
exonerating evidence equally. That has allowed us to
get concrete results.
I announced that we had applied for more warrants
in the Libya situation. I can announce today that four
warrants were issued by the independent Judges of the
International Criminal Court. I have applied for them
to be unsealed, and the Judges will decide on that
application in due course. In addition to those four
warrants in Libya, which are demonstrable evidence of
renewed activity and greater focus, in the past two to
three weeks I also applied for two additional warrants
as well. That is also important.
Warrants are not an end in themselves, but they
are an important step in the rights of victims and
survivors — that their lives matter to the members
of the Council and to us. What many of them have
suffered and the allegations they have raised that we
believe to be supported by evidence need to be assessed
by independent and impartial judges, if we are not to
give the lie to the promise of Nuremberg — the promise
in which all permanent members of the Council joined
with one voice: that there should never again be a time
in which human rights are trampled so egregiously in
different parts of the world. Of course, as the Council
and as the international community, we have a great
deal of room for improvement.
The warrants are of course the first step. How do
we deliver ever more? Partnerships are absolutely key,

S/PV.9320

as well as the realization that it does not matter at all
which flag is behind a judge or a prosecutor. We need
to work more closely with the independent judicial
authorities of the States Members of the United Nations,
States parties and non-States parties alike. Everybody
has a stake in justice. And when we can share evidence
with national authorities in the way that we have over
the six-month period, it is a sign of hope that, at last, we
are maturing as a people.
Impact is important, however. When I was in
Tarhuna and in the Kalma camp in the Sudan, there was
a concern that victims did not trust the Security Council
or the ICC. The United Nations and its Member States
are viewed as all talk because the victims are not seeing
enough change in their lives. They are not seeing that
their lives matter. There is a gap between the promise
of justice, the prayer of “never again” and the spectre
of international institutions working for them. They see
that they still are in refugee camps. They are displaced
and living in fear around the world. That is something
that every individual, Council member, Member State
and international institution and the men and women
must acknowledge. We need to galvanize our efforts to
do better and come of age as a species. But there are
significant milestones.
During the reporting period, we further supported
the national prosecutions in Italy and the Netherlands,
working with the European Union Agency for Law
Enforcement Cooperation and the joint investigative
team, of which we are members in the Libya case file,
in relation to human trafficking, that egregious crime
that includes sexual abuse, sexual slavery and many
other allegations that we are receiving. And non-States
parties also have a very important role to play.
I recently went to the United Arab Emirates. I
applauded the Emirati authorities because, on 1 January,
a 39-year-old Eritrean man, a key suspect in relation to
the egregious crime of trafficking, was arrested in the
Sudan in an operation courageously led by the United
Arab Emirates. And that was in furtherance of an arrest
warrant issued by the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
That is an example of humankind coming together and
the law not being the preserve of States parties to the
ICC, but being an obligation and the glue that can bind
us together in a way that is not contentious but much
more cooperative than we have seen in the past.
I have continued to engage with the Office of the
Attorney General, the military prosecutor and the

23-133223/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

Ministry of Justice in Libya. We are trying to work on
other areas of partnership, while helping the Libyans to
increase their own capacity and providing the technical
assistance of the men and women of my Office in the
areas of forensics and the identification of remains, in
which there is a great deal of scope for collaboration
and improvement.
In the coming weeks, my team will again be in
Libya, liaising with the Libyan authorities. We also
hope to establish a field office in Tripoli. That is very
important. It is not some cosmetic exercise when are
working with the people affected and with national
authorities. Wherever we are in the world, justice
becomes more tangible. It becomes less distant and
less theoretical, and that is also what is needed at the
moment. Of course, the medium-term aspiration and
hope must be that the Libyan authority, the flag of Libya,
is increasingly behind the principle of justice at home.
We are willing and eager to work ever more closely
with the Libyan authorities to vindicate the needs of
Libyans who have suffered so much for so long.
Of course, partnership is key, and the secondees
all Member States have provided to my Office have
been used across situations — not only in one situation,
but across situations. And Libya is a good example of
having benefited from the allocation of resources that I
provided to the country to ensure that we can obtain the
results that I mentioned in relation to warrants.
I believe that the need for acceleration is not
without significance. We should not have the sense
that we can take our good old time to obtain results.
Rather, we must feel that sense of urgency, as if our
children and family members are suffering and craving
justice, wanting to know where their loved ones are
buried. And if we can pause, for a moment, the political
divisions that are, unfortunately, so abundant around
us and coalesce around people whom we do not know,
whose faces many of us will not see, and unite on
the principles of humanity and justice, it would be to
the betterment of international law, and international
relations more generally.
Technology is not a flash in the pan. The ability
to use technology more effectively is important. I
mentioned Relativity and e-Discovery. But in the
process of transforming the architecture of the Office,
we now have the ability to automatically transcribe
from video and audio and use machine learning and
automated translation to increase the pace of delivery
4/19

11/05/2023

and get the impacts that so many are looking for. We
have used that technology in Libya.
I believe that Libya is absolutely key to all of it — the
collaboration, partnership and trust, which we hope
will become stronger as we go on with Libya — will,
ultimately, be the litmus test to the referral that has been
given to us by the Council. In the meantime, we cannot
dawdle. But we need to show how things should be.
It may be useful to recall one of the episodes
with the most impact during my less than two years
as Prosecutor. In November, I went to a town called
Tarhuna, approximately two hours from Tripoli. I was
there with the local community around a very simple
table, and the accounts we heard was a snapshot of why
the Council referred the matter to the Court. There was
a man who spoke in very simple words, and the words
were all the more powerful for their simplicity, devoid
of any artifice. He described how 15 members of his
family had been taken away and murdered.
There was a lady who, with great dignity, looked
me in the eye and described what it felt like to be in the
room when two of her children were taken away, never
to be seen again. For those of us who have children, just
imagine that suddenly our children are taken away and
we do not know where they are. We do not know how
their lives ended, or where they are buried.
There was a man who really touched me greatly.
He said,
“I cannot live in my own house because that
house — those walls and that roof — is where my
children were born ,and my children are not with
me. I cannot bear any moment in my house. It is no
longer a home. It is a vivid flashback of love lost
and justice that has not been felt”.
And we see in so many parts of the world, including
Libya, that, as those victims told us, quite candidly,
we hear that the Security Council, the ICC, the United
Nations and international institutions talk a good talk,
but they are not feeling it. They are not feeling that their
lives matter to those institutions. I believe that that is
something that should weigh very heavily on us.
I think that during this reporting period, the clear
and demonstrable accelerated focus, the application and
issuance of the four warrants I have mentioned and the
application of two further warrants, the greater focus on a
field presence, the greater sense of urgency and that sense
of acute responsibility — to be servants of humankind,
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

to recall the great Dag Hammarskjöld — have led me
to realize that self-oblivion, having brickbats thrown at
one and being castigated are absolutely worth it if one
can finally become worthy of being properly called a
servant of justice and of the international community.
That sense of service is one that should galvanize all
the members of the Council to do better than we have in
Libya and in so many parts of the world. If we feel that
we can make things better, be more imaginative and
build partnerships together, I think that this referral,
which has seen such progress over the past six months,
can go deeper. And to achieve that would be to receive
a debt of thanks that we might finally deserve. Perhaps
most importantly, we can look at the victims — like
those whom I have seen in Tarhuna and other places
in Libya — and feel not ashamed but that we are
finally doing our best to deliver on their right to justice
and accountability.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Khan
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Prosecutor Khan for
his excellent and convincing briefing.
Let me be clear. As a matter of justice under the
rule of law and reconciliation for sustainable peace, the
perpetrators of serious crimes must be held accountable
for their wrongdoing. The International Criminal Court
(ICC), as the central institution of the international
criminal justice system, stands on the front lines of the
global fight against impunity. Japan proudly supports
the Court by providing both human and financial
resources, and we hereby reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to that.
We take note of the progress made in key lines of
inquiry by the Court, led by the Office of the Prosecutor.
In particular, the issuance of new arrest warrants will
lead to the realization of justice if it is followed by
an appropriate process without delay. Furthermore,
the Court’s positive collaboration with the relevant
national authorities has begun to bear tangible fruit
in combating crimes against migrants, which have
become a major source of insecurity and upheaval in the
region and beyond. We continue to pay close attention
to that ongoing abhorrent situation and support efforts
to hold the perpetrators of such atrocities accountable.
We also recognize that the Office has made progress
on the key principles for renewed action announced in

S/PV.9320

April last year. It is encouraging to hear of the ongoing
cooperation by the Libyan authorities and the Court’s
increased engagement with victims and civil society.
We are convinced that strengthening cooperation with
those actors will not only help the investigations but
will contribute to gaining public support and achieving
long-lasting reconciliation in the region. We take note
of the ICC’s efforts towards establishing a liaison office
in Tripoli in that regard.
However, it is unfortunate that we have not yet
seen major progress in the investigation into the 2011
violence, including advances in the prosecution of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. We look forward to seeing the
Court expedite that process. The success of the Court
also depends on cooperation from States. Without their
help, the Court cannot function effectively.
We must recall that it was the Council itself that
unanimously decided to refer the situation in Libya
to the Court. Adopting resolution 1970 (2011) was not
a goal but rather a starting point. Our job should not
be just hearing from the Prosecutor every six months
and reporting back to our capitals. The Council is
responsible for ensuring the full implementation of
its own resolutions. We must let the Court fulfil its
mandate. Japan stands ready to further engage with
the relevant Member States and will continue its firm
support for the important activities of the Court.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me first thank
Prosecutor Karim Khan for his powerful briefing
today and for his twenty-fifth report on the situation
in Libya. The United Kingdom gives its full support
to the Prosecutor’s ongoing investigations in line with
resolution 1970 (2011). We welcome both the briefing
and the report as a demonstration of his transparency.
We also welcome the participation of the representative
of Libya in this meeting.
We are pleased to hear of the acceleration in the
investigation of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the progress in the delivery of the new
strategy outlined in the Prosecutor’s twenty-third
report to the Council. We note the concrete outcomes
of the investigation, including the issuance of new
arrest warrants by the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber during
the reporting period. Those are important steps for
delivering justice for the Libyan people. We are
grateful to the Office of the Prosecutor and those
who supported it for the renewed efforts during this
period. We thank the Government of National Unity

23-133225/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

in Libya for facilitating the first official visit of an
ICC Prosecutor to Libya in more than 10 years. It
will be critical to the continued successful delivery of
the investigation that further support be given to the
investigation by the Government of National Unity
and all other relevant Libyan authorities, including by
providing documentation.
We welcome the increased engagement with
witnesses and survivors and the collection of
testimonial evidence. I thank the Independent FactFinding Mission on Libya for sharing its expertise
and enhancing the Prosecutor’s work to record the
experiences of Libyan people. Following the ending
of the Fact-Finding Mission, I encourage the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue that
cooperation to help document and safeguard evidence
of serious crimes.
This is a moment of opportunity in Libya.
Transitional justice is vital to long-term security and
stability and should be embedded in the political
process. The ICC is a vital tool to help deliver justice for
Libya through transparent and fair investigation. I urge
all parties to work together to safeguard human rights
and ensure that justice can be delivered when crimes
occur, including through cooperation with the ICC and
the surrender of individuals subject to arrest warrants.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains
committed to working with the Prosecutor’s Office and
the Libyan authorities to build on that momentum and
accelerate progress towards justice. Let me underline
our full support for the work of the ICC in its pursuit
of justice for the victims of the most egregious crimes,
wherever they may occur.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing to the Security Council
on the International Criminal Court’s (ICC) work on
the situation in Libya.
The International Criminal Court has an important
role to play in the international system of justice, and
its work in Libya plays a critical part in support of
our collective pursuit of accountability and peace and
security. The United States commends the extraordinary
dedication of the Court’s staff and the sustained efforts
of the Court to investigate and prosecute those most
responsible for the heinous atrocities committed against
the Libyan people since February 2011.
6/19

11/05/2023

The Prosecutor’s latest report to the Council
reflects considerable progress in the past six months.
The investigative and cooperative activities undertaken
by the Office of the Prosecutor — including conducting
numerous investigative missions to Libya and building a
proactive policy of cooperation with Libyan authorities,
third States, regional organizations and international
partners — have laid the foundations for accountability
in the face of ongoing challenges in Libya and in a
difficult operating environment. In particular, we note
the issuance of multiple arrest warrants, including some
that remain under seal.
We also commend the Prosecutor’s Office for its
commitment to increasing cooperation and engagement
with witnesses, victims and civil society, and for the
substantial progress in its investigations. We welcome
strategic approach by the Prosecutor for renewed
action in the Libya situation. The United States also
congratulates the Office of the Prosecutor for its role in
the arrest in January of a suspect wanted by the Dutch
authorities for brutal crimes against migrants and
commends the United Arab Emirates for its role in his
apprehension. We remain deeply concerned about the
fate of migrants, including women and children who
have experienced sexual violence and continue to be
subjected to abuse. We urge the Libyan authorities to
take credible measures to dismantle the trafficking and
smuggling routes.
We are encouraged by the progress on the ICC
discussions with the Libyan authorities to enhance the
long-term presence of ICC staff, including by opening
a liaison office in Libya as a key means for enhancing
cooperation with the national authorities and victims.
However, more needs to be done. We call on the
Libyan authorities to do more to support and advance
accountability efforts and to enhance cooperation with
the ICC, including in ensuring that those subject to
arrest warrants face justice as soon as possible.
The United States recognizes with gratitude the close
and productive cooperation between the Prosecutor’s
Office and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. We also welcome the ICC’s collaboration
with the Human Rights Council’s Independent FactFinding Mission on Libya and commend its work
in documenting reports of arbitrary detentions,
extrajudicial killings, torture, rape, enslavement,
sexual slavery and enforced disappearances. We
note that the Fact-Finding Mission found reasonable
grounds to believe that crimes against humanity
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

were committed against Libyans. The United States
welcomes the increased contact with victims and civil
society organizations in Libya as crucial to the delivery
of justice for victims who have waited far too long to
be heard. Victims and survivors deserve justice, which
can be a powerful stabilizing force for Libya’s future.
We continue to believe that resolving political
uncertainty and promoting accountability in Libya
will go a long way towards addressing the chronic
instability the country continues to face, including
from the mobilization of armed groups. Human rights
violations and abuses will continue unless meaningful
steps are taken to address the chronic instability in
Libya. A critical step towards peace and stability is the
withdrawal of all armed groups and mercenaries from
Libya without further delay, in line with resolution 2656
(2022) and the October 2020 Libyan ceasefire agreement.
The people of Libya deserve stability and justice,
and we support the International Criminal Court’s
effort to help to bring justice to the people of Libya.
Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for the report
he just submitted to the Security Council, and express
my thanks to Ambassador Taher Elsonni of Libya for
participating in this meeting.
At the outset, let me underscore that Ghana has
a lot of confidence in the Prosecutor and his Office,
as the Prosecutor has, any time he has addressed the
Council, demonstrated his professionalism, dedication
and commitment to the duty of ending impunity. In that
regard, we convey our support for his efforts.
On the substantive issues in the report, Ghana
wishes to highlight the following four points.
First, we note the continued efforts and steps being
taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to establish an
enhanced dialogue with the Libyan authorities in the
implementation of the principle of complementarity by
actively contributing to the investigations conducted
by the domestic law enforcement agencies of six States
parties into international crimes committed in Libya,
including within the joint team on crimes affecting
migrants. That approach will build the capacities of
Libyan institutions towards conducting national trials
of indictees.
Ghana welcomes the positive results from the
renewed approach to complementarity that the Office

S/PV.9320

has taken in this situation, including the arrest and
prosecution by the relevant national authorities of
key suspects connected to crimes committed against
migrants in Libya. We are also happy to note that such
cooperation has led to 17 interviews, conducted jointly
by the Office and investigators from a domestic law
enforcement agency. That will not only build capacities
but also — as rightly captured in the report — save
resources and enable a direct exchange of knowledge
and experience.
Secondly, on cooperation with the competent
Libyan authorities, we note with appreciation that
cooperation and a greater partnership between the
Office and Libya remains a fundamental tenet of
the Office’s work on the Libyan situation. Further
strengthening of excellent cooperation with the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, enhancing
the Office’s investigations and supporting the
identification of additional witnesses relevant to the
investigations, are worthy of note and encouragement.
We commend the Office for transitioning to the use of
Relativity, a new evidence-management system using
artificial intelligence and machine learning, which will
modernize and enhance the team’s investigative and
analytical capabilities.
While underscoring the positive relations between
the Office of the Prosecutor and the competent Libyan
authorities, we call on the Government of Libya to ensure
the full cooperation of all relevant national authorities
with the Office of the Prosecutor, in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011), including by providing
documentation relevant to the ICC investigations. We
welcome the support provided by the Government with
respect to the Prosecutor visit to Libya in November 2022.
Thirdly, during the most recent briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.9187), Ghana highlighted the
importance of witness protection before, during
and after the trial process. We are happy to note
that the Office of the Prosecutor has taken measures
to empower victims, witnesses and affected
communities through an enhanced presence in the
region and increased contact with victims, victims’
associations and representatives and other civil
society organizations on the situation in Libya.
Ghana believes that the renewed strategic
approach, which has increased engagement, will enrich
the investigations, provide access to potential evidence
and witnesses and ensure that the team is abreast of

23-133227/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

current developments on the ground. The Office’s
continued efforts to further strengthen engagement
with Libyan and non-Libyan victims, witnesses and
affected communities, both inside and outside Libya,
are commendable. We take this opportunity to call
on the international community to provide effective
psychological and rehabilitative assistance to victims
across Libya.
Finally, Ghana notes with appreciation the ongoing
close cooperation with other countries and agencies that
led to the recent arrest and extradition from Ethiopia to
the Netherlands and Italy of two key suspects of crimes
against migrants and refugees. We take this opportunity
to thank the Government of the United Arab Emirates
and the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation (EUROPOL) for their support. We call on
the competent Libyan authorities to respect the human
rights of migrants and protect them in accordance with
international law. We therefore encourage the Office to
continue with the proactive cooperation measures with
the national authorities and regional organizations,
such as EUROPOL, to support domestic efforts to
investigate and prosecute crimes allegedly committed
against migrants, as highlighted in the report.
In conclusion, Ghana expresses its appreciation
to the United Nations entities, including the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, that have provided
support to the Office of the Prosecutor during the
reporting period. We encourage the Office of the
Prosecutor to continue to carry out its mandate by
bringing perpetrators of atrocity crimes in Libya to
face justice to bring succour to the families of victims.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Allow me to begin by
thanking Prosecutor Khan for his excellent work and
for briefing us today, as per resolution 1970 (2011).
We fully support Prosecutor Khan in advancing the
mission of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
fighting impunity wherever it arises. Also, we welcome
the representative of Libya to this meeting.
We commend the tangible progress made in
revitalizing investigations; the issuance of arrest
warrants; the collection of case evidence and the
establishment of the commission of serious crimes,
such as unlawful detention, murder, torture, rape
and gender-based crimes. However, the protection of
witnesses and victims of horrific crimes remains a
challenge. We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor
8/19

11/05/2023

to continue collecting evidence for alleged crimes
committed during the conflict, especially with regard
to crimes against women and children.
We are shocked by the crimes committed against
migrants in Libya, who continue to suffer from serious
abuses committed with total impunity. Serious violations
include torture and detention in degrading conditions
and abuses of women and children. We call on the ICC
and Libyan authorities to fully investigate those horrific
crimes and bring the perpetrators to justice. And also
support also the opening of an ICC office in Tripoli,
which we think will help to increase cooperation.
Accountability is crucial to end the violations
and prevent future violations. We must listen to the
demands for justice of the Libyan people and support
cooperation between the ICC and the Libyan authorities
to deliver justice. We regret the persistent insecurity
and the denial of access to documentation and crime
scenes, which undermine investigations.
We support the road map for accountability in Libya
and welcome engagement with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General. We encourage the Office of the
Prosecutor to continue strengthening the victim and
witness support programmes and engage closely with
affected communities and civil society organizations.
In conclusion, let me emphasize the importance of
ending impunity as a precondition for lasting peace and
security in Libya. And in that regard, the Council should
continue supporting the work of the ICC as mandated.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I wish to thank
Mr. Karim Khan, Chief Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing. I acknowledge
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Taher Elsonni, the
Permanent Representative of Libya, in this meeting.
Mozambique welcomes the work being undertaken
by the ICC under the mandate of the Security Council.
We highlight the critical role of the ICC in combating
the impunity of perpetrators of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. In holding perpetrators
accountable, the ICC renders its major contribution to
the promotion of peace and security. We trust that the
ICC will continue to assist the Libyan people in their
collective efforts to promote peace, reconciliation and
stability in Libya.
We note, in that connection, that the Security
Council referred the situation in Libya to the ICC in
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

2011, through resolution 1970 (2011). Serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
committed in Libya constituted the main reason for
that decision. Against that backdrop, it is timely and
important that the Security Council take stock of
what has been done so far in the implementation of
the aforementioned decision. Our reflection must be
oriented to results vis-à-vis the promotion of durable
peace in the country.
We are of the view that investigations undertaken
by the ICC are aimed at holding accountable those
responsible for crimes against humanity, war
crimes and other violations of human rights for the
benefit of the Libyan people and the Libyan peace
process. That process must be led and owned by the
Libyans themselves.
In that context, it is our understanding that there
is a need to give relevance to the role of the national
judiciary system and reconciliation mechanisms. The
ICC acts on the golden principle of complementarity.
That calls for an enhanced role of the Libyan judiciary,
so that the perpetrators of crimes against humanity are
held accountable and justice is done as part of the healing
process of the victims and those affected. Therefore,
we commend the significant landmarks outlined in the
report of the Prosecutor of the ICC, particularly with
regard to the contribution of his Office to investigations
conducted by the Libyan judiciary.
We wish to join our voice to the calls for more
and effective action to be taken to address the crimes
committed against migrants.
The report of the Prosecutor presents an excellent
opportunity for constructive engagement with the
Libyan authorities.
For our part, it is our role to encourage the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC to maintain an engaged
dialogue with the Libyan authorities and stakeholders
so as to create conditions for a constructive way
forward, taking into consideration that this is all done
for the sake of peace and justice in Libya.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank
Prosecutor Karim Khan for the presentation of his
twenty-fifth report, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We also welcome the presence of the representatives of
Libya at this meeting.

S/PV.9320

As we have noted time and again, the International
Criminal Court (ICC), the only permanent international
criminal court with a universal vocation, plays an
essential role in combating impunity for perpetrators
of abuses and in responding to the need for justice
expressed by victims, thus contributing to the integrity
of a law-based international order. In line with its
consistent position, France will continue to support
the work of the Court through political, financial,
operational and human support. The progress made in
the implementation of the new strategy of the Office of
the Prosecutor for the situation in Libya is a positive sign.
An effective fight against impunity for crimes
committed in Libya can be achieved only through active
cooperation, including on the ground, between the
Court and national authorities. The Prosecutor’s visit
to Libya in November was an opportunity to strengthen
that cooperation. The reinforcement of the missions of
the joint team for Libya and the wish to create a liaison
office of the Prosecutor in Tripoli are to be commended.
France welcomes the fact that this bolstered presence
in Libya has enabled greater engagement of the Office
with victims, witnesses and affected communities.
We continue to encourage the Libyan authorities to
cooperate fully with the Office, in particular with regard
to access to documentation needed for investigations or
Office requests for assistance.
It is obvious, but it bears repeating — the most
serious crimes committed in Libya since 2011 must all
be investigated and prosecuted. That includes the crimes
committed by Da’esh and crimes against migrants and
refugees. In that regard, the assistance provided to the
Office of the Prosecutor by international and regional
organizations and by civil society representatives in
Libya is valuable.
The arrest and prosecution by the relevant national
authorities of key suspects in relation to crimes
against migrants in Libya, including on the basis of
information, evidence and guidelines provided by the
Office of the Prosecutor, is encouraging. In that regard,
we commend the various United Nations entities,
including the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the Independent Fact-Finding Mission
on Libya, which have provided significant support to
the Office.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
United Arab Emirates for its commitment to support
the International Criminal Court.

23-133229/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

UNSMIL
continues
to
report
enforced
disappearances, arbitrary detentions and ill-treatment
in the key detention centres. The Office has also
gathered hard evidence confirming that crimes such as
illegal detention, murder, torture, inhumane treatment,
rape and other forms of sexual and gender-based crimes
have been committed in the detention centres. We
are deeply concerned about arbitrary detentions and
cases of inhumane detention conditions. We therefore
encourage the authorities in charge of these detention
centres to allow access to international observers
and investigators, without delay. The enforced
disappearances and sexual violence reported by the
Office are equally unacceptable.
Allow me to make broader remarks and
observations on the political situation in Libya. We
urge all stakeholders to commit to a sovereign, united,
stable and democratic Libya. That is essential for the
country and for regional stability. In furtherance of
that goal, the legitimacy of political institutions must
be restored through national, inclusive, credible and
transparent presidential and parliamentary elections
held throughout the country. France reiterates its
support for Special Representative Abdoulaye Bathily
to achieve that objective in 2023.
On the security front, France welcomes the recent
progress in the implementation of the 2020 ceasefire
agreement, achieved under the auspices of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission, the two Chiefs of Staff, all
security actors and under the impetus of the Special
Representative. The Libyan security actors have made
commitments to reunify the Libyan army and secure
the elections. That is a source of hope.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming France’s
unwavering support for the Office of the Prosecutor
and to the International Criminal Court, as a whole,
and its staff.
Ms. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council is meeting today to hear
yet another briefing by the so-called Prosecutor of the
so-called International Criminal Court (ICC). This body
has, once again, shown its disrespect for the Council by
submitting empty pro forma documents under the guise
of investigation reports. These documents invariably
boil down to a list of yet new excuses for continued
inaction and for why Security Council requests are
not being implemented. The most recent document is
no exception.
10/19

11/05/2023

As a deeply politicized institution that has nothing
to do with rendering justice, the Court is not engaged in
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011). Its main
task on the Libyan track was already carried out in 2011.
Yesterday a question was voiced about the tangible
contribution of the ICC to Libya, so let me recall when
the contribution was made.
Serving the interests of the collective West, the
ICC was fully complicit in NATO’s military aggression
against Libya. The United States-led coalition’s
crusade against the once-prosperous country led to the
total destruction of its statehood and a protracted civil
war — which alternately subsides and flares up — that
has claimed hundreds of thousands of ordinary Libyans.
Libya suffered enormous economic losses and saw its
development set back decades. The countries of the
region are still suffering from the terrorist threat that is
a direct result of those events. It is a real catastrophe to
which the ICC is directly linked.
The West tasked the Court with developing a
cover, a fig leaf for the unprovoked and unjustified
NATO military aggression. This was to be done by
dehumanizing the Libyan leadership, in general and
Mr. Al-Qadhafi, in particular. Former Prosecutor
Moreno Ocampo approached that task creatively. In
just three days, he put together a so-called indictment
of the Libyan leader, based on very crude fakes. The
first one had to do with the supply of Viagra to the
units advancing on Tripoli in order to stimulate their
capacity to conduct mass rapes. The second was the
use of mysterious dark-skinned mercenaries to commit
atrocities that the regular army was incapable of.
It is truly incredible to look back and recall these
events. The Internet still has the statement by the ICC
Prosecutor, who effusively and with no shame talked
about these horrors, with the United Nations building in
the background. As we know, these accusations turned
out to be basic lies. They were even refuted by Western
non-governmental organizations. A scandal was
brewing, and it was necessary to put out the flames.
For that purpose, the ICC very quickly put together
an internal investigation commission. But we know
nothing of the outcome of the commission’s activities
or the people who were held responsible for those false
accusations. As a result, the country was destroyed,
its leader was executed without a trial, and no one has
been found guilty. Apparently the fake facts at the ICC
are self-made in the best traditions of “highly likely”.
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

We have become familiar with what happened after
the shameful performance surrounding the business
with Al-Qadhafi during the 12 years in which the
Security Council has regularly heard reports about why
the ICC has done nothing. Having executed the task set
by the West, the ICC has moved on to a sluggish imitation
of investigative and judicial activity concerning the
country in question. The stories about some sort of socalled secret arrest warrants are a good illustration of
that tactic. The ICC showed no interest in NATO’s war
crimes during that so-called strictly defensive alliance’s
invasion of the Arab Jamahiriya — it was hardly about
to go against its masters, was it? Neither did it pay any
attention whatever to the massacre of Al-Qadhafi. The
ICC clearly believes that the extrajudicial elimination
of undesirable leaders is normal.
Overall, the situation in Libya has been a vivid
demonstration that the ICC’s so-called justice has an
on-off switch. At the West’s signal, in a matter of days
it begins to replicate fakes and fabricate cases and just
as quickly halts any activity that is an inconvenience
for its masters at the first shout from Washington. No
sooner had the United States imposed sanctions on
the ICC Prosecutor and judges than the preliminary
inquiries into the war crimes perpetrated by Americans,
British and other NATO members in Afghanistan and
Iraq were promptly shut down. The result was hundreds
of thousands of civilian deaths and no perpetrators. The
ICC is a true champion at sweeping the evil deeds of its
patrons under the rug.
Our briefer today, Mr. Khan, a British citizen, has
even invented a special term for it — deprioritization.
The fine art of verbal gymnastics is a very Anglo-Saxon
pastime. Why talk about shielding someone when we
can talk about deprioritization and forget the whole
thing? Very handy, no? And that is perhaps the best
illustration for understanding who really determines the
priorities of this puppet Court and its tame Prosecutor.
That is why we are not surprised by the decadeslong imitation of activity on the situations in Libya and
Darfur referred to the ICC by the Security Council. The
political goals have been accomplished but it was never
interested in justice. And now it has even less interest,
because it has received a new assignment from the
collective West and is hard at work on it in the way it
does so well, with crude fake facts and accusations that
are not merely unfounded but simply insolent, amoral
and inhumane. According to Khan’s cannibalistic logic,

S/PV.9320

children in areas of armed conflict should simply be
left in the line of fire.
The financial side of the activities of the institution,
which is so fond of trumpeting its alleged independence,
is another issue altogether. The collective West is not
the least embarrassed about openly paying for the ICC
processes in which it is interested. That is done in the
guise of so-called voluntary donations, whose amount
long ago exceeded the acceptable limits for funding of
that kind and risks equalling the ICC’s regular budget.
Those same Western countries send whole teams of
national investigators and prosecutors who gather
information in its stead. The ICC has therefore become
a mere international facade behind which the United
States and its satellites resolve their political issues.
The ICC has not lived up to the idealistic aspirations of
its founders. Its sole function is to oppose undesirable
countries. No one here has been deceived by the
ICC’s recent attempt to portray itself as a charitable
organization trying to increase States’ potential. But
that is merely the cheese in the mousetrap. We should
not forget who is at the controls of the ICC.
That is why developing countries are beginning
to seriously consider withdrawing from the Rome
Statute. Russia took that decision as early as in 2016.
We withdrew our signature from the Statute and
announced that we would not be party to it. We urge
other countries that are unwilling to finance this piece
of theatre to do the same. We know for a fact that many
States have long had no illusions about this illegitimate
and politicized body. Where the ICC is concerned,
the United States has taken a road of deceit that is
nonetheless as clear as day. It was the first to issue a
formal depositary notification that it had no intention
of ever becoming a party to the Rome Statute and has
concluded many agreements on the non-extradition of
its nationals to the ICC.
We also well remember American statements
in the Security Council on the ICC issue before
Mr. Khan’s notorious deprioritization. They were
invariably accompanied by the statement that the
ICC’s jurisdiction cannot extend to nationals of States
that are not party to the Statute. It is hard to disagree
with the United States on that point. However, the
United States has rapidly changed its position and now
supports the ICC’s prosecution of nationals of third
countries that are not party to the Statute. Obviously,
however, that is as long as they are not citizens of the
United States or its allies. As the Council knows, the

23-1332211/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

United States enacted a law on the ICC that is still
in force and has not been repealed, despite all of the
current Administration’s political rhetoric. It is known
in legal circles as The Hague Invasion Act because it
not only prohibits cooperation with the ICC but allows
the use of any means, including the force, to liberate
Americans detained by the Court. The result is that the
United States itself is not subject to the ICC but will
not allow others to leave the Rome Statute. But those
tactics cannot work forever. Developing countries will
free themselves from the clutches of the ICC, which
will find its rightful place in the dustbin of history, as
a shining example of what the highest aspirations of
the international community can become if they are
crushed under the wheels of political expediency.
We would like to emphasize that as a matter of
principle the ICC, as a politicized puppet structure,
and moreover one created based on a treaty signed
by a limited number of countries, should not be able
to interfere in the normal functioning of the United
Nations and its bodies. Not a single penny from the
regular budget of our Organization should go to this
puppet tribunal. We demand that the Secretary-General
monitor it strictly.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court for his
briefing on the Court’s 25th report on the situation in
Libya. I also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Libya to today’s meeting.
At the outset, allow me to reiterate Brazil’s longstanding participation in the Rome Statute system. We
also want to reaffirm our strong commitment to Libya’s
peace and stability. Brazil reiterates the importance of
a permanent international tribunal in fighting impunity
for the most serious crimes under international law.
Complementarity is one of the cornerstones of
the Rome Statute system, as it is the primary duty
of States to exercise their criminal jurisdiction over
those responsible for serious crimes. Brazil therefore
thanks the Office of the Prosecutor for strengthening
cooperation with the Libyan national authorities.
We believe that the establishment of a liaison
office in Tripoli could enhance the cooperation and
complementary activities of the Office.
For a treaty-based tribunal such as the International
Criminal Court, cooperation among States parties
is crucial to enabling the Court to exercise its
functions in Libya, considering that it does not have
12/19

11/05/2023

its own enforcement body. Furthermore, resolution
1970 (2011), while recognizing that States not party
to the Rome Statute have no obligations under it,
urges all States and regional and other international
organizations to cooperate fully with the Court and
the Prosecutor regarding the situation in Libya. We
note with appreciation the progress made in the policy
of cooperation with third States, as reflected in the
report, on the basis of that resolution, adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In our efforts to promote accountability for the
most serious crimes under international law, we should
not be guided by political polarization, but by the
purpose of providing justice to victims. In that context,
Brazil welcomes the efforts to empower victims,
witnesses and affected communities both inside and
outside Libya. We encourage the Prosecutor to further
engage with victims and their representatives. Brazil
believes that international criminal accountability may
be a means to provide reparations, including collective
reparations. We also believe that all victims of serious
crimes deserve equal treatment, regardless of the
situation under investigation.
Although there has not been any judgment in the
Libyan situation thus far, we welcome the efforts made
by the Office of the Prosecutor to collect evidence and
its prioritization of situations referred by the Security
Council. Brazil appreciates the progress made in the
investigations and urges the Prosecutor to unseal
existing arrest warrants in the interest of transparency.
In conclusion, Brazil would like to renew its
support to the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor
in ensuring justice and accountability in accordance
with the principle of complementarity. We hope
that a fruitful relationship between the Office and
the Libyan authorities will foster a culture of justice
and accountability.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court and his team for presenting the twenty-fifth
report on the situation in Libya. We also welcome the
presence of the representative of Libya at this meeting.
Let me begin by reaffirming Ecuador’s full support
for the International Criminal Court, which is an
essential component in the fight against impunity — a
critical element in the enforcement of international law.
The actions that the Office of the Prosecutor has taken
to continue the implementation of the four elements of
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

the renewed strategy of action for the situation in Libya
have contributed to achieving several of the objectives
set out in resolution 1970 (2011). More than 12 years
have passed since the Council referred the case to the
International Criminal Court. It is therefore imperative
to address the issue, given that the fight against
impunity is, as I said, a central element in achieving
peace and reconciliation in Libya.
I shall now refer to certain points in the report.
First, we agree with the Office of the Prosecutor on
the importance of maintaining a continuous presence in
Libya that allows for diligent evidence-gathering and the
optimization of investigation timelines. It contributes
to the judicial process and deepens engagement with
victims and civil society organizations, especially those
with a focus on women and girls. We also welcome the
possibility of establishing a Prosecutor’s office in Tripoli.
The use of technology, such as the Relativity tool,
allows us to improve and accelerate evidence-collection
processes. Similarly, it is essential to have specific
subject matter experts in the investigation of cases. We
therefore call on all organizations, the United Nations
system and Member States to continue to provide
such cooperation.
Secondly, we welcome the increased collaboration
between the Prosecutor’s Office and the Libyan
national authorities in accordance with the principle
of complementarity. In that regard, we welcome the
readiness of the Office of the Prosecutor to assist in
national capacity-building in forensic matters and
hope that it will continue to do so in the judicial field
as well. The Prosecutor’s Office must have full and
secure access to all relevant documentation throughout
the territory, as well as timely responses to requests for
information submitted to national authorities, whom we
urge to fulfil their obligation to cooperate, including in
the execution of arrest warrants.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the fate of migrants
in Libya, including women and children, who suffer all
kinds of violence. Urgent action is needed to curb the
situation — all the more so after the findings of the
recent report of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission
on Libya, which established reasonable grounds to
believe that crimes against humanity were committed
against Libyans and migrants. We also stress the need to
deepen international cooperation in order to dismantle
transnational organized criminal networks engaged in
human trafficking. We urge the Prosecutor’s Office and

S/PV.9320

the Libyan authorities to redouble their efforts to bring
the perpetrators of those crimes to justice.
Fourthly,
cooperation
with
civil
society
organizations is crucial. That is why my delegation
welcomes the initiative to promote guidelines for civil
society in documenting human rights violations. We
hope that the collaboration resulting from such work
will not lead to any retaliation against those who work
in that field.
Finally, we note with concern that one of the main
challenges the Prosecutor identifies in his report in the
fulfilment of his mandate is the budgetary constraints
his Office faces. We therefore call for the Court to
be provided with the necessary resources for the
implementation of its mandates, including the one we
are addressing today. I call on the Council to reflect on
the mechanisms that could be used to strengthen the
cooperative relationship between the Security Council
and the International Criminal Court, especially in the
referral of cases.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): Let me start by thanking
Prosecutor Khan for the report and his insightful
briefing this morning. I reiterate Malta’s strong
support for the work of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and for the Prosecutor’s tireless efforts in
pursuing justice for victims of the most horrific crimes
in different conflict situations. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
Impunity undermines efforts to resolve conflict,
perpetuating cycles of violence. The Security Council’s
referral of the Libyan situation to the ICC is critical
not only for accountability for international crimes, but
also for long-term peace and stability in the country.
We are pleased with the progress reported and the
meaningful steps forward made in the implementation
of the renewed strategy for the situation in Libya. In
particular, we want to mention the acceleration of
evidence collection, as well as the issuance of multiple
arrest warrants.
We commend the Office’s increased engagement
with victims, victims’ associations and representatives,
other civil society organizations and human rights
activists inside and outside Libya, as well as the attention
given to crimes committed against and affecting women
and children. We concur with the Prosecutor’s call for
effective psychological and rehabilitative assistance
to victims and reiterate the importance of ensuring
that the assistance is age-appropriate, survivor-

23-1332213/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

centred and gender-responsive. As the final report
of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
(A/HRC/52/83) illustrates, the human rights situation
in Libya is cause for deep concern. The addition of a
number of experts to the Office of the Prosecutor with
experience in investigating human trafficking and
sexual and gender-based crimes is a step in the right
direction. However, a greater focus on that is required to
ensure that impunity for such hideous crimes, including
those perpetrated against migrants, does not prevail.
We acknowledge the continuing assistance
provided by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya to the Office of the Prosecutor, as well as the
exchanges between the Office and the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya. Their commitment
to strengthening one another’s work in the interest of
justice and accountability, while fully respecting the
security, privacy and confidentiality of information
providers, is commendable. The Office’s efforts to
coordinate investigative activity with third parties and
international agencies has resulted in investigations
and prosecutions in Libya, as well as by other domestic
authorities that can exercise jurisdiction and by the
ICC. We encourage those proactive and creative efforts,
as well as action in support of domestic investigations.
The significance of the Prosecutor’s first official
visit to Libya in November 2022 and the progress that
has been made since cannot be underestimated. We
applaud the Libyan authorities for their facilitation
of the visit and their efforts to assist the Office in
its work. Further cooperation will be required in the
upcoming operational and logistical mission, including
for the establishment of a liaison office in Tripoli. That
will enhance accountability and complementarity and
bring justice closer to the victims. Moreover, access
to documentation relevant to the investigations of the
Office and engagement with the relevant technical
authorities, including those involved in forensics and
crime-scene analysis, remains a priority.
The situation in Libya continues to warrant the
international community’s focus and support. Despite
the current calm, we remain concerned about its
fragility. Our collective aim is to ensure a durable
and sustainable peace, which can be achieved only if
there is justice for the victims and survivors of atrocity
crimes. The Office of the Prosecutor and the Court
can count on Malta’s unwavering support in all efforts
towards accountability.
14/19

11/05/2023

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like to
thank Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for his informative briefing on his
twenty-fifth report on the situation in Libya, pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011). I welcome the presence of
Mr. Taher Elsonni, the Permanent Representative of
Libya, at this meeting.
When it comes to the fair and impartial trials
we want to see held in Libya, the material search for
evidence is of particular importance. It is the outcome
of a long process of collective consultations involving a
wide range of stakeholders working to ensure that justice
is fully rendered. That inclusive approach is crucial to
ensuring a thorough examination of the key issues and
the identification of the alleged perpetrators. In that
regard, Prosecutor Khan’s briefing to the Council from
Tripoli last year (see S/PV.9187) was very important
to strengthening and improving the investigation
strategy and process. It also had a positive impact on
the conduct of the investigations and the strengthening
of cooperation.
We note with interest the considerable progress
made in the reassessment of the investigation strategy
and the analysis of evidence regarding the alleged
serious crimes committed in Libya in 201l, as well
as crimes related to the military operations in the
country between 2014 and 2020 and crimes committed
against migrants. We are pleased that the Office of the
Prosecutor has stayed the course in implementing its
new strategy aimed at accelerating its investigative
activities and action plan regarding the situation
in Libya. That progress includes, in particular, the
strengthening of cooperation within the framework
of the principle of complementarity between the joint
team for Libya and the Office of the Prosecutor, as
well as close collaboration between third States and the
relevant stakeholders, including the provision by some
States parties of national experts whose assistance has
facilitated the establishment of evidence, including in
the context of crimes committed against migrants. In
that regard, the capacity-building of investigators and
the inclusion of Arabic-speaking experts are assets.
That should enshrine the principle of the rule of law
by way of regular judicial proceedings against persons
presumed to have committed serious crimes.
Furthermore, we welcome the implementation
of an evidence-management platform using artificial
intelligence and machine learning, which will
significantly contribute to improving the quantitative
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

and qualitative aspects of the databases. We encourage
Mr. Khan to continue to work closely with the Libyan
authorities, while also furthering the involvement
of international and regional actors and civil society,
which could contribute substantially to the success
of that vast and complicated undertaking. In that
connection, the emphasis on dialogue with victims,
victims’ associations, local communities and civil
society is essential and should be strengthened. It is
vital to prioritize an approach that promotes truthtelling, justice and reparations, as well as guarantees
of non-repetition.
Combating impunity should remain an imperative
for all, and that requires the continued support of the
international community in order to fully equip the
Prosecutor and his Office in their delicate mission
with the parties concerned. My delegation is aware of
the volatile security context in which the Prosecutor’s
new investigative strategy is being employed and
appreciates his efforts. The fact is that the militarypolitical crisis that has gone on in Libya for more than
a decade remains deeply entrenched today. The armed
violence is far from being contained. It goes without
saying that in such a climate of terror and fear, victims
and witnesses can feel threatened, which makes the
exercise of justice even more complex and perilous.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to
once again express my appreciation for the important
work done by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, whose presence on the ground is helping to
facilitate the work of the Prosecutor, in addition to its
main objective of creating the conditions for a political
settlement of the Libyan crisis. In that regard, we
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, to continue his efforts
and assure him of our full support. We welcome
the cooperative efforts in the context of the crucial
partnership between the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and the Office of the Prosecutor.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the urgent
need to create the conditions conducive to ensuring
restorative justice for the Libyan people. That includes
the successful completion of the political process, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Council,
in particular resolution 2570 (2021), with a view to a
peaceful and lasting resolution of the continuing crisis
in Libya.

S/PV.9320

Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
listened carefully to the briefing by Prosecutor Karim
Khan and welcome the presence of Ambassador Elsonni,
Permanent Representative of Libya, at this meeting.
China has taken positive note of the fact that in
past few months all the Libyan parties have continued
to advance the political process. The House of
Representatives and the High Council of State have
formed a joint 6+6 committee, which recently held
meetings. Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bathily has conducted extensive and in-depth
communication with all the parties in Libya. We support
all the Libyan parties in pursuing dialogue that builds
on previous efforts to create conditions conducive to
the holding of general elections as soon as possible.
External interference is a major cause of the
protracted crisis in Libya. Commitment to the principle
of Libyan ownership and leadership is the only way
to achieve peace and stability in the country. The
international community should provide constructive
support for Libya’s political stability, national
reconciliation and economic development and avoid the
complex effects of externally imposed solutions on the
situation in Libya.
Finally, we reiterate that China’s position on
activities related to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) remains unchanged. We hope that the
ICC will continue to strictly follow the principle of
complementarity, as stipulated in the Rome Statute;
fully respect the judicial sovereignty and reasonable
opinions of the countries concerned; and avoid
politicization and double standards in its work.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): We welcome the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Karim Khan, and we take note
of his briefing. We also welcome Ambassador Taher
Elsonni to our meeting.
In the context of today’s discussion, I would like to
focus on the following three issues.
First, with regard to crimes committed against
migrants, we consider the steps taken by the
International Criminal Court, especially towards
continuing close cooperation with the local authorities in
Libya, including within the framework of the joint team
investigating crimes against migrants, encouraging. We
also commend the continuous efforts to strengthen the
renewed strategy of the Office of the Prosecutor of the

23-1332215/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

International Criminal Court regarding the situation in
Libya, including through building partnerships with
national actors.
We reiterate our position on the need for continued
proactive cooperation with the national Libyan
authorities, while supporting their local efforts in that
regard. We also stress the importance of continuing
international cooperation in dismantling the networks
of transnational organized crime, including in countries
of origin, destination and transit. According to the
Prosecutor’s report, that cooperation led to the arrest of
an Eritrean, who is a main suspect in crimes committed
against migrants, within the framework of an operation
conducted by INTERPOL under the leadership of the
United Arab Emirates.
Secondly, achieving accountability and transitional
justice is a sovereign prerogative of States. In that
regard, we consider the visit that took place last
November and the meetings with the Libyan parties and
authorities important developments.
Cooperation with the relevant national authorities
in Libya must be strengthened and their concerns
and needs must be taken into consideration through
continued meetings and contact. That will support
and enable the relevant actors to take concrete steps
at the national level and will contribute to the existing
efforts made in accordance with the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Office of the Libyan
Public Prosecutor and the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, in line with the
Court’s jurisdiction.
Thirdly, according to international law, States
have the primary responsibility to address and ensure
accountability for crimes committed on their territories,
according to their jurisdiction, including atrocity
and serious crimes. States are also responsible for
fighting impunity and seeking justice for victims. We
would also like to emphasize that compliance with the
principle of complementarity under the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court requires respect
for the views and positions of the State concerned. We
emphasize once again that achieving accountability and
transitional justice is a sovereign prerogative of States.
In conclusion, we affirm the support of the United
Arab Emirates for the efforts made by the United
Nations in support of Libya. We hope that concerted
efforts are made to realize the aspirations of the people
of Libya.
16/19

11/05/2023

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement as the representative of Switzerland.
Switzerland thanks the Prosecutor and his team for
his important briefing and for submitting the twentyfifth report on the situation in Libya. We also welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya.
“Impunity will not be tolerated.” Those were the
words of Kofi Annan, then Secretary-General, when
he welcomed the International Criminal Court (ICC).
In Libya, accountability is not an abstract concept, it
is a constant and legitimate demand expressed by the
victims and an essential element for the success of the
reconciliation process. As co-Chair of the Working
Group on International Humanitarian Law and Human
Rights of the Berlin Process, Switzerland often interacts
with victims who tell us again and again that Libya
cannot have a lasting peace without justice.
I would like to address three points.
First, we commend the Office of the Prosecutor
for the progress made in the implementation of the
renewed action strategy for Libya, in particular the
efficient allocation of resources coupled with the use of
advanced technology in evidence management, as well
as efforts to make justice accessible to victims. It is
essential that the security of victims be ensured so that
they can access the Court without hindrance, including
within the country.
Civil society also has a crucial role to play, and we
are deeply concerned about the increasing repressive
measures imposed on civil society in Libya. We
therefore note with interest the organization of a round
table by the Office of the Prosecutor on the topic of
gender-based persecution.
We also welcome the fact that, despite the
challenges posed by the complex political landscape
and security situation in Libya, numerous field missions
have been conducted. Those efforts, coupled with
enhanced cooperation, have led to concrete results: the
issuance of new sealed arrest warrants in the context of
investigations in Libya is proof of that.
Secondly, cooperation is key to the proper
functioning of the Court. We therefore strongly
encourage the Libyan authorities to continue to
cooperate fully with the Office of the Prosecutor,
in particular with regard to access to necessary
documentation or the prompt follow-up on requests for
legal assistance. We support efforts to open a liaison
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

office in Libya, in particular to deepen the partnership
with the authorities, survivors and families of victims.
We further commend the Office of the Prosecutor’s
proactive policy of cooperation with third States, which
has contributed to the arrest of a suspect in crimes
against migrants. We highlight the important role of the
United Arab Emirates and the Netherlands in that arrest
and encourage all States to make use of the principle of
universal jurisdiction which allows for the prosecution
of the most serious international crimes. That is also
in the context of the latest report of the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission for Libya, which cites reasonable
grounds to believe that crimes against humanity have
been committed against migrants and persons in
detention centres.
Thirdly, the mission of the ICC, the only permanent
international criminal court, remains the priority for
delivering justice, in Libya and elsewhere. However,
in order for the Court to carry out its mandate of
effectively, its independence and impartiality must be
preserved, and it must be given the necessary human
and financial resources. Switzerland calls on all States
to support the Court.
By referring the matter to the Court in its
resolution 1970 (2011), the Security Council has
shown its commitment to fight against impunity for
the most serious crimes and to bring justice to the
victims. Supporting the Court is therefore our common
responsibility. Together we can ensure that justice is
done and thereby contribute to a lasting peace in Libya.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Switzerland on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you, Madam President, and your
team success in your presidency. I would like also to
thank Mr. Karim Khan for his briefing today and for
his twenty-fifth report, of which we have taken note.
In our statement delivered at the previous meeting
on this topic (see S/PV.9187), we welcomed the visit by
Mr. Khan to Libya last November, which we viewed
as strengthening cooperation between the Libyan
authorities and the International Criminal Court
(ICC), especially as fact-finding and listening to the
testimonies of the victims and their families would

S/PV.9320

contribute to uncovering the long-awaited truth. In that
regard, we reiterate that Libya is committed to holding
accountable and punishing the perpetrators of crimes
and violations under national law, sooner or later,
notwithstanding the challenges.
Nevertheless, the administration of justice on
Libyan territory is a sovereign prerogative for a
national court and judicial jurisdiction, and the Libyan
judiciary is committed to ensure the conduct of fair and
impartial trials. We reiterate that our cooperation with
the ICC, according to its jurisdiction and mandate, is
on the basis of the principle of complementarity. That
does not mean in any way that the ICC is an alternative
to the Libyan judiciary. In that regard, it behoves me
to stress that judicial jurisdiction was not invented
recently. The Libyan judiciary has a long history, and
should be treated accordingly, notwithstanding the
current circumstances.
Years after the discovery of the mass graves in
Tarhuna, the tragedy continues to unfold, as it led to the
discovery of more tombs and graves and more unknown
and unidentified bodies. The search process is in full
swing, and I think Mr. Khan and his team have seen
and heard the testimonies. In that regard, the Libyan
General Prosecutor’s Office has made efforts and
carried out very scrupulous investigations to identify
those bodies. We have already identified a number of
the perpetrators and have issued arrest warrants against
them, but many of them are still at large, whether in
Libya or abroad.
We therefore call upon Mr. Khan and his team to
cooperate with the General Prosecutor’s Office and to
issue warrants against all those who have perpetrated
those crimes and their sponsors, as well as those who
are sheltering them or are refusing to extradite them.
That applies to all crimes committed since 2011. On
many occasions, Mr. Khan’s report has listed crimes
committed that are tantamount to war crimes or crimes
against humanity.
Despite all the challenges and difficult
circumstances, we stress that the Libyan State is keen
on protecting illegal migrants from any violations. The
Libyan authorities are sparing no effort to protect them
and are working to voluntarily return and repatriate
them whenever possible. We are collaborating with all
States concerned in that regard.
We condemn all crimes perpetrated against
migrants or anyone else. We consider such crimes as

23-1332217/19

S/PV.9320

The situation in Libya

individual incidents because they are not systematic.
Their perpetrators should be held accountable. In that
regard, we once again emphasize that Libya should not
be exclusively blamed for this crime and phenomenon
because we all know the situation my country, Libya,
is witnessing. We therefore call upon the Council to
scrupulously consider the facts without politicization
and to remember that the current situation of migrants
in Libya is not new or disconnected from the direct or
indirect interference of many States in Libya.
This is the Council’s responsibility and there is
a moral responsibility that the Council must uphold
regarding migrants in Libya. We therefore need a
synergy of efforts to help us combat transnational
crime networks of human trafficking. In order to
eliminate those networks and hold accountable
the perpetrators — whether from the countries of
origin or of transit, in Africa, or of destination, in
Europe — without any exception. In that regard, we
stress that the General Prosecutor’s Office in Libya
has managed to identify a number of names of persons
involved in international transnational crime networks
of human trafficking. We need the cooperation of
the ICC if we are to prosecute those perpetrators and
criminals, as these are international networks and
therefore fall within the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court.
The operationalization of comprehensive national
reconciliation, which starts with transitional justice,
facts unveiled, reparation and reconciliation and the
discovery of the whereabouts of all missing persons
since 2011 is the only path to regaining and restoring
trust in State institutions in order to put an end to the
suffering. We therefore renew our trust and confidence
in our judicial institutions, as they are capable of
administering justice and upholding the rule of law,
notwithstanding the challenges.
War crimes and crimes against humanity are
imprescriptible. We therefore call upon the ICC to
coordinate with the National Prosecutor in Libya and
to accelerate measures to unveil the perpetrators of
all crimes committed in Libyan territories — whether
they are individuals, entities or States. We are all
following, and we are all wondering when the series of
investigations and visits that have lasted for years will
end. Until when will continue to watch what is going
on without concrete results? Mr. Khan mentioned that
there were 20 missions and more than 500 pieces of
evidence. Now we are looking at the twenty-fifth report
18/19

11/05/2023

of the ICC. However, we are wondering — where are the
concrete results and why have we reached this situation?
We therefore need practical and concrete results.
In conclusion, we recall that supporting stability in
Libya and finding a comprehensive political solution
to escape from this bottleneck is the only — and
ideal — way to ensure justice, accountability and rule
of law. The political situation and the current division
in the international community and within the Security
Council is connected with what is currently going on,
including the crimes and atrocities that we hear about.
This is a common responsibility. Libyans are tired of
being blamed exclusively, as if there were no moral or
international responsibility resulting from the numerous
international direct and indirect interventions in my
country since 2011.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to Prosecutor Khan to respond briefly
to comments.
Mr. Khan: I thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to say a few words to the representatives of
the Council.
The first remark, of course, must be to echo the
comments made by the Permanent Representative of
Libya — that the Office that I lead in the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is based upon complementarity.
We heard a lot of remarks today that the foundation of
the Rome Statute is not an effort to seize jurisdiction
or to conjure up clever legal arguments. It is to work
together so that there is less space for impunity and
more space for justice. I do not want anybody to be
abused of the notion that the relationship is competitive.
It is essential that there be ever-more collaboration and
cooperation, and I think that is to be well understood.
The second observation is that in Libya and in other
situation, my approach is that arrest warrants should
be public. They will be sealed if there is an immediate
arrest opportunity. In terms of the Libya case file, we
already applied for warrants to be unsealed. Hopefully,
the names will be known by the time of the next briefing,
but that is a legal determination for the Judges. I cannot
act precipitously in that connection.
The third remark is an elaboration with regard to
the Trust Fund for Victims and secondments. One of
the things that I believe is very important is to make it
clear that the cause of international justice is the cause
of humankind. The new Trust Fund that we are seeking
23-13322

11/05/2023

The situation in Libya

to establish on equitable geographical distribution is an
important one because we have countries in economic
transition. And we want to benefit from the diversity
that is represented here in the Council and the United
Nations, and by the various legal systems and people
from various parts of the world who can bring their
own perspectives to international justice so that we can
do better and narrow the gap. That is also a remark I
wanted to make.
My fourth remark is that I do not believe that
anybody in the Council is naive enough to think that
the ICC or my Office alone is a panacea for all ills. But
it is the case that we have an important role to play. We
are trying to do better and to have more of an impact.
When I was in Libya, I had a very good meeting with
the Foreign Minister and one of the remarks I made,
in terms of appraising the situation in Libya honestly,
is — in addition to working to serve international
criminal justice and trying to support and provide
technical assistance so that the Libyan system can
become as strong as possible and stand alone — that I
believe there is space for a South-South dialogue to look
at transitional justice systems so that the architecture
that is in place, as a whole, can be ever more conducive
to peace and reconciliation. But in so many situations,
we see that having peace and reconciliation without
accountability is impossible. Having reconciliation
and peace with some form of wider transitional justice
lends itself to greater success.
The final thing I have to say is that I am the first
to accept that international justice is far from perfect.
After all, the Security Council itself — and the United
Nations — was created as a result of the failure of the
League of Nations and of the international system to
prevent the Second World War. It was hope, a beacon
of light and a promise that the things we saw in the
gas chambers and in various parts of the world during
the Second World War would never occur again. It is
only right to say that the face of humankind has been
scarred, deeply wounded, by the imperfect application
of international law. But that should not be any defence
or justification for Member States, the international
community or non-State actors to self-mutilate or
further disfigure other parts of the body. Does the fact
that there are scars on our face, the face of humankind,

S/PV.9320

mean we have licence to look away as we are scarring
our torso and legs?
We must do what we can together by building
partnerships because, ultimately — and many members
of the Council have said it very cogently, with much
more eloquence than I could ever summon — what is
at stake here is not the ICC. We have very important,
powerful, impactful States with great histories, for
which I have great respect, in the role of the Council,
but that are not State parties to the Court. But the
Charter of the United Nations gives a responsibility
to the Council to ensure that it does not act in vain.
What we are doing in Libya is not an act based on a
frolic of a Prosecutor. It is the Prosecutor acting on a
referral by the Council. And what the question really
should be is asking what every Council member is
doing to be a supporter of humankind. Leaving aside
the politics — that is a reality out there — what are we
doing for the people of Tarhuna? What are we doing
for the people of the world who are looking for some
semblance of justice and some shelter? I believe that
would lead to a much more constructive discussion
about how we can all do better. I need to do better, but
so does the Council.
The primary legal instrument in the international
legal firmament is the Charter. On some issues, the
obligation is principally on the Council to put politics
aside and realize that while I will not be here forever,
neither will the individuals around this table. And when
we take on other responsibilities, do we feel a sense
of pride and honour that we have done our best or do
we feel that we have been self-indulgent and engaged
in polarized discussions as humankind is crying out
for help?
I thank you, Madam President, for the opportunity
to say those few words. This is a time for partnership. It
is a time for putting the interests of the most vulnerable
on this top table of the international community and
trying to do better than we have done.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Khan
for the additional details he provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-1332219/19
