United Nations

A/RES/66/262*

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 October 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 75

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 29 May 2012
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/66/L.47 and Add.1)]

66/262. Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/12 of 23 November 2010 and all its previous
relevant resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies, is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential if a society in conflict or
recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past abuses committed against
civilians affected by armed conflict and to prevent such abuses in the future,
Acknowledging the fact that the International Criminal Court has achieved
considerable progress in its analyses, investigations and judicial proceedings in
various situations and cases which were referred to it by States parties to the Rome
Statute and by the Security Council, and which the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court has initiated proprio motu, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all
aspects of its mandate by States, the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations remain essential for the International Criminal Court to carry
out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective
and efficient assistance to the International Criminal Court in accordance with the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court, 2

_______________
*Reissued for technical reasons on 7 August 2013.
1
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
2
Ibid., vol. 2283, No. 1272.

11-47454*

*1147454*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/262

Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of 13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of
the resolution, with respect to the payment in full of expenses accruing to the United
Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement, 3 which
provides a framework for continued cooperation between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations, which could include the facilitation by the United
Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of
supplementary arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
Noting the need for funding of expenses related to investigations or
prosecutions of the International Criminal Court, including in connection with
situations referred to the Court by the Security Council,
Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International
Criminal Court,
Recognizing the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights and achieve sustainable peace, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Criminal Court for providing
assistance to the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2010/11; 4

2.
Welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court1 in the past year, and calls upon all States in all regions
of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider ratifying or
acceding to it without delay;
Welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the Rome
3.
Statute that have become parties to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court, 5 and calls upon all States that have not yet done
so to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4.
Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to
adopt national legislation to implement obligations emanating from the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the exercise of its
functions, and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this
respect;
Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the
5.
International Criminal Court by States parties as well as States not parties, the
United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls upon
those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation
and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses, and
the enforcement of sentences;
Recalls article 3 of the Relationship Agreement2 according to which, with
6.
a view to facilitating the effective discharge of their respective responsibilities, the

_______________
3

Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
See A/66/309.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
4

2

A/RES/66/262

United Nations and the International Criminal Court shall cooperate closely,
whenever appropriate, with each other and consult each other on matters of mutual
interest pursuant to the provisions of the Relationship Agreement and in conformity
with the respective provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome
Statute, as well as the need to respect each other’s status and mandate, 6 and requests
the Secretary-General to include information relevant to the implementation of
article 3 of the Relationship Agreement in his report to be submitted pursuant to
paragraph 11 of the present resolution;
Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties
7.
to the Rome Statute;
8.
Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation
agreements with the International Criminal Court;
9.
Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, if
the acceptance of a State which is not a party to the Rome Statute is required under
article 12, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute, that State may, by declaration lodged
with the Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of
jurisdiction by the Court with respect to the crime in question;
10. Encourages all States parties to take the interests, needs for assistance
and mandate of the International Criminal Court into account when relevant matters
are being discussed in the United Nations;
11. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of all aspects of
the Relationship Agreement, which forms a framework for close cooperation
between the two organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual interest
pursuant to the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective
provisions of the Charter and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for the
Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session of the
expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations in connection
with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
12. Recalling the referrals of situations to the International Criminal Court
already made by the Security Council, also invites all States to consider contributing
voluntarily to the bearing of expenses related to investigations or prosecutions of the
Court, including in connection with situations referred to the Court by the Council,
in accordance with the modalities for such contributions established by the Registrar
of the Court;
13. Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken by the International
Criminal Court liaison office to United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;
14. Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the
benefit of victims of crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
15. Recalls that, at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which was convened and opened by the SecretaryGeneral and held in Kampala from 31 May to 11 June 2010, States parties
reaffirmed their commitment to the Rome Statute and its full implementation, as
_______________
6

Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Relationship Agreement.

3

A/RES/66/262

well as its universality and integrity, and that the Review Conference undertook a
stocktaking exercise of international criminal justice, considering the impact of the
Rome Statute on victims and affected communities, peace and justice,
complementarity and cooperation, called for the strengthening of the enforcement of
sentences, adopted amendments to the Rome Statute to expand the jurisdiction of
the Court to cover three additional war crimes when committed in armed conflicts
not of an international character, adopted amendments to the Rome Statute to define
the crime of aggression and to establish conditions under which the Court could
exercise jurisdiction with respect to that crime, and decided to retain article 124 of
the Rome Statute; 7
16. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization, 8 in which it was stated that, following the success of the ninth session
of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute, efforts towards universality
had yielded positive results;
17. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court at its tenth session, while recalling that,
according to article 112, paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute, the Assembly of States
Parties shall meet at the seat of the Court or at United Nations Headquarters, to hold
its eleventh session in The Hague, 9 looks forward to the eleventh session, which is
to be held from 14 to 22 November 2012, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the necessary services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship
Agreement and resolution 58/318;
18. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assembly of
States Parties, invites States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the participation of
least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation contributions made
to that Trust Fund thus far;
19. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, in accordance with
article 6 of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2011/12, for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
111th plenary meeting
29 May 2012

_______________
7

See International Criminal Court, document RC/11.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/66/1).
9
See resolution ICC-ASP/10/Res.5 of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.
8

4
