A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/71
10 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 105
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/614)]
51/71.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and
displaced persons in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/149 of 21 December 1995,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 and the report of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,2
Convinced of the necessity of strengthening the capacity within the
United Nations system for the implementation of relief programmes for
refugees, returnees and displaced persons,
Welcoming the ongoing process of voluntary repatriation of refugees in
some parts of Africa,
Taking note of resolution CM/Res.1653 (LXIV) on refugees, returnees and
displaced persons in Africa, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its sixty-fourth ordinary session, held at
Yaoundé from 1 to 5 July 1996,3

1

A/51/367.

2

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 12 (A/51/12).
3

See A/51/524, annex I.

97-76675

/...

A/RES/51/71
Page 2

Recalling the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2312 (XXII) of
14 December 1967, by which it adopted the Declaration on Territorial Asylum,
Recognizing the need for States to create conditions conducive both to
the prevention of flows of refugees and displaced persons and to solutions,
especially voluntary repatriation,
Bearing in mind that the majority of refugees and displaced persons are
women and children,
Noting with great concern that despite all the efforts deployed so far
by the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity and others, the
situation of refugees and displaced persons in Africa, especially in the West
African and Great Lakes regions and in the Horn of Africa, remains precarious,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General1 and the report
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;2
2.
Notes with concern that the effects of political instability,
internal strife, human rights violations and natural disasters such as drought
have led to increased numbers of refugees and displaced persons in some
countries of Africa;
3.
Expresses deep concern at the serious and far-reaching
consequences of large numbers of refugees and displaced persons in the
receiving countries and the implications for security, long-term socioeconomic development and the environment;
4.
Expresses its appreciation and strong support for those African
Governments and local populations which, in spite of the general deterioration
of socio-economic and environmental conditions, as well as over-stretched
national resources, continue to accept the additional burden imposed upon them
by increasing numbers of refugees and displaced persons in compliance with the
relevant principles of asylum;
5.
Expresses concern at instances where the fundamental principle of
asylum is jeopardized by the unlawful expulsion or refoulement, or the threat
to life, physical security, integrity, dignity and the well-being of refugees;
6.
Commends the Governments concerned for their sacrifices in
providing assistance and protection to refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons and for their efforts to promote voluntary repatriation and
other durable solutions;
7.
Expresses its gratitude to the international community, and to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in particular, for
the humanitarian assistance it has continued to render to refugees and
displaced persons as well as to the countries of asylum;
8.
Welcomes the strengthening of cooperation between the Office of
the High Commissioner and the Organization of African Unity at all levels, and
urges the two organizations, in conjunction with United Nations agencies,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, the international
community and the Governments concerned, to increase efforts aimed at
facilitating voluntary repatriation in a dignified and orderly manner, as well

/...

A/RES/51/71
Page 3

as addressing the root causes of the refugee problem and working out
modalities for a lasting solution;
9.
Reiterates that the Plan of Action adopted by the Regional
Conference on Assistance to Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in the
Great Lakes Region, held at Bujumbura from 15 to 17 February 1995, as endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 50/149, continues to be a viable
framework for the resolution of the refugee and humanitarian problems in that
region;
10.
Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner and other concerned
entities to intensify protection activities by, inter alia, supporting the
efforts of African Governments through appropriate capacity-building
activities, including training of relevant officers, disseminating information
about refugee instruments and principles and providing financial, technical
and advisory services to accelerate the enactment or amendment and
implementation of legislation relating to refugees;
11.
Appeals to Governments, United Nations, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and the international community to create
conditions that can facilitate the voluntary return and the early
rehabilitation and reintegration of refugees;
12.
Appeals to the international community to respond positively to
the third-country resettlement requests of African refugees in the spirit of
solidarity and burden-sharing;
13.
Commends the Governments of the Great Lakes and West African
regions and the Office of the High Commissioner for their initiatives to
promote repatriation within the framework of tripartite agreements on
voluntary repatriation of refugees in the region;
14.
Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to
cooperate with the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in emergency humanitarian situations in Africa;
15.
Welcomes the ongoing efforts undertaken by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, with host Governments, United
Nations and non-governmental organizations and the international community, in
addressing the negative impact of large-scale refugee influxes and
concentrations on the environment and ecosystems of countries of asylum;
16.
Notes with satisfaction the voluntary return of millions of
refugees to their homelands following the successful repatriation and
reintegration operations carried out by the Office of the High Commissioner,
with the cooperation and collaboration of many countries hosting refugees, and
looks forward to other programmes to assist the voluntary repatriation of all
refugees in Africa;
17.
Expresses its concern about the long stay of refugees in certain
African countries, and calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to keep
its programmes under review in conformity with its mandate in the host
countries, taking into account the increasing requirements there;

/...

A/RES/51/71
Page 4

18.
Urges the international community to continue to fund the general
refugee programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner, taking into account
the substantially increased needs of programmes in Africa;
19.
Calls upon Governments, United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and the international community as a whole to strengthen the
emergency response capacity of the United Nations system on the basis of the
experience of the emergency in the Great Lakes region and to continue to
provide needed resources and operational support to refugees and countries of
asylum in Africa until a permanent solution can be found;
20.
Calls upon the international donor community to provide material
and financial assistance for the implementation of programmes intended for the
rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure in areas affected by
refugees in countries of asylum;
21.
Requests all Governments and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to pay particular attention to meeting the
special needs of refugee women and children;
22.
Calls upon the Secretary-General, the Office of the High
Commissioner and intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental
organizations to increase the capacity for coordination and delivery of
humanitarian emergency assistance and disaster relief in general with States
and others concerned in respect of asylum, relief, repatriation,
rehabilitation and resettlement of refugees, returnees and displaced persons,
including those refugees in urban areas;
23.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive and
consolidated report on the situation of refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, under
the item entitled "Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions", and an oral report to the Economic and Social Council
at its substantive session of 1997.
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
