S/PV.6982

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6982nd meeting

Wednesday, 19 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention and natural resources
Letter dated 6 June 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2013/334)

13-36754 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1336754*

S/PV.6982

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I recognize the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I now
give him the floor.

Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention and natural resources
Letter dated 6 June 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/334)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Belgium, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Germany,
India, Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, South Africa, the
Sudan, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
at the Council table of His Excellency Mr. Christian
Friis Bach, Minister for Development Cooperation of
Denmark.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Kofi Annan, Chair of the Africa
Progress Panel; Ms. Caroline Anstey, Managing
Director of the World Bank; and Ms. Rebeca Grynspan,
Under-Secretary-General and Associate Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kofi
Annan, who is participating in today’s meeting via
video teleconference from Geneva.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/334, which containjs the text
of a letter dated 6 June 2013 from the Permanent

2

The Deputy Secretary-General: Before I begin
my remarks, let me say a few words about the tragic
events in Mogadishua today. The Secretary-General and
I were deeply saddened and shocked by the outrageous
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu
this morning. Full details are still emerging, but we
know that several people have died. The SecretaryGeneral and I express our deepest condolences to the
families of the deceased. Our thoughts are with the
United Nations staff and all those who have suffered
through this tragedy.
We remain committed to the principles of achieving
peace and keeping Somalia on its path to recovery,
which were strongly endorsed recently by the Council.
I thank you, Sir, for your words before the beginning
of this meeting. We thank the Government of Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia for their
prompt response. I have just learned that the SecretaryGeneral and the President of Somalia have spoken to
one another by telephone.
The Council is well aware of the link between
abundant extractive resources and conflict. In Sierra
Leone, guns financed by blood diamonds and illegal
timber are now silent. Liberia’s Charles Taylor is facing
international justice. The scars of war are healing. But
in too many countries, a wealth of resources — such as
timber, oil, coal, diamonds and precious metals — fail to
translate into equivalent wealth for the people. Instead,
communities and individuals pay a terrible cost in terms
of corruption, human rights abuses and environmental
damage. Only a powerful few benefit. The result of this
inequality — this injustice — is bitterness, mistrust
and alienation. These are the precursors of conflict.
This is the so-called resource curse.
Yet, managed wisely, extractive resources can and
should be the foundation for sustainable development
and lasting peace. I therefore welcome this thematic
open debate of the Council and the opportunity to
outline how the United Nations system is working with
Member States, the private sector and other partners

13-36754

S/PV.6982

to help transform the resource curse into a resource
blessing, in the best of cases.
Last month, the Secretary-General briefed the
Council about his joint visit with World Bank President
Mr. Jim Yong Kim to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. Their message was clear.
Peace, development and the rule of law go hand in hand.
That is why the Council and the United Nations system
are supporting the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. That is why the World Bank is investing
heavily in the region and encourages business to follow.
The private sector is a key player in equitable,
transparent and sustainable exploitation of extractive
resources from Botswana to Brazil, from Cambodia to
Colombia, and from Malaysia to Mozambique. But it
is only one among a broad cast of actors. Civil society,
national Governments and international organizations
have important roles to play. And, where conflict
rages or is a distinct risk, the Security Council has its
obligations.
The primary responsibility for preventing conflict
and transparently and equitably managing resources
lies with Governments. Political leaders are to ensure
that extractive industries generate employment and
tax revenues that support economic development and
the provision of basic services. And leaders are to be
held accountable by national institutions that promote
social cohesion and inclusion based on the rule of law
and an independent judiciary. Transparency, it should
be noted, is not limited to just tracking the flow of
payments from extractive industries. Information about
the quantity, value and location of resources is also
essential to managing public expectations and reducing
tensions.
Preventing conflict related to resources also
means identifying social, economic and environmental
impacts. Measures must be taken to mitigate negative
consequences, in close contact with local communities,
and clear processes for compensation must be available
to prevent tensions and disputes. The United Nations
Environment Programme has been working closely
with the Government of Nigeria, for instance, to assess
the environmental and public health impact of oil
contamination in Ogoniland, in the Niger delta, and to
identify the options for clean-up.
United Nations political and peacekeeping
missions and country teams support dispute resolution

and grievance mechanisms through their rule of law
programmes. We also work to ensure that issues related
to extractive industries are part of mediation efforts
and are addressed in peace processes. We have now
included an expert on natural resources in our stand-by
team of mediation experts. Together with international
financial institutions, we can help Governments to
develop capacity on taxation policies and regulations
relevant to extractive industries, and to address the
impact of inflation and currency fluctuations.
There is also a significant gender dimension
to extractive industries. The United Nations is
working to ensure that this aspect is addressed. In
Mozambique, HIV/AIDS is a major problem related
to migrant workers working in South Africa’s mines.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
is working with companies in South Africa and with
the miners’ home communities to raise awareness and
reduce transmission of the disease. And with the rapid
expansion of Mozambique’s own extractive industries,
the United Nations system as a whole is working on
the broad spectrum of related health and development
issues.
Where countries are recovering from conflict, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and country
teams can engage extractive companies in training
and employing former combatants. Where resource
extraction is fuelling conflict, the Security Council, of
course, has a crucial role to play. The expert groups
that support sanctions committees are a valuable tool.
They have presented findings on extractive industries,
such as charcoal, timber, diamonds and gold. Their
recommendations to the Council, its committees and to
Member States should be important catalysts for action.
The expert groups have also provided guidance
to the private sector, for instance on due diligence for
individuals and entities that trade, process and consume
minerals from eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Private sector initiatives, such as the Kimberley
Process in relation to Liberia and Cóte d’Ivoire, and
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, are
important to accountability, conflict prevention and
sustainable development. Ending corruption must be a
core goal of the United Nations.
Voluntary action by the corporate sector also
underpins the United Nations Global Compact and the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights. Endorsed in 2011 by the Human Rights

13-367543

S/PV.6982

Council, the Principles provide a global standard for
preventing and addressing human rights abuses linked to
business activity. Member States — both the traditional
major players, as well as the emerging economies that
are increasingly entering the resources market — should
support these initiatives and principles.
Ultimately, all parties need to recognize and act
upon the links between poverty, inequality, conflict
and sustainable development. As demand for extractive
resources increases, so will competition and rivalry.
This must lead not to more violent conflicts in fragile
nations, but rather to cooperation and a sense of shared
responsibility As we are seeing in many developing
countries, resource wealth can be a catalyst for
development. As the report of the Secretary-General’s
High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015
Development Agenda states:
“We need a transparency revolution, so
citizens can see exactly where and how taxes, aid
and revenues from extractive industries are spent.”
Let us support this process of transparency and sharing
so that the people of developing nations can benefit
from their own natural resources.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annan.

Such a view is far too simplistic. For every conflict,
one can find several contrasting examples of African
countries where natural resources are now fuelling
sustained high growth and are improving their citizens’
daily lives. Natural resources are neither a curse nor a
blessing; they are simply a source of opportunity. They
can be used for tremendous good or they can be wasted.
Over the past decade, Africa’s economies have
been riding the crest of a global commodity wave.
Surging demand for natural resources in China and
other emerging markets has pushed export prices to new
highs. Africa’s petroleum, gas and natural resources
have become a powerful magnet for foreign investment.
With new exploration revealing much larger reserves
than were previously known, Africa stands to reap a
natural resource windfall.
The challenge facing the region’s Governments is
to convert the temporary windfall into a permanent
breakthrough in human development.
Let us remember that natural resources do not cause
war. Violent conflict happens when national institutions
are too weak to contain political, ethnic or religious
tensions within a peaceful national dialogue. But
competition for natural resources can often amplify and
accelerate conflict, tearing apart the already weakened
fabric of such fragile States, or raise the stakes in latent
conflicts between neighbouring countries.

Mr. Annan: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to address the Council today. The topic of today’s
discussion is extremely important and one that is close
to my heart. I will limit my remarks today to what
concerns Africa, although I believe that the challenges
facing the continent also have relevance for many other
parts of the world. I believe that Council members have
received the Africa Progress Report 2013 — “Equity in
extractives”.

The discussion therefore needs to focus on how
natural resources can contribute to higher human
development outcomes and reduce inequality; the
actors involved in their extraction; and the rules that
govern international commerce that can help prevent
such centrifugal forces from occurring. The effective
and transparent management of a country’s natural
resources is a priority for preventing conflict, fighting
corruption and promoting sustainable development.

For years, we have seen that natural resources have
been a presence in and at times a driver of internal
and regional conflicts in Africa. Over the past 15
years alone, rivalry for access to natural resources has
fuelled wars and rebellions in Sierra Leone, Liberia,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Sudan, South
Sudan, and elsewhere. Oil has also played an important
role in the recurring violence in the Niger delta.
This close and recurrent association between natural
resources and war has led some people to describe
the discovery and exploitation of natural resources in
Africa as a curse.

For societies to function and prosper, we need
three interrelated conditions — what I call three
pillars — economic and social development; peace and
security; and the rule of law and respect for human rights.
If exploited well, natural resources can contribute to
strengthening all three. The responsibility for ensuring
that lies primarily with African Governments. The
starting point is for all countries to develop national
strategies that set up the terms under which their
natural resources will be developed, including fiscal
policies, contractual arrangements and tax regimes.

4

13-36754

S/PV.6982

Those strategies should replace short-term calculations
with the necessary long-term thinking.
Critically, those national strategies must identify
extractive projects that can generate more jobs by
linking effectively to the existing local economy. Africa
cannot build dynamic growth and shared prosperity
while extractive projects operate within enclaves, or
countries export natural resources without value added.
Above all, national strategies have to set out how the
extractive sector fits with plans for poverty reduction,
inclusive growth and social transformation.
Success will require leadership, transparency and
accountability. Transparency is a powerful tool, and
there is no substitute for public scrutiny in developing
effective and equitable policies.
However, African Governments cannot resolve
all those governance challenges on their own. The
international community must also shoulder its
responsibility. When foreign investors make extensive
use of offshore companies, shell companies and
tax havens, they weaken disclosure standards and
undermine the efforts of reformers in Africa to promote
transparency. Such practices also facilitate tax evasion
and, in some countries, corruption, draining Africa of
revenues that should be deployed against poverty and
vulnerability.
This year’s Africa Progress Report found that
anonymous shell companies were used in five deals
that cost the Democratic Republic of the Congo nearly
$ 1.4 billion between 2010 and 2012. That sum is
equivalent to almost double the country’s combined
budget in 2012 for health and education. Indeed, Africa
loses more money every year through the tax-avoidance
technique known as “trade mispricing” than it receives
in international development assistance.
Conflicts driven by natural resources can, and
should, be prevented long before they start. Once arms
are drawn it is too late. By securing international rules
to close down opportunities for tax avoidance, rules
that limit the use of shell companies and other tools
that contribute to secret, murky and exploitative deals,
the international community may help prevent the
conditions that lead to armed competition for the spoils
of natural wealth. Once an armed conflict has started,
natural-resource wealth both drives it, by increasing the
reward for victory, and fuels it, by providing revenue to
buy arms and ammunition.

The Council can play an important role in ending
the plunder of minerals and other natural resources
that perpetuates violent conflict. In West Africa,
for example, the Council took vigorous action to ban
the trafficking in diamonds and timber, the proceeds
of which was funding armed groups. Without those
measures, the efforts of the United Nations to end
the wars in that region would have been harder. The
Kimberley Process to prevent “blood diamonds”
was not ideal, but it showed that the international
community was able to work together to cut off illegal
revenue streams that fuel wars.
What we need today is a much more ambitious and
comprehensive framework for transparency, fair tax
practices and asset pricing so that the conditions that
contribute to conflict over natural resources can be
eliminated. The Africa Progress Panel, which I chair,
looked in detail at how natural-resource wealth could
best contribute to improved well-being and equitable
growth for African nations. Our outlook is optimistic.
For the first time in more than a generation, the
number of people in poverty in Africa has fallen. Child
death rates are declining. There has been progress
in combating major infectious diseases. More of
Africa’s children are in school. All of that is evidence
that a combination of stronger economic growth and
strengthened policies can deliver results.
Building on a decade of strong growth, economic
governance continues to improve in many countries,
providing protection against the boom-bust cycle
fuelled by earlier commodity booms. Across the
region, democracy is sinking deeper roots, and the
accountability that comes with democracy strengthens
natural-resource management. Some foreign investors
show that they can make a healthy return from
African investment while also adhering to the highest
international standards of social and environmental
protection.
Economic collaboration across borders has shown
itself to be a very strong peace-builder. Such crossborder collaboration should be strongly encouraged
by Governments with private sector partners, when
it comes to the exploitation and processing of natural
resources, whether it is through multi-country
pipelines, iron ore smelters, refineries or other downstream industries based on extraction.
It is encouraging that today a shared agenda
is emerging. What is striking is that change is

13-367545

S/PV.6982

happening, and happening fast, as the demand for
greater transparency and fairness extends globally and
accelerates. For example, for citizens everywhere, in
Africa, in the Group of Eight (G-8) countries and across
the globe, current tax practices are raising questions
about fairness, social justice and citizenship.
In the past year, the United States and the European
Union have introduced new transparency requirements.
We have seen the United Kingdom and France sign up
for the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative,
and now Canada has announced its intention to
introduce mandatory transparency requirements for
its extractive sector. Switzerland has also just voted to
draft a payment disclosure law similar to the ones of the
United States and the European Union.
The international community has a major
responsibility to put in place such an environment.
The G-8 Summit in Lough Erne earlier this week was
a major step towards creating such an environment. I
hope the United Nations can continue to play its role in
helping to make this happen.
The President: I thank Mr. Annan warmly for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Anstey.
Ms. Anstey: I thank you very much, Mr. President,
for inviting me to discuss how the international
community can support fragile countries reliant on
natural resources. The issue is critical for fragile
countries seeking to escape the ravages of war. As
our research, the 2011 World Development Report on
conflict, security and development, said,
“slow-developing low-income economies largely
dependent on natural resources are 10 times more
likely than others to experience civil war”.
Natural resources have the potential to finance
transformative development in fragile States. Take
Guinea, for example. The Government recently
reviewed mining contracts and identified a licence
given free in 2008 for Simandou, the country’s huge
iron-ore mine. Two years later, the investor, who was
given that license free of charge, sold 51 per cent of that
investment at a price of $2.5 billion. Guinea’s entire
Government budget in 2010 was just $1.2 billion.
Managed well, natural resources have the potential
to transform countries and get them out of the cycle
of violence and fragility and aid dependency. But

6

managed poorly, unfairly or secretly, they can lead to
a missed opportunity of tragic proportions. The World
Bank Group is committed to helping fragile countries
transparently and sustainably manage natural resources
and ensure that the benefits are shared equitably. That
ambition is in line with our goal to eradicate extreme
poverty and promote shared prosperity.
Importantly, we need to work with countries
through the entire extractive industries value chain.
Why? For the simple reason that there is no point in
fixing the royalty-collection system if contracts are
poorly negotiated or revenues are wasted. We know
the importance of a level playing field to negotiate
contracts and regulate industries, so that countries are
not at a disadvantage in negotiating with the legions of
lawyers employed by international companies. We are
helping Governments to negotiate contracts through the
new Extractive Industries Technical Assistance Facility
and our new Africa Extractive Industries Facility.
We know the importance of the proper collection
of revenues. We support countries in implementing
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI) in 40 countries. The new EITI standard has
raised the bar on transparency — this is important and
needed — requiring public disclosure of auction results
and licences. We are committed to supporting countries
in meeting this new standard.
We also know the importance of managing
expenditures financed through natural resources, so
we are helping countries to transparently manage the
wealth from their natural resources, deal with issues
of volatility, set up transparent savings regimes and
strengthen the management of public finances and
public contracts.
We also need to pay attention to the environment
and to the local communities directly affected
by those investments. Such work needs to go
beyond Governments. Civil society organizations,
parliamentarians and the media have a key role to play
so as to enable better policy debates, better contractual
negotiations and a better ability to enforce contracts
and track contractual obligations. We are working with
those groups in such countries as Afghanistan, Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recently
also signed a memorandum of understanding with the
World Wildlife Fund to ensure that African extractive
industries pay greater attention to local communities.

13-36754

S/PV.6982

The role of the private sector is, of course, crucial.
Our private-sector arm, the International Finance
Corporation, and our risk insurance arm, the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency, support investment,
engendering best practices in environmental and social
standards and the transparency of payments to host
Governments.
We know much more needs to be done to ensure that
resources are a blessing, not a curse. The Group of Eight
Summit just concluded yesterday. As I emphasized on
Saturday at the Trade, Tax and Transparency conference,
hosted by the British Government in London, sunlight
is not only the best disinfectant, as a United States
Supreme Court Justice once said; sunlight can also be a
critical accelerator for development.
Transparency enables a level playing field, which is
good for private-sector-led growth. Transparency gives
citizens the tools to hold their Governments to account.
Transparency enables investigators to track the flow of
funds. Transparency offers us a way to accelerate the
transformation of underground and secret wealth into
poverty eradication and shared prosperity done in the
full sunlight of results and accountability.
I want to commend the United Kingdom and the
countries of the Group of Eight for putting tax and
transparency at the centre of their agenda this week, and
for the commitments made to increase transparency,
address tax evasion and tackle illicit financial transfers.
But much more can and should be done by all partners,
and we will be looking to all forums available to support
progress in this area.
Let me briefly outline where we at the World Bank
are committed to doing more and three initiatives we
announced this week. First, much progress has been
made on revenue transparency, and the next challenge
is to ensure transparency around contracts, licences and
concessions and their beneficial owners. That is why we
have just launched the Open Contracting Partnership
to ensure effective disclosure and participation in all
public contracting. That is particularly relevant for the
extractive industries sectors.
Secondly, we are working to create a trillion-dollar
map of Africa to put these resources literally on the map.
The map will address the lack of modern geological
data and overall knowledge of mineral potential. That
is one of the key barriers to improving the quality of
resource deals in Africa.

Finally, we have just announced the Open and
Collaborative Private Sector Initiative. There is a
range of tools involved in this initiative, but let me
focus on just one. With our partners, we have launched
the pilot of the Open Company Data Index. This new
data index looks at the state of play of how countries
enable transparency of information about registered
corporations, but it goes further by aggregating open
registry information. The tool generates open-source,
transnational data sets. For instance, if one searches
for a particular company on this website, one can
see not only corporate registration information for
that company, but also — and this, we believe, is
revolutionary — generate a visual representation of the
corporate network to which that company belongs and
the registry information for all the companies in the
network. For extractive industries, the tool could be
transformational.
To conclude, I would offer a word on the importance
of partnerships. We should not shy away from the fact
that translating natural resource wealth into investments
that create jobs and lift people out of poverty is complex,
with critical political dimensions. It requires close
collaboration across partners and particularly with the
United Nations system. Our commitment to enhancing
that partnership, particularly in fragile and conflictaffected countries, was shown in the recent historic
visit to the Great Lakes region by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the World Bank Group President Jim
Yong Kim and United Nations Special Envoy Mary
Robinson. There, they saw first-hand how the drive for
control over resource wealth can bring instability to an
entire region. Their visit highlighted an idea we know
well but still have a long way to go to put into practice,
namely, that peace and development are inextricably
intertwined and must go hand in hand. We are
committed to further deepening our partnership with
the United Nations system to support fragile countries
in their quest for peace and sustainable development.
We are committed to continuing to push the critical
extractive industries agenda.
The President: I thank Ms. Anstey for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Grynspan.
Ms. Grynspan: Let me start by sharing with the
Security Council our pain over the lives lost in the
vicious attack on our compound today in Mogadishu.
We wish to pay our respects to and express our

13-367547

S/PV.6982

solidarity with our staff and we offer our condolences
to the families of those we lost.
The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) welcomes the opportunity today to examine
how effective and transparent management of natural
resources in conflict-affected States can contribute to
international peace and security. Experience suggests
that being a resource-rich country is both an opportunity
and risk. It is risky to be a resource-rich yet socially
poor country but it is not destiny. We know that the
risk is sizeable but not insurmountable. A lot has been
learned about how to manage the risk effectively and
transparently and how to take advantage of the revenue
generated from higher prices and new discoveries of
oil, gas and minerals to jump-start economies, create
stable societies and improve the lives of people.
Good examples from Chile to Botswana tell us that
our hope is well founded, although many resource-rich
countries have disappointing results, growing in fact
more slowly, experiencing fewer human development
gains, including in poverty rates, and greater
inequality, than countries without natural resources.
Since the 1990s, the number of oil-producing countries
with ongoing conflicts has increased, while non-oilproducing countries have become more peaceful. Over
half of all countries with Security Council-mandated
missions are resource-dependent, that is, with oil, gas
or minerals accounting for more than 25 per cent of total
exports. That trend leaves little doubt of the importance
of the extractive sector as an international peace and
stability issue that demands a development response at
the national and international levels.
To face the challenges in least developed and
conflict-affected countries, our development work
needs to support them through an integrated approach in
four areas. First, we must get the legal, institutional and
policy frameworks right and build national capacities
and law enforcement mechanisms to implement them
properly. Secondly, we must support action at the
international level, calling on countries which are
home to multinational corporations or hosting stock
markets where international corporations are listed
to legislate transparency provisions in their laws and
regulations and to fight illicit capital flows, bribery
and tax evasion. The more universal these provisions
are the better. Thirdly, the voice and participation
of affected communities, especially women and
indigenous populations, must be boosted. Fourthly,
we must deal prudently with large revenue flows,

8

enhance transparency and public information and
invest in sustainable human development to balance
countries’ short-term priorities with ensuring longterm development benefits.
Let me expand. First, we need robust legal and
policy frameworks that enable countries to negotiate
fair contracts and establish clear and transparent rules
of the game to guide both Governments and companies.
Such legal and policy frameworks need also to protect
communities with social and environmental safeguards,
prevent illicit capital flight and tax evasion and build
institutions and governance systems with the capacity
to enforce laws and negotiated agreements. Too often,
good rules go unenforced.
Given the conflicting interests and multifaceted
challenges inherent in the process, UNDP has been
most valuable as an impartial facilitator, working with
the full range of development actors and stakeholders.
We help Governments know what to expect, access
technical support, lessons learned and best practices,
including through South-South and triangular
cooperation, identify capacity gaps, establish concrete
action plans and secure the support they need to narrow
asymmetries.
In Tanzania, Liberia and Sierra Leone, UNDP has
supported Governments in monitoring contracts and
rectifying information and bargaining asymmetries. In
Afghanistan, we supported the Ministry of Mining in
building its national capacities and through it to establish
basic regulations for the sector. In Tanzania, the Sudan
and Zimbabwe, through the Global Environment Fund,
we have introduced cleaner gold mining and extraction
technology as critical environmental safeguards to
protect communities.
The second area demanding more attention is
the involvement and active participation of affected
communities. Countries working with development
partners should take measures to ensure full participation
of communities, especially women, indigenous and
vulnerable groups. We have learned from experience
that the involvement of communities from the start
is critical to preventing misunderstandings, defusing
tensions and preventing conflict.
Through the European Union-United Nations
partnership on natural resources, conflict and
peacebuilding, UNDP works with civil society groups
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda to establish conflict resolution

13-36754

S/PV.6982

mechanisms that can lessen tensions over land and
revenues. We have also supported the strengthening
of national human rights institutions in the protection
of people’s rights and in building the capacities of
communities and civil society so that they can be better
informed as they press for more evidence-based and
thoughtful policies. Those efforts should be expanded
to help companies fulfil their obligations under the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights and the United Nations Global Compact.
Thirdly, countries need support in prudently and
transparently managing large revenue inflows and in
investing them well. In that regard, the work of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, Revenue
Watch, Publish What You Pay and the Africa Progress
Panel, whose Chair, former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, spoke earlier, are critical, and very important
steps forward. The recent Group of Eight meeting
also included an important discussion on transparency
measures. Clear and transparent processes, an
empowered and informed civil society and media can
help ensure remedial action against corrupt practices.
UNDP has a long-standing record in enhancing the
capacity of civil society actors to scrutinize private
and public actions and also to close the gap between
transparency and accountability.
Finally, countries must be supported in their
efforts to effectively invest the revenue generated from
natural resources in sustainable human development
for the long term, especially in health, education and
infrastructure. Benefits must help communities and
allow for the diversification of economies, so resources
do not go only to the big infrastructure projects that end
up concentrating benefits in the same sectors that are
already benefitting from resource inflows.
In Azerbaijan and Mongolia, UNDP supported
efforts to establish insulated investment funds.
Mongolia in particular has established a fiscal stability
fund and a human development fund. In Angola
and Kazakhstan, UNDP has helped to put together
programmes that encourage extractive industries
to break out of their enclaves and work with local
businesses and entrepreneurs to generate needed
skills, provide on-the-job training and involve them in
supply chains. It is important that the extractive sector
generates jobs at an early stage, especially in affected
communities and for ex-combatants and vulnerable
groups. Unfortunately, resource extraction itself creates

few jobs, which is why successful programmes such as
those are so important.
I am confident that conflict-affected countries
can harness the great potential of natural resources
to deliver such results. The world cannot afford not
to deliver the stepped-up support that will require.
Population growth, climate change and scarce natural
resources threaten to conspire to make conflict related
to natural resources a definite threat to global peace
and security in this century. UNDP looks forward to
working with all partners to deliver the development
response it demands.
The President: I thank Ms. Grynspan for her
informative briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council. I would like to remind them of the
agreement reached in presidential note S/2010/507, of
26 July 2010, that statements should be delivered in five
minutes or less.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to start by underscoring the condemnation of the United
States of the terrorist attack on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu. Our deepest sympathies go
to the injured as well as the families of the deceased
and the people and Government of Somalia.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on conflict and
natural resources. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson, Mr. Annan, Ms. Anstey
and Ms. Grynspan for their briefings.
Since 1990, at least 18 armed conflicts have been
fuelled by the exploitation of natural resources. At least
40 per cent of all intra-State conflicts over the past
60 years have a link to natural resources. The Security
Council is currently dealing with several countries in
conflict where natural resources have played a central
role. From diamonds in West Africa to coltan in the
Great Lakes region, the irresponsible exploitation
of, and illicit trading in, natural resources have
financed conflict, motivated antagonists and increased
susceptibility to conflict by fomenting corruption and
competition for wealth. For evidence we need look no
further than the horrors perpetrated in Sierra Leone in
the 1990s, or the current conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic.
Moreover, the illegal exploitation of extractive
resources often contributes to the unravelling of post-

13-367549

S/PV.6982

conflict peacebuilding processes. Conflicts associated
with natural resources are twice as likely to relapse in
the first five years. Societies that cannot responsibly
manage the wealth of their extractive industries are at
higher risk of instability and violence.
In short, the illegal extraction of, and trade in,
natural resources are directly related to international
peace and security and to the Council’s business.
National Governments must lead in responsibly
managing their countries’ natural resources for
the benefit of their peoples, but the international
community must support them in doing so by reducing
the opportunity for corruption and helping to strengthen
national Governments. The United States actively
promotes responsible behaviour on the part of American
companies in line with the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights. In July
2010, the United States Congress enacted legislation
aimed at diminishing the potential for mineral-supply
chains to contribute to violence. Companies listed on
United States stock exchanges must now submit annual
descriptions of their due diligence on the sourcing
and chain of custody of conflict minerals from the
African Great Lakes region. That legislation also raised
transparency standards in the extractive industries by
requiring the disclosure of payments to Governments
for the commercial development of oil, gas and mineral
resources by certain companies. We welcome last
week’s vote by the European Parliament to adopt a
similar rule.
The United States also supports several related
global initiatives. The Kimberley Process, which the
United States chaired last year, strengthens governance
in international trade in mineral commodities. Since its
inception, it has helped to reduce the trade in conflict
diamonds to less than 1 per cent of the world’s total
rough-diamond trade, down from an estimated 15 per
cent in the 1990s. Multiple stakeholder partnerships
among Governments, the private sector and civil
society, such as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI), are making significant progress
in addressing the link between extracted resources
and conflict. The United States urges all countries to
embrace the EITI principles of revenue transparency
and to support the Voluntary Principles on Security and
Human Rights initiative, which promotes the adoption
by oil-and-gas and mining companies of operational
security measures that respect human rights.

10

However,
intergovernmental
regimes
and
multi-stakeholder partnerships are necessary but not
sufficient. The Security Council must act as well.
Since the Council last addressed natural resources and
conflict, in 2007 (see S/PV.5705), it has reinforced
the Kimberley Process’s actions on sanctions regimes
for diamonds in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, and it has
endorsed due-diligence guidelines on conflict minerals
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have also
imposed and lifted a timber ban in Liberia and imposed
a ban on charcoal exports from Somalia. In addition, in
April 2012, under the presidency of the United States,
the Council called on the United Nations system to
strengthen Member States’ capacity to secure their
borders in order to combat the transnational flow of
illicit goods that can fuel conflict and breed insecurity
(see S/PV.6760). Whether the Council is imposing
sanctions, authorizing field missions or supporting
mediation efforts, it must continue to give attention to
such threats.
Natural resources remain indispensable to many
countries’ economies. When managed and traded
responsibly, they can accelerate development and
improve living standards for millions. But when
exploited for the benefit of the few, or co-opted for
nefarious purposes, they can fuel corruption, violence
and conflict. States fortunate enough to be endowed
with such wealth owe at least this to their people, and we
who sit on the Council owe it to them not just to discuss
the challenge it presents but to act in the numerous
real-world cases where the illicit extraction of, and
trade in, natural resources threatens international
peace and security.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to condemn as strongly as possible this
morning’s attack on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu, and to express my sincere condolences to
the families of the victims of that cowardly attack.
I would like to thank the British presidency of
the Security Council for choosing the subject of the
prevention of conflict and natural resources for this
debate, — a highly pertinent topic, as the Council’s
work regularly demonstrates.
My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-Genera Jan
Eliasson, Director General of the World Bank Caroline

13-36754

S/PV.6982

Anstey and Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Rebeca
Grynspan for their briefings. I also thank former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his briefing and
his leadership on improving equity in the extractive
industries in Africa.
Just as intra- or inter-State competition for natural
resources can be a cause of armed conflict, so their
illegal exploitation and commercialization can often
help to finance and prolong those same conflicts. At the
local level, conflicts between communities and mining
enterprises can lead to violent encounters, whether
over issues of property rights or sharing in the benefits
of the exploitation of resources. At the national level,
revenue losses from such exploitation can mortgage
development dividends and thus undermine the
possibility of achieving lasting peace.
In order to effectively combat instability and
violence in countries rich in natural resources, it is
essential to use a comprehensive approach that links
instruments of preventive diplomacy, sustainable
development, responsible trade and security that
respects human rights. The Security Council has an
unquestionable role to play in that process. Among
the tools available to it are, first and foremost, United
Nations missions. In our view, giving support to States,
depending on the situation, with a view to combating
armed groups and criminal networks that profit from
the illegal exploitation of natural resources is most
relevant. The same could be said of support given
to States to help them strengthen their capacity to
manage public finances and combat corruption, using
the framework of United Nations special political
missions and integrated offices. Close coordination
with all relevant actors in the field — namely, the
United Nations, the international financial institutions
and other international partners — is necessary in that
regard.
A coherent approach would make it possible to
strengthen the capacities of the State to prevent the loss
of revenue needed for the development of the country,
which could result from illegal mining operations or
from dishonest accounting practices. In order to prevent
conflicts, the Council should give priority to such
issues when it establishes or renews mandates. Such
an integrated and coherent approach should also be
taken into account when drawing up sanctions regimes.
We feel it would be appropriate for the sanctions
committees, and the panels of experts assisting them, to

exchange information on how to best cooperate actively
on those matters.
Finally, good management of natural resources is
a national priority for countries that are on the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We feel that
greater interaction between the Council and the PBC
country configurations would be appropriate.
We welcome the progress made towards greater
transparency under such voluntary initiatives as
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative or
the United Nations Global Compact. However, such
voluntary initiatives by themselves are insufficient;
hence the importance of having a legal framework in
place to ensure that extractive industries make public
all information relating to amounts paid to national
Governments. European directives on accountancy and
transparency follow that approach. We also welcome
the declaration adopted yesterday by the Group of Eight
stressing that transparency must be the catchword for
State revenue and land transactions and that minerals
must be extracted from legitimate sources, not pillaged
from conflict areas.
For its part, the African Union adopted its Africa
Mining Vision in 2009, which promises
“equitable and optimal exploitation of mineral
resources to underpin broad-based sustainable
growth and socioeconomic development.”
African leaders who are prepared to implement the
vision in their respective countries deserve our full
support. We also welcome the commitment of civil
society, particularly in areas of conflict, for the
formulation of transparent and responsible policies.
Finally, Luxembourg welcomes the trend in the
discussions of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons
on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, which accords
central importance to peace, the creation of effective,
transparent and responsible institutions for everyone,
and the fight against inequality. My country will
continue to support our partners’ efforts, particularly in
Africa, aimed at an equitable distribution of resources,
which is indispensable for just and lasting peace.
I would like to thank the President for placing
this subject on the Council’s agenda, and we regret
that no agreement was reached on a draft presidential
statement, despite the efforts of the presidency.

13-3675411

S/PV.6982

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We condemn the
dastardly attacks on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu and convey our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims in the Somali Government.
We thank you for convening this open debate, Sir,
and particularly for your concept paper (S/2013/334,
annex), which clearly highlights the correlation
between conflict and natural resources and outlines a
practical strategy for mitigating the potential risks. We
agree with the Council that effective and transparent
management of a country’s natural resources can be
critical to preventing conflict. Natural resources, such
as oil, gas, minerals and timber, are nature’s bounty.
In many countries the proceeds of extractive industries
have brought economic prosperity and development. But
in many other countries, regrettably, natural resources
have become detrimental to economic development.
In some instances, national and international elites
exploit natural resources, and Government officials
and mining corporate executives collude to siphon off
exorbitant profits that rightfully belong to the people.
It is true that extractive resources are not the only
cause of conflict. Poverty, ethnic and religious strife
and bad governance often exacerbate the tensions
created by the mismanagement of natural resources.
High dependency on extractive industries, combined
with unsettled disputes, lead to competition and conflict
over resources. Greater transparency enables citizens
to hold Governments and corporations to account and
ensure that the proceeds from extractive industries are
used for the public good.
Historically, almost all countries have experienced
conflicts triggered by natural resources, but today
many resource-rich countries in Africa are convulsed
by warfare. The Council’s presidential statement on
conflict in Africa adopted in April (S/PRST/2013/4)
expressed concern at the role played by the illegal
exploitation of natural resources in fuelling some past
and current conflicts. In that regard, nature’s bounty
has become a cause of suffering in several countries.
Elites profit from their land and fight for the spoils, but
the people remain poor. The conflicts in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, initially triggered by longstanding grievances, were aggravated and prolonged by
illegal exploitation of natural resources. Experts point
out that Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of Congo suffer from their incapacity to
effectively manage their immense natural wealth.

12

Natural resources continue to be illegally exploited
to finance militant activities, which reignites conflicts.
We know that there is no panacea or shortcut for
addressing the distortions created by the illegal or
inefficient exploitation of natural resources. A coherent,
strategic approach is needed. The United Nations is a
natural partner for countries caught in conflict over
natural resources. The Security Council’s embargoes
and sanctions, experts’ advice and the capacity-building
exercises undertaken by United Nations peacekeeping
missions and other United Nations entities have helped
to limit the menace. Its eradication will be a lengthy
process.
In our view, a strategic approach should include the
following elements. First, the Security Council should
devote more attention to natural resources in conflict
situations. Secondly, the Council should target measures
against those responsible for violating its embargoes
and for illegally exploiting natural resources. Thirdly,
more resources should be allocated to peacekeeping
and to special political missions in order to assist
affected countries in building their institutional and
legal capacities. Fourthly, regional approaches are
essential when there is a cross-border dimension of the
illicit trade in resources. In that regard, the adoption
of the African Mining Vision by the African Union in
2009 is an important step. Reform of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the Kimberly
Process Certification Scheme would also help. Fifthly,
mining companies should be held accountable if they
engage in illicit activities. The private sector, when
entering into natural resource contracts, should ensure
that the land ownership and other rights of local
communities are fully respected. Finally, we should
use the full potential of the Peacebuilding Commission
in assisting transitions from natural resource conflicts
and encourage such countries to work more closely with
international financial institutions to build pressures
for transparency.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the outset
I would like to echo previous speakers in condemning
the cowardly attack that took place this morning in
Mogadishu and express our condolences to the families
of the victims, to the United Nations staff and to the
Somalian authorities. I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, Mr. Kofi Annan,
Ms. Rebeca Grynspan and Ms. Anstey for their
briefings.

13-36754

S/PV.6982

The issue of managing and controling natural
resources, in particular those of the the extractive
industry, is a key issue with regard to maintaining
international peace and security. A number of conflicts
are related to the issue of natural resources, and that
trend will accelerate in the coming years given the
increasing pressure upon such resources. We would
therefore like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this debate on
what is really a major issue at the heart of the Security
Council’s mandate, especially within the perspective of
conflict prevention.
International law confers upon States special
prerogatives with regard to natural resources; they have
sovereign rights over those resources. The Security
Council’s role is not to question such rights in any
instance, but to consider situations in which natural
resources play a role in conflicts. There are many such
situations. We therefore regret the fact that the Security
Council cannot adopt a text on the issue because of the
objections of one delegation.
In some cases, it is the way in which natural
resources are managed that can lead to conflicts. There
are many such examples. The civil wars in Liberia,
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo all
share a sommon aspect: resources such as diamonds,
gold, minerals and oil. In other cases, the exploitation
of natural resources or of wildlife can fuel conflicts
through the purchasing of weapons and payments to
armed groups, as for example in the Kivus.
Unfortunately, those factors can some together,
resulting in suffering for civil populations.Children
are often recruited to work in mining. Ms. Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, has also pointed out in
her most recent report the correlation between armed
activities related to illegal mining and sexual violence.
While tensions around natural resources have major
consequences on the stability of a region, that should not
allow us to forget that the sound management of natural
resources is essential in the reconstruction phase and
would prevent a relapse into conflict. By benefitting
economic development, the sound management of
resources also contributes to peacebuilding. We see
that, for example, with the normalization of relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan with regard to the
oil sector, which is one of the necessary preconditions
for stabilizing their relations and, beyond that, for their

development. In the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, addressing the issue of sharing
resources and arable land is an matter that is vital to
putting an end to the repeated crises in the region.
Clearly, the issue of natural resources and their
management is far from being the only cause of
conflict, but it is a deep-rooted and lasting one that, as
we have seen, can affect all phases of a conflict. Good
management of such resources is an important element
in good governance, which in its turn is essential for
maintaining stability. It is important that local people
be able to enjoy the benefits of their resources in
order not to fuel tension. The Security Council has
a responsibility to encourage initiatives that ensure
proper, lasting and responsible management. It must
support measures that can establish the basis for lasting
peace.
Aware of all those challenges, the international
community has gradually established means to
ensure proper management of natural resources,
and we must support those initiatives. To combat the
pillaging of natural resources, France supported, in the
General Assembly and the Security Council alike, the
establishment of the Kimberley Process certification
scheme, which establishes a certification mechanism for
the source of diamonds. Those efforts must be carried
out at the level of States as well as that of private-sector
companies, and they can also be supported by civil
society. Frances supports the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, which on a voluntary basis
brings together Governments, mining companies and
non-governmental organizations. The initiative has as
a goal to ensure that those resources serve development
and not fuel ongoing conflicts. That is also a historic
step forward in combatting corruption, given that
it aims to make Governments accountable to public
opinion for their use of mining-sector resources. Private
companies play a key role in the effective, transparent
and responsible management of such resources. It is
important to continue to encourage them to sign on to
the United Nations Global Compact, through which they
would align their operations with the 10 universally
accepted principles concerning human rights, labour
standards, the environment and combating corruption.
I should like to conclude by emphasizing that the
United Nations system, including the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, can play a very
useful supporting role vis-à-vis States that wish to
establish transparent institutions responsible for

13-3675413

S/PV.6982

managing their natural resources and to avoid the illegal
exploitation of those resources, thereby promoting
sustainable development. But to fully benefit from
the involvement of the various players in the United
Nations system, we must enhance coordination. I would
like to note that the current example of the involvement
of the World Bank in bringing States of the Great Lakes
region closer together through the Secretary-General’s
Framework Agreement is promising.
In conclusion, we believe that in future it is
important that the Security Council continue to review
the issue of the management of natural resources, whose
consequences for international peace and security, as
we have seen, are considerable.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom
for having organized this debate on the link between
natural resources and conflicts, six years after this
was initiated, in 2007, by Belgium. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson;
the Chair of the Africa Progress Panel, Mr. Kofi
Annan; and the representatives of the World Bank and
the United Nations Development Programme for their
briefings introducing the issue.
Togo welcomes the increasingly established
recognition of the link between the access, control,
exploitation and management of natural resources,
on the one hand, and, on the other, the emergence,
escalation and prolongation of conflicts. With regard
to what is at stake with those resources in the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security,
this issue should not be seen exclusively from the
perspective of development. The issue of natural
resources should, rather, be of greater interest to the
Council, not just with regard to conflict management,
but it should also be increasingly considered from the
point of view of prevention. We believe that the Security
Council should not take a wait-and-see approach,
nor wait to manage conflicts once they break out. On
the contrary, we should try to anticipate conflicts by
adopting appropriate measures in conformity with
the norms and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
In the majority of countries on the agenda of our
Council, particularly in Africa, the conflicts that
have broken out are, broadly speaking, fuelled by
covetousness for the natural resources of the given
country. During the conflicts, the illegal exploitation

14

and trade in natural resources helps to finance the
purchasing of weapons and ammunition and to pay
combatants, which, in turn, fuels the conflicts. In
certain cases, the conflicts simply serve to enrich the
leaders of the militias and armed groups, who benefit
from the economy and state of war. There are examples
of many countries in Africa, Asia and the Middle East
that illustrate that during civil wars, diamonds and
other precious minerals, timber and oil in particular,
have been used to finance military action and have
given rise to systematic violations of human rights.
The drive for natural resources that results from
the economic and strategic stakes associated with
the exploitation of natural resources, renewable
or non-renewable, leads multinational companies,
economic and political lobbies and foreign Powers to
take advantage situations of underlying crises or to
benefit from ongoing conflicts to gain control over
those resources in order to obtain disproportionate
concessions. That direct or indirect involvement by
multinationals and foreign Powers in conflicts is often
illustrated by the contracts that are signed, sometimes
before the end of the conflict, between said companies
and the future victors.
Although there are judicial mechanisms in place
to ensure that belligerents are held responsible for the
crimes and violations of human rights they commit,
private multinational companies and States involved
enjoy complete impunity. In order to put an end to that
situation of impunity for multinationals, Togo feels that
international justice institutions and the States where
the companies are based should have the duty to carry
out transparent investigations on the role that they
have played in the outbreak and the continuation of a
conflict.
With respect to monitoring mechanisms and
the exploitation of and trade in natural resources,
Togo believes that the Kimberley Process, which has
logged some successes, should be adapted to make it
more effective in reducing the predatory mining of
diamonds, which has often been used to finance certain
crises in Africa. Togo also supports the idea to extend
the principle of transparency and traceability to natural
resources other than diamonds.
We firmly believe that transparency in the
exploitation and management of those resources is a key
tool in ensuring the accountability of both Governments
and multinational corporations that are active in the

13-36754

S/PV.6982

sector. That is why my country encourages all of the
national and international mechanisms aimed at greater
transparency and accountability, such as the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative, which Togo signed
on 22 May. We also welcome the positive impact of
the threat or imposition of sanctions in encouraging
Governments or partners to carry out reforms in the
area of natural resources.
Natural resources need not become a cursed
element of conflict in the countries so endowed. In
the case of Togo, if measures are taken early enough
to reduce domestic conflict by promoting good
management and the improved redistribution of profits,
then the exploitation of such resources should help
to avoid economic marginalization, while ensuring
development, security and peace.
To that end, it is important to strengthen State
capacities to establish efficient governance in the
natural resources sector in order to optimize revenue,
particularly through transparent procedures in the
allocation of mining and trading licenses, as well as in
controlling the sector. Such strengthened capacity should
also complement the political and legal framework
established by Africa Mining Vision — whose
outcome document was adopted in 2009 by the African
Union — with a view to establishing a strategic
planning framework linking mining with development
and transforming the same into a potential economic
source of wealth in Africa to benefit peace.
It is important to call for the greater involvement
of civil society in the good management of natural
resources and for deeper consideration of the risks
associated with mining and oil extraction activities,
particularly in terms of society and the environment.
I would like to conclude by expressing my country’s
disappointment that, owing to certain inflexible
positions, the Council has been unable to agree on a
presidential statement that could have reflected the
attention that it should pay to the link between natural
resources and conflict. My country hopes, however,
that today’s debate will enable the drafting of new
measures or the improvement of existing ones aimed
at breaking the links between natural resources and
conflict, so those resources will no longer serve as a
curse, but will become a blessing for the countries so
endowed, in particular the African countries.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China is
shocked by the attack on the United Nations compound

in Mogadishu, which has resulted in casualties to
Somalia’s Government and its people. We express our
sympathies to the United Nations staff affected.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing. We have also listened attentively to the
interventions of Mr. Annan, Managing Director Anstey
of the World Bank and Under-Secretary-General
Grynspan.
Natural resources form the material foundation for
human survival and development and play an important
role in promoting countries’ economic growth and
development. However, in some conflict regions,
the illegal exploitation of and trafficking in natural
resources and their irrational use and distribution will
likely become major factors in triggering and fuelling
conflict.
Addressing the problem of conflict resulting
from the abuse of resources requires a multifaceted
industrial mix and a pattern of sustainable economic
growth, which are needed for the promotion of
sustainable development. On the other hand, the factors
leading to armed conflict are numerous and complex,
involving political, economic, social and other factors.
Nevertheless, natural resources are not a direct cause
of conflict.
Allow me to stress the following points on
the relationship between natural resources and the
prevention of conflict. First, the domestic sovereignty
of States over their natural resources must be respected.
All States possess inalienable sovereignty over the
resources within their territory. Given the rights and
duties of those countries, which include managing
and using their natural resources, the exploration,
development and use of those resources should be
determined by the people of the country itself. The
international community should respect that principle in
conducting resource-related cooperation. In particular,
it should respect the ownership by the country in
conflict in efforts to improve the management and use
of resources and to ensure that the people of the country
concerned will benefit from them.
Secondly, United Nations agencies and programmes
should enhance coordination in that area and together
assist conflict-affected countries to improve the
management of their natural resources. They should
also work within their respective remits and avoid
repetition. China supports the efforts of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, inter

13-3675415

S/PV.6982

alia, in continuing the discussion on the management
and use of natural resources. In formulating
integrated peacebuilding strategies, the Peacebuilding
Commission should bolster the important area of natural
resources management in post-conflict resolution and
reconstruction. The United Nations special missions
and various specialized United Nations development
agencies should integrate their resources and synergies
in order to support countries in conflict in their efforts
to strengthen capacity-building and the rational
development and use of their natural resources.
Thirdly, from its vantage point, the Council should
play its natural role in carrying out its responsibilities.
As the main United Nations organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council should place greater reliance on mediation and
good offices efforts. The Council must prioritize the
prevention and resolution of conflict when it seeks to
effectively fulfil its responsibilities in safeguarding
international peace and security. Therefore, sanctions
imposed by the Council should not serve as a means
in themselves, but should be specifically targeted to
avoid adverse impacts on the country’s use of natural
resources while it is subjected to sanctions.
Fourthly, it is imperative to devote greater attention
to the role of regional organizations and relevant
mechanisms. In recent years, the African Union and
other regional and subregional organizations have
played an important role in encouraging African States
to bolster their resource management and development
efforts and improve the integrated management of
natural resources.
Intergovernmental mechanisms, such as the
Kimberley Process, have played an outstanding role in
curbing illegal trafficking in natural resources. Those
mechanisms should be encouraged to play a mutually
complementary role with the efforts of the affected
countries and the United Nations so as to ensure further
contributions in that area.
Transforming a country’s natural resources into the
opportunity to create an enhanced future requires the
coordinated efforts of countries and the international
community. China supports the efforts of the relevant
United Nations agencies, based on their respective
mandates and the distribution of labour, in assisting
the countries affected to shake off the curse of natural
resources and promote their use and development.

16

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to echo the words of previous
speakers in condemning the attack in Mogadishu.
Natural resources are above all a major factor of
sustainable development. They often underpin the
economies of many developed and developing countries.
States possess inalienable sovereign rights over their
natural resources and, rightfully, autonomously
determine their approach to the management of those
resources based on their priorities, needs and capacities
and in line with their national legislation and pursuant
to their international legal commitments.
In line with the principle of inalienable sovereignty
over natural resources, the combat against illegal
activities in the mining sector is also the prerogative and
responsibility first and foremost of the Governments
and the countries that possess such resources. Armed
conflicts, whether internal or international, can
exacerbate problems related to the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, which may become the target of
seizure by foreign States or be appropriated by illegal
armed groups. However, in both cases the source of
the conflict is not natural resources as such but the
aggressive acts committed by one or the other force.
In individual cases of armed conflict, following
a serious analysis and a detailed discussion of the
prevailing circumstances, the question might arise of
introducing international sanctions. However, such
mechanisms can be adopted by the Security Council
only in the case of specific violators whose actions
fuel hotspots of instability. Such measures should be
introduced on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, be targeted in nature and take account of the
negative humanitarian consequences thereof for the
population as a whole.
We view as dangerous attempts to introduce
automaticity in the sanctions mechanisms or to
introduce, through the Security Council and not in
line with its mandate, quasi-sanction instruments by
broadening the practice of the certification of raw
materials. It would be even more dangerous to do so
on the basis of superficial, rash conclusions and broad
generalizations, without taking account of the particular
nature of the situation in a given country, which can
play a critical role in a specific context.
With reference to conflicts, we must point out that
the root cause is not natural resources per se but the
social tensions that give rise to poverty and inequality,

13-36754

S/PV.6982

as well as the often unfavourable economic climate
resulting from the imprudent, irresponsible financial
and trade policies of influential countries. However,
United Nations specialized agencies are seeking to
address those problems. They are giving countries, at
their request, targeted policy and expert support as well
as support in strengthening State structures.
With regard to the illegal trade in natural resources,
we would stress that there are always two parties
involved and that buyers must bear their own share of
responsibility. A blatant example of fuelling a conflict
through the illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources is the decision taken by many countries to
buy oil from areas in Syria that are controlled by illegal
armed groups.
Ms. King (Australia): Allow me to begin by
condemning this morning’s appalling attack on the
United Nations compound in Mogadishu. We convey
our condolences to the families of the victims and
express our solidarity with the United Nations and with
the Somali Government and people.
Mr. President, we are grateful to you for having
convened this important debate today, and we thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Annan, Ms. Anstey and
Ms. Grynspan for their informative briefings.
Since the last Council debate on natural resources
and conflict, held in 2007 (see S/PV.5705), good work
has been done, including by the Council’s sanctions
Committees and their expert groups, to understand and
address the impact of natural resources management in
countries prone to conflict. But it is timely that we look
again at this link and at the Council’s role in ensuring
that natural resources benefit rather than destabilize
countries.
The continued demand for commodities and energy
is driving growth, trade, investment and job creation
in resource-rich countries. For developing countries,
revenues from natural resources can, as Mr. Annan has
said, lead to sustained high growth and thereby ensure
development. In 2009, Africa’s natural-resource exports
were worth $246 billion, six times more than the total
aid inflows. Putting in place the proper systems to
manage natural-resources revenues can deliver benefits
well into the long term.
As we all know, however, there can be a correlation
between natural resources and conflict. In 2007,
the Council recognized part of this equation: the

destabilizing impact of the illegal exploitation of
and trafficking in natural resources. That can fuel
armed conflict, weaken State institutions and set back
development.
Beyond illegal activity, though, failure to manage
natural resources transparently and sustainably can be
a factor in exacerbating conflicts or provoking new
ones. Mismanagement of extractive industries can
entrench corruption, undermine governance and State
institutions, and exacerbate tensions over revenue
distribution, employment opportunities and land rights.
Effective and transparent resources management
should be part of the international community’s
assistance to resource-rich developing countries.
Australia’s 2011 Mining for Development Initiative
was created in response to requests from our partner
countries to share our experience and support them in
maximizing the economic benefits from their extractive
sectors in a socially and environmentally sustainable
way.
The Security Council has a role in reducing the
risk of conflict and instability where natural resources
exploitation and management are a factor. It has taken
targeted Chapter VII measures to prevent funds derived
from the illegal exploitation of such resources from
fuelling existing conflicts, for example in Liberia,
Somalia and Côte d’Ivoire. However, it needs to
broaden its understanding of this issue and take a more
proactive approach.
I will focus on three areas.
First, the Council needs to work more strategically
with the regional and global initiatives that have
been effective in helping countries to establish wellregulated and transparent natural-resources industries.
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI), which already works in partnership with several
Council-mandated missions, is a prime example. The
EITI Global Conference, hosted by Australia last
month, launched new, stronger standards to enhance
the consistency and quality of the information reported
by implementing countries.
Another such initiative with a long-standing
relationship with the Council is the Kimberley Process.
That scheme has successfully curbed the flow of
conflict diamonds to rebel groups in a relatively short
period of time, since 2003.

13-3675417

S/PV.6982

Regional organizations are also taking forward
important work. The African Mining Vision, with
its framework for transparent, equitable and optimal
exploitation of natural resources, is a strong example.
The Council needs to forge partnerships with
those initiatives. It should seek to reference them in the
relevant statements and mandates so as to ensure that
United Nations actors in the field work with others in
assisting national Governments build transparent and
accountable institutions.
Secondly, the Council needs to have more
confidence in using the sanctions tools already available
to it to prevent, or at least limit, the abuse of natural
resources to fund conflict. Through the careful design,
implementation and monitoring of such measures, the
Council has gone some way towards minimizing the
misuse of resources to fund conflict. That experience
proves that those measures can enhance security.
The Council should apply those measures where
circumstances warrant.
Thirdly, the Council must provide peacekeeping
and political missions with the appropriate mandates
and tools to assess potential threats associated with
natural resources, assist Governments to build their
capacities to manage their resources effectively, and
work with the private sector and civil society to bolster
their efforts. Security Council resolution 2098 (2013),
which extended the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, provides a strong model.
There are, of course, other United Nations
actors that play a vital role in this area, including the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The Council should
listen to the PBC’s advice with respect to countryspecific situations where natural resources are driving
destabilization.
The private sector, too, must undertake its business
in a manner that not only respects human rights but
also establishes mutually beneficial arrangements
with national Governments and local communities
to promote development and employment, which
contribute to conflict prevention.
Finally, we are disappointed that the Council
was unable to agree on a presidential statement
which could have advanced our consideration of this
issue. We regret the lack of flexibility in our efforts
to achieve a consensus outcome. Looking ahead, the

18

Council should continue to focus on the nexus between
natural resources and conflict prevention. We thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for making clear the
commitment of the United Nations to addressing this
also, and we encourage the Secretariat to deepen its
own understanding and analyses of these links so it can
inform the Council’s deliberations.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to condemn in the strongest
terms the attack that took place today in Somalia and to
convey our sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of Somalia and to the families of the victims.
I should like also to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for having convened this important
debate. We express our gratitude to the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson; Mr. Kofi Annan;
Ms. Caroline Anstey; and Ms. Rebeca Grynspan for
their briefings and the very useful information that they
provided.
Natural resources play a driving role in national
economies, and their exploitation can be a positive
factor in promoting development and strengthening
the mechanisms of social cohesion, co-development
and cooperation, in accordance with the provisions of
international law. There is no doubt that the transparent
and inclusive management of natural resources, — in
harmony with the rule of law, reflecting the political
orientations of the constitutional institutions of States,
and responsive to general and local interests — contribute
to economic growth and stability.
It is important to recall in the context of this debate
that every State freely enjoys full and permanent
sovereignty over all its wealth, natural resources
and economic activity, and may therefore use such
resources in line with its own national interests. All
Governments are responsible for ensuring conditions
conducive to the equitable distribution of the income
derived from the exploitation of natural resources in
order to promote humane, sustainable and inclusive
development, pursuant to its own priorities.
If the issue of natural resources is being addressed
in the context of today’s debate, it is unfortunately
because, in some cases, such resources — being
either abundant or rare — contribute to sparking or
perpetuating conflict. In that regard, the Security
Council has established mechanisms to limit the use
of natural resources in financing or prolonging crises
or conflicts situations, particularly in the Mano River

13-36754

S/PV.6982

basin and the Great Lakes region. With a view to
brevity, I wish to insist on the following three aspects
of this issue.
First, the difficulties encountered by States in
monitoring the vast expanses that harbour their natural
resources, controlling their borders, regulating the
exploitation of their natural resources and managing
them correctly are serious problems that need to
be addressed. It is important for the international
community and the various United Nations agencies to
coordinate their efforts better and provide the support
necessary to countries emerging from or in conflict
in order to strengthen their institutions and national
capacities, in full respect for their sovereignty. We
believe that the Peacebuilding Commission also has an
important role to play in that respect.
Furthermore, fair economic relations that ensure
sufficient resources for populations affected by conflict
and promote the sustainable exploitation of natural
resources can contribute to efforts to re-establish and
build peace. In that regard, the international financial
institutions, subregional and regional integration
processes, the private sector and civil society can play
a lead role.
Finally, the channels whereby natural resources can
contribute in some cases to conflict are closely linked to
the economic and social structures of the State, stability
and good governance. They therefore require integrated
approaches promoting peace and development. That is
why we believe that this important theme should be
considered in a context that transcends the issue of
peace and security. We should also address the issues
of development and the environment in the framework
of broadened consultations between the various United
Nations entities concerned.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): With
respect to what occurred this morning in Mogadishu, the
human face of these events was dramatically described
by my neighbour at this table, Rebeca Grynspan, when
she noted that one of her staff members who died had
left her six-year-old son an orphan. I trust that our press
release shall convey an equally humane dimension of
the senseless, direct attack on the United Nations.
We thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate.
We appreciate the presence of Deputy Secretary
General Jan Eliasson and the important contributions
made by Caroline Anstey, Rebeca Grynspan and Kofi
Annan. We would also like to thank you for the concept

note circulated for this debate (S/2013/334, annex). I
will limit my comments to five points.
First, there are certainly situations, in particular
in the African continent, where the struggle over the
control of natural resources can lead to conflict, even
conflicts deep-rooted enough to constitute threats
to international peace and security. However, there
are other situations where the struggle over natural
resources can create tensions that do not rise to the
level of threatening international peace and security. In
the majority of cases, there is no relationship between
natural resources and conflict situations. That is to say,
the jurisdiction of the Security Council in relation to
this area is very limited.
Secondly, that having been said, we recognize that
the exploitation of natural resources is a double-edged
sword, or, as one speaker put it, can be either a
blessing or a curse. It undoubtedly generates potential
benefits for the host countries, but as we have heard,
it sometimes becomes a source of adverse phenomena,
including high levels of corruption, displacement,
environmental degradation, and grave violations of
human rights. In extreme cases, their exploitation has
been linked to internal conflicts or even to regional
conflicts associated with the control of those natural
resources or their illegal trafficking. Diamonds and
river-bed gold mining are cases in point.
Thirdly, the Security Council must consider the
potential link between the management of natural
resources and the prevention of conflicts on a case-bycase basis, and only to the extent that they may be
relevant to the particular context. In many situations,
the Security Council has adopted specific mechanisms,
such as those envisaged by the sanctions committees
and their expert groups, in addition to the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Currently, there are at
least two countries that have export bans on a natural
resource: Côte d’Ivoire and Somalia. In Somalia’s case,
the Monitoring Group states that the illegal export of
vegetable carbon still accounts for some 10 per cent of
Al-Shabaab’s financial backing, despite its prohibition.
This debate must strengthen our commitment to
ensuring that sanctions that are currently imposed are
fully implemented.
Fourthly, the strategic nature of natural resources
requires cooperation frameworks to be more effective
and firm. We recognize current initiatives, such
as the Kimberley certification process system, the

13-3675419

S/PV.6982

Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, and the
International Tropical Timber Agreement. We value
tripartite initiatives between Governments, the private
sector and civil society that promote transparency and
the responsible management of the extractive sector.
Finally, in discussing the role of natural resources,
a wider context to consider is the collective legacy that
we are leaving to future generations. There are some
countries that are not on the agenda of the Security
Council, but whose carbon emissions are causing the
average global temperature to rise about 4 degrees,
which can cause a calamity of global dimensions. The
United Nations is currently reviewing its development
agenda with the aim of agreeing on a set of post-2015
global goals. Challenges such as climate change and
water scarcity must be carefully addressed so that such
issues are not the main drivers of conflict in the near
future.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Ms. Caroline
Anstey, Ms. Rebeca Grynspan and Mr. Kofi Annan for
their statements.
Like other colleagues, we condemn the attack
on the United Nations Office in Mogadishu, and we
would like to express our solidarity with the people and
Government of Somalia.
As was correctly pointed out by former SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan in his briefing, conflicts that are
directly or indirectly linked to natural resources are not
limited only to the African continent. In that regard,
the President of my country said recently that the major
battles of the twenty-first century would be fought over
our people’s natural resources. South America is one of
the planet’s richest regions, not only in terms of human
resources but also in natural resources — water — as
well as all the various other potential resources being
discovered on a daily basis. Conserving our natural
resources therefore also means safeguarding a region
in which peace prevails.
There is no doubt that the exploitation of natural
resources can be a source of conflict in many countries
owing to the irresponsible conduct of transnational
corporations, shadowy contracts, and the vulnerability
of State sovereignty in managing natural resources.
But that can also be due to the existence of weak States
and already deeply unequal societies where poverty is
rife and there are domestic problems having to do to
with rivalries and tensions caused by ethnic or religious

20

differences or all-out power struggles. Nevertheless,
despite the fact that the illegal or illegitimate exploitation
of natural resources can unleash, exacerbate or provoke
armed conflicts on many occasions, we should avoid
establishing a causal link between armed conflicts and
the exploitation and management of natural resources.
What is unquestionable is the link that exists
between the structural causes of poverty and inequality
in some countries and regions and the irresponsible,
illegal and corrupt exploitation of renewable and
non-renewable natural resources. Argentina believes
that the international community should focus its
efforts on addressing this issue by establishing a more
fair and balanced world order. It should put an end to
the illegitimacy of an unregulated financial system and
a world market in which everything has a value except
respect for human rights. We emphasize that we should
concentrate our efforts on ensuring sustainable human
development based on the principle of shared but
different responsibilities, with a focus on human rights
and on economic, social and environmental aspects.
We believe that the mandate to deal sustainably with
the exploitation and management of natural resources
lies clearly with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the funds and programmes, the
regional economic commissions and the various
specialized agencies. As we are seeing, organizations
such as the World Bank and regional development banks
also have an important role in line with the priorities
that have been established by the Governments and the
peoples of the various countries concerned. Security
Council intervention should occur only in conflict or
post-conflict situations that are on its agenda and that
represent a threat to international peace and security.
With regard to conflict prevention, the Security
Council should refrain from intervening in a situation
in which it believes that there is a potential risk that the
exploitation of one country’s natural resources could
fuel a conflict that could pose a threat to international
peace and security. In that way, it would avoid any
intervention in the internal affairs of a given country.
Preventive diplomacy should play a leading role in
such situations by dealing with problems that affect
the stability of a particular region or subregion when
it comes to the exploitation and management of natural
resources. The United Nations must focus its efforts in
a coordinated way and in cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations.

13-36754

S/PV.6982

With regard to conflict and post-conflict situations
in which the Security Council intervenes, the work
of the United Nations should be aimed at supporting
those measures that tend to break the link between
the predatory exploitation and corrupt management
of natural resources and the emergence of conflicts,
while transforming natural resources into a key to
development, promoting economic diversity and
strengthening democratic, legitimate and transparent
State institutions.
Bolstering the rule of law in the framework of
peacebuilding strategies requires the strengthening
of the debate and the collective work under way
among the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, including
through the Peacebuilding Commission. Similarly, the
implementation of sanctions regimes by the Security
Council are on some occasions effective in combating
the effects that the illegal trade in natural resources
can have in a given situation. However, the success of
such measures can be ensured only if both States and
companies in the private and public sector alike fully
meet their obligations imposed by the Security Council.
In conclusion, we believe that the international
community should assume its responsibility not just
with regard to efforts to support peacebuilding and
sustainable human development, but also with regard
to the struggle to combat practices that facilitate the
unregulated greed of the financial system, tax havens
and evasion, and corruption. The management and
the legal, legitimate, fair, responsible and transparent
exploitation of natural resources requires not only a
commitment by the Governments of those countries
where such activities take place, but also a commitment
by the Governments of those countries where the
headquarters of multinational companies involved in
such exploitation are located.
We must recognize the responsibility of destination
and transit countries to prevent any activity related to
the exploitation and management of natural resources
that can lead to or perpetuate a conflict, as well as its
financing. An active civil society is undoubtedly needed
to take clear measures with regard to regulating trade
practices and promoting corporate social responsibility.
Argentina emphasizes the importance of avoiding
the securitization of the development agenda and
making the exploitation and management of natural
resources into the cause of conflicts, leaving aside the

complex interrelationships among its genuine deepseated causes. The real way to prevent conflicts at both
the intranational and international level and to maintain
peace and security is through the establishment of
a more just world order that shows more respect for
human rights.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea joins other delegations in strongly
condemning the terrorist attacks on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu. I would like to express our
deep condolences to the victims, their families and the
Government of Somalia.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing this meeting. Considering
the security implications that natural resources entail,
I believe that today’s topic is highly relevant to the
work of the Council. I would also like to extend my
appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson,
Mr. Kofi Annan, Ms. Caroline Anstey and Ms. Rebeca
Grynspan for their insightful briefings.
Natural resources play an irreplaceable role in
many national economies, as they provide a potential
basis for sustainable economic growth and political
stability. However, we can observe a strong correlation
between a country’s dependence on extractive
industries and its susceptibility to conflict, especially
when governance is weak and State institutions are
fragile. To tackle that problem, it is essential that the
gains from extractive industries are shared in a society
through a fair, transparent and well-managed process.
Good governance, rule of law and anti-corruption
efforts are indispensable.
The Republic of Korea welcomes international
initiatives aimed at increasing transparency in
extractive industries, such as the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and the Kimberley Process.
We echo the Council’s determination expressed in
resolution 1625 (2005) to take action against illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources and
high-value commodities in areas where such activities
contribute to the outbreak, escalation or continuation of
armed conflict. My delegation would like to make some
suggestions that the Security Council could consider to
further contribute to achieving that end.
First, the Security Council could consider providing
appropriate mandates to peacekeeping and special
political missions to help the Governments concerned
address the economic dimensions of conflict. United

13-3675421

S/PV.6982

Nations missions can advise and assist Governments
with steps to prevent the illegal exploitation of natural
resources.
Secondly, it is imperative that the Council follow
through on the implementation of its sanctions in the
context of natural resources management. The role of
United Nations expert groups should be improved and
enhanced in order to have a proper assessment and
response. Clear mandates and professional perspectives
on natural resources could be reflected in the work of
the United Nations expert groups as necessary. The
Secretariat should also be given an adequate supporting
role, with emphasis placed on improving its function as
a centre for coordination among groups of experts.
Thirdly, with regard to post-conflict situations,
the Security Council needs to further strengthen
its cooperation with other organs within the United
Nations system, such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and the World Bank, in order to establish and conduct
an integrated development and reconstruction
strategy. The natural resources perspective should be
incorporated in the development of peacebuilding and
State-building strategies for countries where extractive
industries are a major source of revenue.
As a related topic, I would like to take the
opportunity today to briefly highlight the security
implications of water resource issues. Factors such
as climate change and economic development have
worsened scarcity and driven up demand for water
resources. Conflicts over transboundary water have
become an emerging security issue. In the light of that,
preventive diplomacy and mediation to address waterrelated conflicts require our renewed attention.

convened today’s open debate on the very important
issue of conflict prevention and natural resources. I
would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, and all other speakers for their
insightful briefings.
It has been widely acknowledged that the illegal
exploitation and ineffective management of natural
resources, particularly non-renewable ones, can raise
serious challenges to international peace and security
by triggering, escalating or protracting conflict around
the global. Often coupled with increasing competition
over scarce renewable resources, the phenomenon
is exacerbated by problems like environmental
degradation, population growth and climate change.
Natural resources play different roles at different
stages of conflict. In one instance, rivalry to control
or gain access to natural resources increases domestic
tensions and weakens social cohesion. A number of
factors, including the systematic marginalization and
exclusion of local communities from the management
of resources, inadequate institutional capacity and legal
frameworks, lack of transparency and equitable sharing
of benefits and the inability to channel revenues into
development programmes are powerful conflict drivers
which can easily turn a country’s resource blessing into
its curse. Today, natural resources are often exploited
by armed groups to fund war and undermine efforts
to build peace. Meanwhile, the natural resources trade
mechanisms, such as the Kimberley Process, are unable
to meet their primary goals.

Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, let me
join others in condemning the recent terrorist attack in
Mogadishu and express our condolences to the families
of victims of that heinous act.

Addressing the underlying causes of natural
resources-driven conflicts requires a multifaceted and
comprehensive approach that entails the spheres of
governance, legislation, economic development and
capacity-building. Immediate and long-term steps
should be taken to avert the occurrence of conflicts
and reduce the impact that exploitation of natural
resources can have during a conflict. Those steps
can include ensuring inclusiveness, transparency and
accountability, establishing mechanisms of equitable
benefit sharing, building proper institutional capacity
and introducing robust legal frameworks. The potential
of natural resources can be fully utilized for postconflict rehabilitation efforts, such as the creation of
conditions for economic recovery, confidence-building
and promoting dialogue.

I would like to start by expressing our gratitude
to the presidency of the Security Council for having

Transparency and accountability are critical
to the effective and responsible management of

To conclude, we believe that today’s debate is
providing constructive insights that could help to better
address the issue of natural resources and conflict.
While expressing our disappointment at not being able
to agree on the draft presidential statement today, we
hope that the Security Council can work together to
develop useful instruments through further discussion
on the issue.

22

13-36754

S/PV.6982

natural resources. Extractive industries generate vast
revenues which, if improperly managed, can lead to
corruption and cause severe economic losses. In that
regard, we emphasize the important role of various
multi-stakeholder voluntary mechanisms that involve
Governments, the private sector and civil society,
including in particular the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI). Being the first EITIcompliant country, Azerbaijan believes that setting
high standards of transparency and accountability in
the extractive industries is an imperative for preserving
macroeconomic stability and achieving long-term
economic growth and sustainable development in a
country.
Natural resources-related problems must for
the most part be addressed in the context of internal
conflicts. Through the Sanctions Committees and
panels of experts, the Security Council has been
consistently seized of the matter in some countries
on its agenda. But it is essential that the impact of
natural resources on inter-State conflicts, particularly
the illegal exploitation of such resources by States
in violation of international law, also receive the due
consideration of the Council within its thematic work.
In the case of foreign military occupation by
one State of the internationally recognized territory
of another, the former tends to actively exploit
natural resources of the country that is the victim of
aggression, resulting in colossal damages to property,
the environment and the economy. That practice and
other illegal activities in occupied territories are
carried out with the sole aim of consolidating military
gains, preventing expelled populations from returning
to their homes and obstructing ongoing efforts aimed at
achieving peace.
Such violations become more flagrant when foreign
companies seek to participate in illegal activities
in contravention of their countries’ international
legal obligations. Therefore, the United Nations
and its Member States must exert vigilance and take
all necessary measures, including through targeted
sanctions, in order to preclude the involvement
of State-owned and private entities in the illegal
exploitation of natural resources located in territories
under foreign military occupation.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First of all, Rwanda strongly
condemns the attack on the United Nations compound

in Mogadishu. We offer our deepest condolences to the
bereaved families.
I would like once again to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and providing the concept
note that serves as the basis for our discussions today
(S/2013/334, annex). I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson, Ms. Anstey, Mr. Annan
and Ms. Grynspan for their comprehensive briefings.
In the past three months, beginning with Rwanda’s
presidency in April, and during the presidency of Togo
in May, the Security Council has been engaged in a
series of debates on the prevention of conflict. In that
spirit, we believe it is right that the Council should
pay attention to factors such as the mismanagement
of natural resources that have been a cause of war and
used to fuel conflict. Debates such as this will better
enable the Council to understand the links between
conflicts and natural resources and thus to enhance
United Nations intervention measures in such conflictprone areas.
There is no doubt that natural resource endowments
have been an economic backbone enabling the
Governments of various countries to advance their
development agendas and lift their citizens out of
poverty. That can be true for States that have learned the
art of effective stewardship of the public good. We have
systems in place to ensure the transparent and equitable
distribution of resources. It goes without saying that in
some parts of the world, including my region, Africa,
that those resources have been a blessing for some and a
curse for others. Many parts of Africa remain in abject
poverty, with poor economic growth and consequently
a lower standard of living. The argument that the more
resources a country has, the greater its economic
growth and prosperity will be, does not hold true. Why
is that the case?
The challenge lies in how efficiently the available
resources are utilized to improve the living standards
of the population. It is imperative that all aspects of the
management and exploitation of natural resources are
pro-people. The fact of the matter is that the exploitation
of resources in Africa has benefited multinational
corporations rather than the development of local
communities. Conflict is inevitable where investment
in natural resources increases rather than decreases the
gap between rich and poor and benefits the elite rather
than the population as a whole. The result, in the long
run, has always been that marginalized groups seeking

13-3675423

S/PV.6982

redress from injustice come up against those who profit
from business ventures. Conflicts then emerge through
clashes between Governments, militia groups and other
actors struggling for resource ownership and control.
Rwanda is of the view that rebuilding governance
and the rule of law, combating corruption, improving
transparency and accountability, and encouraging
the participation of disenfranchised populations can
indeed lead to the effective and equitable management
of natural resources.
It is unfortunate that the illegal exploitation of such
resources can be a factor in prolonging and in some
cases fueling conflict, both in the area of exploitation
and, in some cases, across the borders of neighbouring
countries. We have a scenario in the Great Lakes
region where genocidal or terrorist armed groups such
as the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
and the Lord’s Resistance Army have used the illegal
exploitation of resources in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to cause the insecurity in that country to
affect its neighbours, including Rwanda. Such events
demand the attention of the Security Council so as
to ensure that a country’s mismanagement of natural
resources does not become a source of financial aid to
criminal elements.
The United Nations system and peacekeeping
operations, together with regional and international
actors, can provide collective support and effective
management of the extractive industries. It is crucial
that the United Nations country teams work diligently
to support implementation of voluntary initiatives such
as the Kimberley Process, the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, the Global Reporting
Initiative, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises and the United Nations Global Compact. To
ensure accountable management of natural resources,
for example, the Government of Rwanda has set up a
verification mechanism to help identify the origins of
mineral resources on its territory. The country’s geology
and mines authority has set up a mineral tagging and
selling scheme aimed at curbing the illegal trade in
conflict minerals such as tin, tantalum and tantalites.
The Government ensures that minerals from Rwanda
are verified and traceable right from their source to
smelters. We encourage countries in the region to adopt
similar measures that can contribute to the transparency
of mineral trading in the region.

24

Through
its
various
configurations,
the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) can use its leverage
to ensure that natural-resource considerations are
mainstreamed into its deliberations. In particular,
the PBC can promote the importance of effective
management and incorporate relevant findings into
the integrated peacebuilding strategies developed with
countries on its agenda.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Rwanda’s
call to the United Nations to focus more on institutionand capacity-building for countries in need, and to
ensure that the utilization of natural resources promotes
national development, peace and security, with full
respect for such countries’ sovereignty and right to
control and exploit their natural resources.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, Ms. Caroline Anstey and Ms. Rebeca
Grynspan for their informative briefings today.
Let me begin by expressing the United Kingdom’s
disappointment that the Council was unable to agree
on a presidential statement on this critical issue. I
would like to directly address the concern of a few
Council colleagues that the issue of natural resources
and conflict falls outside the mandate of the Security
Council. That is clearly not true. As almost all
Council members have remarked today, the Council
has frequently had to deal with the ramifications of
poor governance of natural resources, and there are a
significant number of countries on the Council’s agenda
where weak management and illegal exploitation of
natural resources have played a role in triggering,
prolonging or escalating a conflict.
Of course, a country endowed with natural
resources will not inevitably succumb to conflict. On
the contrary, an endowment of oil, gas or minerals
creates a genuine opportunity for growth and prosperity.
So the Council must use all of the tools in its toolbox
to support countries in taking advantage of such
opportunities. Effective sanctions regimes and panels
of experts can play an important role in curtailing the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. Where we have
mandated missions in resource-endowed countries,
the United Nations can provide high-level political
advice and support to national Governments on these
issues, help build the capacity of national institutions,
strengthen the rule of law and tackle corruption. In

13-36754

S/PV.6982

order to do that effectively, missions must work in close
coordination with the United Nations country teams,
international financial institutions and regional and
international actors.
But United Nations support for national
Governments is only one part of the picture. National
leaders in resource-endowed countries must commit to
building strong, transparent and inclusive institutions
to ensure that their extractive industries do not fall
prey to corruption or become a source of conflict. The
private sector and civil society are crucial partners
in that endeavour. The private sector should ensure
that its operations respect human rights and take into
account the needs of local communities, including
through implementation of the Voluntary Principles
on Security and Human Rights and the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
And an active and vibrant civil society can shine a light
on corruption, and ensure that companies and national
Governments are held accountable for how they manage
extractive industries.
Yesterday, at the Group of Eight (G-8) Summit,
leaders recognized the potential of natural resources as
a key driver of strong, sustainable growth, if managed
responsibly. They agreed to take action to raise global
standards for extractives’ transparency, and to make
progress towards common global reporting standards,
both for countries with significant domestic extractive
industries and for the homes of large multinational
corporations.
In recent years, a number of international initiatives
have helped to entrench an expectation of transparency,
and many of them were endorsed by the G-8 yesterday.
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative is
an excellent example of this, and I am proud that the
United Kingdom formally signed up to it this year.
Likewise, since its start 10 years ago, the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme has made huge progress
in curtailing the flow of diamond revenues to rebel
groups. Conflict diamonds are now estimated to
represent a fraction of one percent of the international
trade in diamonds. In addition, the OECD’s Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-affected and High-Risk
Areas — of which the United Kingdom is a leading
advocate — helps to build transparent supply chains,
which in turn helps companies to respect human rights.

A number of countries on the Council’s agenda
have adopted those initiatives, and we should make
sure that United Nations missions are equipped to
implement them. The United Kingdom is doing
its part. For example, we are providing support to
Sierra Leone and Afghanistan to help them develop
appropriate legislation for their mining sectors, build
their capacity to negotiate contracts with the private
sector and establish independent audit functions. We
will use our chairmanship of the Voluntary Principles
on Security and Human Rights in March 2014 to
improve transparency and accountability in their
implementation.
A natural resource endowment brings with it
enormous stakes. It can bring considerable risks,
especially in countries affected by conflict. The
Security Council should be prepared to act when those
risks threaten peace and security. But we should also
see natural resources as an opportunity for countries
emerging from conflict. Managed well, they can hold
the key to prosperity, growth and self-sufficiency. We
must do all we can to help countries achieve this.
I resume my function as President of the Security
Council.
I should like to thank Mr. Annan for his contribution
to, and his participation in, today’s debate.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to not more than four minutes in order to allow the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Denmark.
Mr. Friis Bach (Denmark): At the outset, my
delegation would like to join others in condemning
today’s terrorist attack on the United Nations offices
in Somalia in the strongest possible fashion, and to
express our since condolences. It is a cowardly act that
will not impede the establishment of a peaceful and
stable Somalia.
On behalf of the Nordic countries — Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark — I am
honoured to address the Council on the important issue
of conflict-prevention and natural resources. The issue
deserves serious attention and is also the mark of an
effective preventive diplomacy.

13-3675425

S/PV.6982

Please note that a longer and more detailed version
of this statement is being distributed.
The root causes behind the eruption and continuation
of any violent conflict often involve a complex pattern of
political and economic factors. It is a paradox that many
of the poorest and most conflict-affected countries are
simultaneously very rich in natural resources. We must
strive to ensure that natural resources become a force
for positive change and development.
The illicit extraction of natural resources has many
repercussions, not least illicit financial flows, which
negatively impact economic development. Such flows
undermine state-building and, ultimately, democracy,
promote corruption, result in poor investments,
facilitate crime and terrorism, and destabilize the
financial system, to cite several examples.
Governments, donors, the private sector and civil
society need to take a multi-faceted, integrated approach
in addressing conflicts with regard to non-renewable
natural resources. First, such an approach should take
account of establishing and enforcing a regulatory
framework for natural resource management. Secondly,
attention must be paid to transparency and accountability
in public-sector expenditure. Thirdly, there is a need
for security sector reform and a rule-of-law approach,
including the training of police, border management,
governance, sound public financial management,
human rights and land rights. Fourthly, reconciliation
and the creation of options for viable livelihoods for
people affected by the extraction operations must be
fostered.
A number of international processes and
actors — many of them supported by the Nordic
countries — are active in the field of conflict-prevention
and natural resources. One central actor that we would
like to highlight is the Peacebuilding Commission, which
plays an important role in encouraging and promoting
coherence, coordination and knowledge-sharing at all
levels, and between processes and stakeholders that are
of paramount importance.
I welcome today’s debate as the co-chair of
the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding, together with the Finance Minister of
Timor-Leste, and to which all the Nordic Countries are
committed.
The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
emanating from the Dialogue, defines five peace- and

26

state-building goals, among them the need to create
economic functions and ensure State revenues that
in turn will safeguard public service delivery. In that
regard, equitable natural resource management is on
the agenda as an essential and contributory factor to
a durable and sustainable peace as the main building
block for long-term development.
I would like to highlight the importance of
respecting country-led and country-owned strategies.
It is crucial that we support the ground-breaking
work undertaken by the Group of Seven Plus States.
Businesses have a clear interest in promoting peace,
security and stability and in ensuring that natural
resources are a blessing, not a curse. We therefore
encourage them to engage proactively in voluntary
initiatives in this field — the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, the Kimberley Process, the
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and
the United Nations Global Compact. In that regard,
we need multi-stakeholder consultative processes and
the participation of youth, women and marginalized
groups.
We commend the Secretary-General for his
proposal to establish a partnership facility. We believe
that the international financial institutions have a
crucial partnership role to play in managing natural
resources. Public income and expenditure reviews are
critical, as are requisite regulatory frameworks and
procedures.
We must strengthen existing local structures that
promote conflict-free mining, such as the Regional
Certification Mechanism of the International Conference
of the Great Lakes Region and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas.
The international community, especially the United
Nations, should strive to improve coordination on the
ground and support the implementation of the OECD
Due Diligence Guidance. International partners should
ensure that the Guidance is better known and used by
their agencies and field offices.
Lastly, civil society has a crucial and active role
to play in resolving disputes and in holding States and
businesses accountable. In that regard, civil society and
free media should serve as our watchdog to monitor
compliance with standards and oversight arrangements
in order to improve transparency in extractive industries

13-36754

S/PV.6982

and in Governments’ management of their resource
revenues.

the resumption of political dialogue and negotiations to
achieve a peaceful solution.

Let this important issue unite us and compel us
to exert greater efforts in future. Unfortunately, today
the Council did not make any statement on this very
important topic, but we thank it for the dialogue and
the debate.

The role of the international community in
supporting regional organizations and countries with
natural resources is another factor in ensuring that
conflicts can either be prevented or resolved. For
example, in 2008, the African Union adopted the
Africa Mining Vision. The support of our international
partners will also extend to helping States develop
strong, accountable and transparent Government
institutions that can regulate their extractive industries.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission is also
critical to supporting States emerging from conflict
to develop the necessary capacity for the effective
management of their natural resources and ensuring
respect for national ownership.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): My delegation
would like to join others who expressed their
condemnation and disgust at the unfortunate attacks
on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu. Our
condolences go to all those affected.
My delegation wishes to thank the President of
the Council for convening this debate on conflictprevention and natural resources. We also wish to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, UnderSecretary-General and Associate Administrator for
the United Nations Development Programme Rebeca
Grynspan, World Bank Managing Director Caroline
Anstey and Mr. Kofi Annan, Chair of the African
Progress Panel, for their statements to the Council this
morning.
Unfortunately, natural resources are a persistent
contributory factor in fuelling instability and conflict
across the globe. Countries endowed with natural
resources should ideally harness those invaluable
resources to improve socioeconomic conditions. South
Africa believes that, through the United Nations, the
international community has an obligation to eradicate
the nefarious factors behind intra-State and inter-State
conflicts that are fuelled by the struggle over natural
resources. Often such conflicts devastate States by
destroying already underdeveloped infrastructure,
undermine peacebuilding and fuel conflicts through
competition for access to natural resources.
In that context, we believe that Council sanctions
are an important tool for the international community
to ensure that revenues from natural resources do not
further fuel conflicts. We also believe that the work
of the Security Council should be seen in that regard.
While recognizing that the Security Council may
be called upon to impose coercive measures, such as
sanctions, we believe that such measures should be
exercised with great caution and only be used to support

There are several examples of various largely stable
resource-exporting countries where natural resources
have contributed to long-term economic growth. In
those countries, the resources with which they are
endowed have not necessarily led to violent conflict.
Rather, we have experienced major improvements in
the quality of life of the people. Clearly, the mechanism
through which natural resources induce conflict are
deeply rooted in economic and social structures. In
that respect, the acknowledged importance of the
governance and management of natural resources as the
core tools of conflict prevention should lead countries
to developing effective responses to the challenges
posed by the mismanagement of natural resources.
In that regard, national legislation and regulation
for the effective management of natural resources
is critical to ensuring that the risks emanating from
natural resources are reduced. Counter-measures
such as revenue-sharing, resumed social spending,
transparency and anti-corruption initiatives are some
of the ways by which tensions and conflict can be
reduced, if not avoided.
The Kimberley Process certification scheme is an
example of such a mechanism. That United Nationsendorsed multi-stakeholder process, which South
Africa has the honour to chair this year, involves
more than 50 Governments, the European Union, the
diamond industry and civil society. The process has
established a set of minimum acceptable international
standards for national certification schemes relating to
the trade in rough diamonds. The certification scheme
ensures that the rough-diamond trade does not finance
violence by rebel movements and their allies seeking

13-3675427

S/PV.6982

to undermine legitimate Governments. This year we
celebrate 10 years of the international implementation
of the Kimberley Process. We must acknowledge
that the Kimberly Process has been instrumental in
stemming the flow of rough diamonds from rebelheld conflict areas, thereby contributing substantially
to peace efforts. The Kimberly Process has also had a
significant developmental impact in improving the lives
of people dependent upon trade in rough diamonds.
In conclusion, South Africa recognizes that farreaching shifts in the global economic order over
recent years have created a fundamentally new
configuration of natural resource markets and trading
relations, as well as competition over real or perceived
natural-resource scarcity. However, the fundamental
changes should not provide an excuse for anybody to
ignore the strife created by international corruption in
the natural-resource sector. We should not ignore the fact
that parties involved in armed conflict have developed
access to the external markets of the developed world
to dispose of these resources. That makes the role of
traders, transport companies, international banks and
transnational corporations a critical part of this debate.
On the other hand, the home Governments of those
involved in trading with rebels, smugglers and arms
traders must also hold those entities who are involved
accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Machado (Brazil): At the outset, I would like
to join other speakers in condemning the appalling
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu
and in expressing our condolences to the families of the
victims.
On the issue before us today, as in many others,
the link between security, development and sustainable
peace is quite evident, and it is appropriate for this
body to continue to reflect on that crucial relationship.
I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
and Mr. Annan for their briefings.
The link between natural resources and conflict
prevention has been considered by this Council before.
It is relevant that the Council reflect on a number of
important elements in the ongoing discussion about how
to avoid natural resources from feeding armed conflict
and to recognize that peacebuilding strategies can play
a role in gearing the exploitation of natural resources

28

towards sustainable development and concrete peace
dividends.
It is certainly important for the Council to make
its contribution, within its competencies, to the fight
against the illegal exploitation and trafficking in natural
resources, where they relate to armed conflict. At the
same time, as widely recognized, there are no necessary
or mechanical linkages between the exploitation of
natural resources and armed conflict. On the contrary,
such resources are generally an important source of
prosperity and stability, and they must be seen as such.
It is also crucial to look at the international demand
for natural resources as a decisive part of our collective
effort to prevent natural resources from fuelling
armed conflict. In 1998, in his report entitled “The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa” (S/1998/318),
Secretary-General Annan called attention to the impact
that business interests in natural resources could have
on the success or failure of peace efforts. Since then,
progress has surely been made.
Now it is time to further articulate conflict
prevention and the demand side of the equation. Due
diligence is certainly an important tool in that regard,
and has helped address the problem. More is needed,
however, to identify new means to stop such resources
from fuelling armed conflict. We believe that could
matter in the further reflection and work of the Security
Council, as well as that of the General Assembly and
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The sound exploitation of natural resources is,
for many States in conflict or post-conflict situations,
the single most important vehicle for economic
development. The international community, including
the Security Council, within its competencies, should do
more to assist such countries. We must help strengthen
national ownership and the State institutions necessary
to exercise national oversight over natural resources,
as well as to develop or consolidate policies to ensure
that the extractive industry always serves development
and not war. When State sovereignty is fully exercised
in the exploitation of natural resources, fewer are the
chances of their misuse for fuelling conflict.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its support for
actions and strategies — here and in other forums, in
full respect for the mandates of each — that help ensure
that natural resources in conflict-affected States are a

13-36754

S/PV.6982

powerful tool of development with social justice, and
therefore, stability and peace.

Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to add my
voice to those who have condemned the terrorist attack
on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu, and my
condolences to the families of those killed and affected.

solutions feasible. In this context, sufficient capacity is
indispensable to ensuring compliance. Corruption needs
to be fought and impunity ended. Closer cooperation
among countries in which actors exploiting and using
natural resources operate should be pursued. With
regard to due diligence mechanisms, quality and the
independence of audits need to be ensured. Addressing
the problem of conflict minerals therefore also requires
political solutions and further steps.

The effective and transparent management of
natural resources matters. Natural resources are
still fuelling conflicts, both internal and between
States. Many countries rich in natural resources are
immersed in poverty because of mismanagement of
these resources and corruption. We therefore welcome
today’s open debate and the United Kingdom’s initiative
to explore — in the context of maintaining international
peace and security — ways how to strengthen
responsible management of extractive industries. We
also regret that it was not possible to agree on a draft
presidential statement.

In Africa, the African Union and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in this
field. Germany welcomes their efforts and supports
them, as well as projects to strengthen good governance
of mineral resources in a number of countries.
Germany also backs the United Nations Global
Compact, which assists companies and investors and
facilitates constructive discussions on how to engage
in conflict-affected and high-risk areas in compliance
with United Nations standards, including the principles
of anti-corruption, human rights and respect for the
environment.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to stress the following points.

The support of United Nations actors also
remains key. We want to specifically encourage the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to engage in the
capacity-building of national administrations as the
successful implementation of control and regulating
initiatives depend on functioning administrations and
their integrity. PBC engagement to support the fight
against corruption in affected countries also remains
crucial.

The President: I call on the representative of
Germany.

Financial transparency in the extractive industries
and the transparency of supply in case of mineral
imports from conflict regions are in our view crucial
to help reduce the potential for conflict and to deter
corruption. Germany therefore supports the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the Kimberley
Process, and we very much welcome the discussion that
took place at the Summit of the Group of Eight.
In the Security Council, we have actively
supported setting out clear standards of supply-chain
due diligence for businesses using minerals from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance
with the guidelines of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. Furthermore, Germany
is leading a certification and traceability initiative to
establish certified trading chains in Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for minerals and
natural resources, fostering the efforts of the local
mining authorities and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).
However, such technical solutions alone cannot
stop the trade in minerals from fuelling conflicts. That
requires governance in resource-exporting countries
based on the rule of law to make such technical

Furthermore, we believe that sanctions against
traders of natural resources and companies dealing
with armed groups could contribute to strengthening
the effective management of extractive industries.
Existing sanctions regimes, including the regime for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, provide for
this option. It should be applied wherever feasible. In
this context, we would also like to raise awareness of
a growing concern that, like poorly managed natural
resources, contributes to conflicts and regional
instability — namely, poaching and the illicit trade of
wildlife. We urgently need new strategies and more
international efforts to address the increase in illegal
wildlife exploitation. Exploring options for the United
Nations to address the negative impact of poaching on
peace and security will be at the core of a policy forum
we will hold in cooperation with the International Peace
Institute tomorrow at the Institute’s headquarters. All
Member States are cordially invited to attend.

13-3675429

S/PV.6982

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I join you, Sir, and others
in condemning the barbaric and cowardly attack on the
United Nations compound in Mogadishu, and convey
my condolences to all the bereaved.
I wish to commend you and the delegation of the
United Kingdom on your leadership of the Security
Council this month. I also thank you for convening this
debate on the important topic of conflict prevention and
natural resources. We also thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Mr. Jan Eliasson, Africa Progress Panel Chair
Mr. Kofi Annan, Wor1d Bank Managing Director
Ms. Caroline Anstey, and Under-Secretary-General
and Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme Ms. Rebeca Grynspan for
their insightful briefings.
We acknowledge that peace, security, development
and human rights are closely linked and mutually
reinforcing. In this context, it is essential to intensify
efforts aimed at ensuring that conflicts are prevented
through comprehensive strategies that address their
root causes. My delegation would like to stress that
the primary responsibility for preventing conflicts
lies with individual Member States and that initiatives
undertaken within subregional, regional or United
Nations frameworks should support and complement
the roles of national Governments.
The African Union (AU), in this regard, has shown
its resolve to address the root causes of conflicts on
the continent, including through the African Charter
on Democracy, Elections and Governance; the African
Peer Review Mechanism; the Continental Early
Warning System, the Panel of the Wise, and the AU
Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development Policy.
On the issue of conflict prevention and natural
resources, I would like to make four points.
First, endowment with and harnessing of natural
resources — minerals, water, fisheries, forests, oil,
natural gas, coal and so on — provides countries with
significant opportunities for national development.
Uganda reaffirms the principle of permanent
sovereignty over natural resources as an inalienable
right that must be exercised in the interest of national
development and the well-being of the population.
Secondly, when countries’ natural resources are
well managed and the revenues generated are utilized

30

to spur economic growth through investment in critical
areas such as economic diversification, infrastructure
development, education and health, numerous benefits
are derived. These include employment creation and
improvement in livelihoods, which contribute to laying
a strong foundation for peace and socioeconomic
development. This is one of the ways of avoiding the
so-called resource curse, or the paradox of countries
and regions with abundant natural resources, especially
non-renewable resources like minerals and fuels,
tending to have less economic growth and worse
development outcomes than countries with fewer
natural resources.
Thirdly, natural resources can and often do cause
conflicts within countries if they are not properly
managed, as different groups and factions fight for their
share, while other conflicts may arise out of attempts
to control and exploit resources or the allocation of
the revenues accrued. In other cases, access to natural
resource revenues by belligerents through illegal
exploitation can fuel or prolong conflicts. There have
also been cases of inter-State conflict over natural
resources.
We therefore emphasize the need to intensify
national, regional and international efforts to improve
natural-resource management through the sharing
of best practices and such measures as stabilization
funds,
subregional
development
programmes,
revenue-sharing regimes and transparency initiatives.
Additional measures may include local programmes
that compensate for the negative impacts of resource
exploitation through programmes for environmental
protection, infrastructure development and employment
creation.
In conclusion, we recognize the importance of
commodity monitoring and certification schemes
and initiatives such as the Kimberly Process and the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, as well as
other tools aimed at curbing the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, including through raising awareness
among the private sector and all stakeholders. Atthe
same time, Uganda underscores the need to promote
legitimate trade in natural resources for economic
growth and development.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.

13-36754

S/PV.6982

Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
First, I would like to join previous speakers in
condemning in the strongest terms the attacks that
took place today at the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu. Our deepest sympathies and condolences
go to the families and friends of those affected by this
heinous crime.
We welcome the initiative taken by the United
Kingdom to hold this open debate on conflict
prevention and natural resources. However, we regret
that the Council was unable to speak in one voice on
this important issue.
I would also like to thank the Deputy-Secretary
General, World Bank Managing Director Caroline
Anstey, Mr. Kofi Annan, as Africa Progress Panel
Chair, and Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme Rebeca Grynspan
for their statements.
Managing, extracting and exploiting natural
mineral resources are often cited as key factors in
triggering, escalating or sustaining violent conflicts.
There is also a worrying correlation between military
activity linked to the illegal extraction of natural
resources and episodes of sexual violence.
For instance, the African Great Lakes region is
characterized both by instability and mineral-rich
soils. The illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural
resources has led to the development of a number of
initiatives. Some are aimed at delinking the trade in
minerals sourced from the control of armed groups,
while others aim to promote good governance and
transparency of financial revenues and the adoption of
responsible business principles.
The impact of those and other existing initiatives
has to be assessed against their objectives; they
cannot address the root causes of violence and
instability by themselves. Experience shows that a
more comprehensive approach is needed to break the
linkages between instability and violent conflict in

mineral-rich countries, one that deploys the full range of
development, trade, security and diplomatic instruments
at the disposal of the international community and that
ensures a human rights perspective.
For its part, the European Union has focused
on promoting conflict-sensitive management of the
international diamond trade and the forestry sector, as
well as on the transparency of the revenues generated
by the extractive industry. We have adopted policy
frameworks and business standards relevant to the
promotion of transparency in the supply chains. The
following are some examples.
The European Union played a crucial role in
setting up and implementing the Kimberley Process
certification scheme. The Kimberly Process needs to
be strengthened to meet future challenges in the global
diamond-supply chain and provide assurances for
consumers that diamonds are not tainted by violence.
One of the unique features of the Kimberly Process is
its tripartite structure, which involves Governments,
industry and civil society. We take this opportunity
to call on all parties involved to recognize the full
diversity of opinions within and about the Kimberly
Process and to continue to work together to enhance
the scheme’s credibility.
The EU also supports the Regional Initiative
against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
launched by the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). The EU will provide
technical assistance that will contribute to building
the capacity of the ICGLR and its member States’
national administrations in relation to natural resources
and conflicts, notably through the establishment of a
regional certification scheme.
With regard to the United Nations, the Eureopean
Union is fostering an inter-agency approach through
the EU-United Nations Partnership on Natural
Resources and Conflict Prevention, as well as with
the World Bank and other international stakeholders.
Participating agencies are leveraging their respective
skills and knowledge to better assist third countries in
preventing and addressing natural-resources-related
conflicts. Furthermore, the EU takes note of the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission and encourages it
to enhance its interaction with the Security Council
in this area. The European Union also supports
the implementation of the United Nations guiding
principles on business and human rights.

13-3675431

S/PV.6982

The European Union is funding the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative. With regard to
internal legislation, in 2011 the European Commission
proposed a reform of the accounting and transparency
directive that requires EU oil, gas, mining and timber
companies to publish specific payments to partner
Governments. The reform was politically agreed in May
2013, and we envisage its entry into force in August.
The EU has also adopted the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-affected and High-risk
Areas. In addition, the European Commission is
considering a comprehensive EU supply chain initiative
for the responsible sourcing of minerals originating
from conflict areas. In that respect, the European
Commission launched a public consultation in March
to gather views from stakeholders. On that basis, the
Commission expects to publish a communication and a
legislative proposal later this year.
In our experience, it is important that the
international community, including the Security
Council and the relevant United Nations bodies, build
on existing initiatives and seek convergence and
complementarities. Inclusiveness and the partnership
of all stakeholders at all stages of the value chain are
also essential.
Finally, natural resources play a critical role
in fuelling and financing conflict, but also in
creating strategic incentives for peacebuilding and
peace-supporting action. Peace agreements have to
create conditions in which belligerents have more of
an incentive to become part of a peace economy than
to remain in the shadow economy. The implementation
of legitimate methods of exploitation and trade for
concerned minerals should be encouraged by specific
incentives. It is therefore important that all initiatives
be undertaken pursuant to relevant international law,
include appropriate safeguards and are carefully
evaluated for their impact on domestic reform, conflict,
poverty and insecurity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to resolutely condemn the attacks
against the United Nations that took place this morning
in Mogadishu. On behaf of my country, I wish to convey

32

our deepest sympathies to those affected by the attacks
and to their families.
Referring to natural resources as a curse may seem
paradoxical and even cynical. But there is no denying
the fact that the Earth’s greatest natural wealth is often
found side by side with great human misery. The fight
over natural resources is often the trigger for and a cause
of conflicts, while the exploitation of natural resources
is a source of funds that can prolong conflicts. I would
therefore like to thank the United Kingdom’s presidency
of the Security Council for this important debate.
We agree with those who say that the legal,
transparent and sustainable management of natural
resources is essential to preventing conflict and
safeguarding human rights. Furthermore, the equitable
distribution of revenue from the exploitation of and
trade in natural resources can contribute sustainably to
human well-being, stability and peacebuilding.
The main responsibility in that respect lies with
those States on whose territory natural resources are
being extracted. But the United Nations and donors
can also play a role by assisting the States concerned,
at their request, on the basis of full respect for their
sovereignty. Such support can take various forms, from
strengthening governmental capacities and institutions
to consolidating the rule of law in fragile States and in
post-conflict situations.
A significant number of missions mandated by
the Security Council, along with country teams, are
operating in countries where extractive industries play
a major economic role. It is therefore essential that such
United Nations mandates take due account of the link
between conflict and natural resources and facilitate
our efforts to help national Governments to manage
their extractive industries. Given its composition, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission seems to
us to be an institution ideally suited to promoting a
management of natural resources that takes due account
of conflicts.
It is just as important that private-sector actors,
particularly multinational companies involved in
large-scale projects in fragile environments, adopt
approaches that take account of conflict and human
rights. All stakeholders — the Governments of the host
countries and of countries where mining companies
are headquartered, international organizations, private
enterprise and civil society — must bear their share
of responsibility. Switzerland expects that those

13-36754

S/PV.6982

international companies that are headquartered there
will comply with the legal provisions currently in force,
meet their human rights due-diligence obligations and
refrain from contributing to conflicts. That applies in
particular to complex environments where the rule of
law remains insufficiently developed and to conflict
zones.
To that end, Switzerland is committed to the
promotion of United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights. It is an active participant
in international initiatives and certification processes,
such as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, of which Switzerland is a Board member, the
Kimberley Process, and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development Due Diligence Guidance
for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas.
Switzerland is convinced that partnerships among
the various stakeholders — Governments, the private
sector and civil society — are pivotal and calls on those
countries that do not yet participate in such partnerships
to join them.
Switzerland currently holds the chairmanship of
the initiative on Voluntary Principles on Security and
Human Rights, aimed at companies that are active
in the extractive and energy sectors, and is working
to strengthen its implementation. We believe that the
Voluntary Principles can play a key role in preventing
conflicts linked to the exploitation of natural resources
by encouraging companies to analyse risks and enter
into a genuine dialogue with communities, local
authorities, and public and private security forces.
We encourage the Council to continue its
deliberations on the available instruments for the
sustainable management of natural resources by
focusing on the issues of transparency and compliance
with human rights in the exploitation of and trade in
natural resources.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to echo the strong condemnation
and condolences that others have expressed in this
Chamber in connection with the attack that took place
in Mogadishu.
Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on having
convened this debate on natural resources and on the

positive contribution that the transparent management
of extractive industries can make to preventing such
conflicts. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Eliasson; Ms. Anstey; Ms. Grynspan; and Mr. Kofi
Annan for their briefings.
Belgium associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
The link between natural resources and conflict
is particularly important to Belgium. My country
convened an initial debate (see S/PV.5705) on this issue
in 2007, during its presidency of the Security Council,
which led to the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2007/22).
In recent years there have been a growing number
of initiatives aimed at promoting the transparent
management of natural resources, in particular in the
extractive industries. A number of them have already
been mentioned by other speakers. I would just refer
to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
process, the Kimberley Process, the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas,
the International Organization of la Francophonie
Resolution on Good Governance in the Extractive and
Forestry Industries, the Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights, as well as the Global Compact
initatives. At the regional level, I would stress the
African Mining Vision adopted by the African Union.
When the Security Council considers a situation in
which poor management of the extractive industry is
likely to play a role in conflict, several tools are already
at its disposal to meet that challenge. Mediation efforts
in the natural-resources sector are regularly conducted
by the United Nations and other actors. Sanctions
relating to the extractive industries have been adopted,
for example in the form of embargoes. Expert groups
and panels associated with the sanctions committees are
also working on the issue. Finally, several peacekeeping
missions or special political missions have been given
mandates that include work in the area of natural
resources, in support of national Governments.
In future, the Security Council could consider
stronger action in this area through an integrated,
cross-cutting response based on existing tools. Such a
response should take into account the contribution and
value added of United Nations system organizations in
areas that are key to good governance, including reform

13-3675433

S/PV.6982

of the security sector, the promotion of the rule of law
and capacity-building.
In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission could
play an important role by clarifying for the Council the
challenges and issues related to natural resources, by
promoting a coherent and coordinated approach among
the actors involved, and by supporting the efforts of the
countries on its agenda.
Such response should consider all phases and
dimensions of the conflict, such as early warning in
the case of violence, including human rights violations
related to the exploitation of natural resources;
preventing the resumption of violence; and the signing
of peace agreements. It should also be based on the
overall peacebuilding process.
In that context, we must stress, as many speakers
have done, the crucial importance of ownership by and
accountability on the part of States in the governance
of natural resources. Each State has the sovereign right
to control and exploit its resources, in accordance with
the Charter and the principles of international law. It is
therefore up to States to establish solid and transparent
governance at the institutional, legislative and
regulatory levels, in order to reduce any vulnerability
to conflict related to a form of resource management
characterized by a lack of transparency or corruption.
It is also up to them to ensure that they have policies in
place that will make it possible to invest revenue from
the exploitation of natural resources in the country’s
future, to the benefit of the entire population.

34

Moreover, the governance of extractive industries
requires the support of all international partners, in
particular in enhancing capacity. It must be based on
regional and subregional cooperation. It requires the
close involvement and active engagement of the private
sector and civil society, as well as coordination among
the Governments concerned, United Nations entities and
regional organizations. Finally, we must remember that
the prevention and fight against the trafficking, illegal
exploitation and illegal trade in natural resources are
based on cooperation and shared responsibility among
countries of origin, transit and destination.
As we have heard this morning, the management
of natural resources is not related exclusively to
conflicts. This gives me the opportunity to draw
attention to an initiative of Belgium and Gabon that
is soon to be presented to the General Assembly. As
has been mentioned during this debate, many national,
regional and international initiatives relating to the
transparent management of natural resources have
been launched in recent years. The useful lessons for
sustainable development that have emerged should be
shared with all Member States. Our draft resolution to
the General Assembly thus aims to promote sustainable
development through transparency in the management
of natural resources.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

13-36754
