S/PRST/2004/24

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 July 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5003rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 July 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its previous decisions concerning the
situation in Somalia, in particular the statement of its President of 25 February
2004 (S/PRST/2004/3) and welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of
June 2004 (S/2004/469), reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of the
country, consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council reiterates its firm support for the Somali national
reconciliation process and the ongoing Somali National Reconciliation
Conference in Kenya, launched under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), and commends the IGAD leaders and in
particular the Government of Kenya for their efforts in the search for peace in
Somalia. The Council also commends the international observers for their
active engagement in the process.
“The Security Council welcomes the outcome of the Fifth, Sixth, and
Seventh IGAD Ministerial Facilitation Committee Meetings on the Somali
National Reconciliation Conference, which demonstrated the coherent regional
approach and commitment of IGAD member States to national reconciliation
in Somalia.
“The Security Council welcomes the launching of Phase III of the Somali
National Reconciliation Conference, and encourages all parties to continue in
their ongoing efforts to move the process forward and agree on a durable and
inclusive solution to the conflict in Somalia and the establishment of a
transitional federal government for Somalia.
“The Security Council recognizes that, while the establishment of a
transitional federal government will be an important step towards establishing
sustainable peace and stability in Somalia, much effort will lie ahead if this
objective is to be achieved. The Council emphasizes the need for the new
government, once formed, to engage with the international community and to

04-42577 (E) 140704

*0442577*

S/PRST/2004/24

use the transition period constructively for the purposes of reconciliation,
stability and reconstruction.
“The Security Council reiterates that the Somali parties should abide by
and implement expeditiously the Eldoret Declaration of 27 October 2002 on
the cessation of hostilities (S/2002/1359), and calls on the Somali parties to
continue working towards a comprehensive security arrangement for Somalia.
“The Security Council reiterates that the Somali parties themselves bear
the main responsibility of achieving a comprehensive ceasefire throughout
Somalia. The Council calls on the Somali parties to fully implement the
ceasefire, to ensure security, and to resolve their differences through peaceful
means.
“The Security Council condemns those who obstruct the peace process,
in this regard fully supports the warning of the IGAD ministers, and reiterates
that those who persist on the path of confrontation and conflict will be held
accountable. The Council will continue to monitor the situation closely.
“The Security Council welcomes the decision by the African Union to
dispatch a Reconnaissance Mission to prepare the ground for the deployment
of military monitors to Somalia, and calls upon Somali leaders to cooperate
with this initiative.
“The Security Council calls on the international community to continue
to support IGAD in its facilitation of the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference, and calls on the donor countries and organizations to contribute to
the Conference, the United Nations Trust Fund for Peace-building in Somalia
and the United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Somalia.
“The Security Council reiterates serious concern regarding the
humanitarian situation in Somalia, and calls on Somali leaders to facilitate the
delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance and to assure the safety of all
international and national aid workers.
“The Security Council reiterates its concern over the continued flow of
weapons and ammunition supplies to Somalia, commends the work of the
Monitoring Group established pursuant to resolution 1519 (2003) of 16
December 2003, and urges relevant States and entities to comply scrupulously
with the arms embargo and to cooperate with the Monitoring Group.
“The Security Council commends the work of Mr. Winston Tubman, the
Representative of the Secretary-General, welcomes his visit of the region in
support of the IGAD sponsored Somali peace process, and encourages him to
continue his facilitation efforts.
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s meeting with
the Somali parties on 8 July 2004 in Mbagathi, Kenya, requests the SecretaryGeneral to keep the Council regularly informed on developments at the Somali
National Reconciliation Conference and to make timely recommendations on
what additional measures could be taken by the Council in support of the
Conference and its outcome.”

2
