United Nations

S/PV.6347

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6347th meeting
Tuesday, 29 June 2010, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gómez Robledo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. McLeod

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Letter dated 18 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/322)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-42676 (E)

*1042676*

S/PV.6347

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace
and security
Letter dated 18 June 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Mexico to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/322)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Australia, Botswana, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Guatemala, Italy, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Peru, the Republic of Korea, Solomon Islands, South
Africa and Switzerland, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Patricia O’Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and Legal
Counsel of the United Nations.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. O’Brien to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should also like to inform the members of the
Council that I have received a letter from His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, in which he requests to
be invited, in his capacity as acting head of the

2

delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Serrano.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Pedro Serrano to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2010/322, which contains a
letter dated 18 June 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Mexico to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro,
Deputy Secretary-General, and by Ms. Patricia
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and Legal Counsel of the United Nations.
I now invite the Deputy Secretary-General to take
the floor.
Ms. Migiro: Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. The Secretariat welcomes the
opportunity to review progress in strengthening the
rule of law in the maintenance of peace and security.
Mexico has been a steadfast friend of the rule of law
here in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly. Its leadership, in cooperation with
Liechtenstein, has been instrumental in establishing the
near-system-wide arrangements for the rule of law,
which I chair.
The rule of law is a broad and complex concept
imbedded in the history of all cultures and nations, as
well as in the longstanding efforts of States to create an
international community based on law. Accordingly,
the United Nations has a broad and ambitious agenda
in this area, which is not easily realized and is often
underestimated. A look back at the debates of 2004 and
2006 makes it clear that the Council and the

10-42676

S/PV.6347

Organization as a whole have been moving in the right
direction.
It is significant that this debate has expanded,
from a focus on the rule of law in war-torn societies, to
include strengthening the rule of law at the
international level. This evolution reflects the
Council’s
special
responsibility
to
maintain
international peace and security in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law under the
United Nations Charter. It also recognizes that the
mutually reinforcing links between the rule of law at
the national and international levels are substantial and
multifaceted. And it is rooted in the fundamental
principle that the Organization must act in accordance
with fundamental standards of human rights in its own
activities, operations and practices. Adherence to the
rule of law begins at home. As the world faces new and
evolving threats to international peace and security
such as transnational organized crime, terrorism and
piracy, the Security Council should place the rule of
law at the centre of its response.
Strengthening national laws, security and justice
systems in a sustainable and nationally owned manner
is vital. Action at the international, regional and
domestic levels must be aligned and grounded in
international norms and standards. The principle that
all individuals and entities, including States, are
accountable to the law lies at the heart of the rule of
law at both the national and international levels. All
mechanisms — judicial and non-judicial — that secure
compliance with or enforce international law require
strengthening.
The International Court of Justice has a special
role to play in the peaceful settlement of disputes
before intractable conflict and post-conflict situations
arise. Strengthening the relationship between the
Council and the Court will fortify the rule of law.
When prevention fails, we need to help fill the rule-oflaw vacuum that often ensues. The Council has
developed new ways to promote compliance with
international humanitarian law and to better protect
civilians, particularly children and women caught up in
armed conflict. By establishing ad hoc and hybrid
tribunals, the Council has been at the forefront of the
campaign for individual accountability for crimes
under international law.
This month we witnessed a historic agreement on
the definition of aggression, by States parties to the

10-42676

Rome Statute. The Council has a unique role in
furthering the fight against impunity. In that realm, the
link between international and national rule of law is
clear. As a prevention tool, the United Nations should
prioritize security, access to justice and legal protection
for all in order to make it more likely that disputes
within society are resolved through legal, rather than
violent, means. Assisting the host countries of
peacekeeping operations to strengthen their justice and
security institutions in accordance with these standards
is central to sustainable peace.
In response to international crimes, the United
Nations must redouble its efforts to build national
capacities to hold alleged perpetrators accountable.
One promising initiative is the effort to create a
deployable team of rule-of-law experts to assist
national authorities in addressing sexual violence in
armed conflict, as mandated in resolution 1888 (2009).
Rule-of-law activities have also been bolstered by the
Peacebulding Commission and Fund. Still, more
strategic focus is needed, as the rule of law is both a
desired end state and a fundamental and coherent
approach to that end.
The objective is to enhance the delivery of safety
and security, legal protection, access to justice for all
and the peaceful settlement of disputes as means to
avoid the risk of relapse into conflict. Gaps persist in
the response to rule-of-law challenges, including with
respect to informal justice systems and economic and
social justice. Responses to housing, land and property
disputes for returning refugees, displaced persons and
vulnerable groups remain ad hoc. Failure to uphold the
law in response to organized crime and illicit
trafficking can fuel violence and increase regional
instability. Combating corruption is essential to
maintain and restore public confidence in the State.
Sustained attention by the Council to the rule of
law and transitional justice has helped the Organization
coalesce around a common language and guiding
principles for this work, such as the importance of
national ownership. Since 2006, the United Nations
system has enhanced its capacities. The Office of Rule
of Law and Security Institutions was established in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, bringing
together police, justice, corrections, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform and mine action capacities. A rapidly
deployable standing police capacity will soon be
augmented by the standing justice and corrections

3

S/PV.6347

capacity.
The
United
Nations
Development
Programme’s Bureau for Crisis Prevention and
Recovery is currently delivering rule-of-law assistance
worth $202 million in more than 20 conflict and postconflict settings, supported by a global programme.
The deployable mediation team of the Department of
Political Affairs provides advice on rule-of-law issues
such as constitution-making.
United Nations actors are increasingly integrating
their country programming, as in Haiti and the Sudan.
Joint United Nations action should be strongly
encouraged as the way forward, as was recently
mandated in resolution 1925 (2010), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In late 2006, the Secretary-General informed the
Council of the establishment of a division of labour in
the area of the rule of law, and of the creation of the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group. Under
my leadership, the Group brings together the nine
United Nations departments and agencies most
engaged in rule of law activities, supported by the Rule
of Law Unit in my Office. The Group is the systemwide focal point for coordination, coherence and
quality control of United Nations engagement in this
field.
Still, the Organization faces major challenges and
constraints. First, we need to recruit, train and retain
high-quality personnel and deploy them in a rapid,
consistent and predictable manner.
Secondly, the financial resources allocated for
strengthening the rule of law in fragile conflict and
post-conflict settings have not matched the rhetoric in
importance.
Thirdly, the external environment, including that
of donors and providers of bilateral assistance, remains
fragmented. This crowded field spans the legal,
development, security and political disciplines, yet no
global forum exists for dialogue among stakeholders.
Fourthly, we need more consistent and
comprehensive needs and threat assessment if we are to
ensure early and strategic responses. Better, ongoing
monitoring is also required to evaluate the impact of
our efforts.
Fifthly, we must be sure to take a strategic,
system-wide approach that includes security sector
reform and equal attention to all components of the
justice system, including prisons.

4

Sixthly, the political nature of the exercise must
be recognized. The rule of law is linked to sovereignty,
control over the use of force and resources and other
sensitive matters. We need to do more to address the
political and institutional aspects of rule of law
development, and to bring national and international
leadership on board.
The rule of law will continue to be central in
meeting the challenges of our time. The Council’s
continued engagement is essential. Together we can
support sustained, coherent and well-resourced efforts
to strengthen the rule of law at both the national and
international levels, and to ensure that it can play its
rightful role in building a better world for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing to the
members of the Council.
I now give the floor to Under-Secretary-General
Patricia O’Brien.
Ms. O’Brien: Thank you for your welcome,
Mr. President, and for the opportunity to participate in
this debate. I am pleased to support your initiative to
bring this important issue to the Council for further
discussion. At the outset, I wish to acknowledge the
leadership that the Deputy Secretary-General has
shown on this matter.
My focus today will be on the rule of law at the
international level. Establishing respect for the concept
is essential, not just to establish or to maintain peace,
but also to enable sustained economic progress and
development. I hope to demonstrate how this legal
perspective has contributed to a trend towards an
international rule of law. In doing so, I will first refer
to those instances where the Organization reaches out
to the world and strives to contribute to the
establishment of an international rule of law. But I
would also like to draw attention to some less visible
aspects of the rule of law for the United Nations and,
more specifically, within the United Nations. In our
Organization, acting in conformity with legal
requirements is a constant and dynamic pattern that is
present in all our activities. In other words, respect for
the rule of law is, for the Organization, a goal to be
achieved every day.
We live in an age in which international law is no
longer the exclusive domain of international courts and
institutions. The links between the individual, the

10-42676

S/PV.6347

nation State and the international community are now
inextricably connected. International law issues are
increasingly being considered by national and regional
courts. This evolution goes even beyond national and
regional courts: international law has become part of
our everyday lives. Its basic principles contribute
essentially to the empowerment of each individual. The
personalization of international law, in which more and
more rights are vested directly in the individual, is now
a reality. Everyone should have access to the tools
enabling him or her to understand international law, to
invoke it and to contribute to its development.
An important aspect of the rule of law at the
international level refers to the codification of
international law and legal obligations, as well as to
the implementation of and compliance with these
obligations, whether they arise from treaties or
customary international law. This concept is rooted in
part in the multilateral conventional framework largely
developed under United Nations auspices. For the past
decade, the Secretary-General has been providing
special facilities for States to sign or ratify treaties of
which he is the depositary through an annual treaty
event held during the high-level segment of the
General Assembly. This event has proved a catalyst for
encouraging wider participation in the multilateral
treaty framework.
The concept of rule of law also translates into
initiatives to promote the application of international
law through technical assistance to Member States. We
have developed a significant number of training
initiatives and publications encompassing several
branches of international law. But more needs to be
done. This is particularly true in post-conflict
environments. Another practical way to make tangible
the concept of rule of law at the international level lies
in our ability to encourage the teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of international
law. The development of the United Nations
Audiovisual Library is an essential outreach tool of our
time, both for demystifying international law and for
making it more accessible, better understood and closer
to the individual.
I take this opportunity to highlight the work of a
less obvious, but very important, area of our
endeavours, that of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), which is the
core legal body within the United Nations system in
the
field
of
international
commercial
law.

10-42676

UNCITRAL’s work on unifying and harmonizing
international commercial law has played an important
role in laying the basis for the orderly functioning of
an open economy. Effective commercial law plays a
supportive role in addressing root causes of many
international problems, such as migration caused by
impoverishment, inequality and internal conflicts, or
inequitable access to shared resources. Next week,
UNCITRAL will host a panel discussion, to be opened
by the Deputy Secretary-General, that will analyse the
impact of commercial law and commercial activities on
the rule of law. Such a thematic debate is rare in the
United Nations, where the traditional focus in the
context of the rule of law has been on human rights,
criminal law and international public law.
The Charter envisages a system of settling
disputes peacefully before intractable conflict
situations arise. The General Assembly, the Security
Council and the International Court of Justice all have
a responsibility to contribute to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. However, the fullest use has not always
been made of the organic link between these bodies
and the procedural means made available to them by
the Charter to coordinate and complement their
respective action.
In 2006, the then President of the Court recalled
both Article 33 of the Charter, under which the
Security Council may call on the parties to settle their
disputes by means that include judicial settlement, and
Article 36, paragraph 3, which provides that in making
recommendations for the settlement of disputes,
“the Security Council should also take into
consideration that legal disputes should as a
general rule be referred by the parties to the
International Court of Justice”.
In doing so, she invited the Council to bring these
tools to life and to make them a central policy of the
Security Council. I take this opportunity to encourage
members of the Council to follow up on this
recommendation. I would also encourage those States
that have yet to deposit declarations accepting the
jurisdiction of the Court to do so, and to do so as
unconditionally as possible.
Another essential component of the rule of law at
the international level is, of course, the struggle to end
impunity for international crimes. International
criminal justice has recently emerged as a powerful,
resonant and effective voice in this new age of

5

S/PV.6347

accountability. The Council has amply emphasized the
importance it attaches to the responsibility of States to
comply with their obligations to end impunity and to
prosecute those responsible for the most serious
crimes.
Justice is a nation’s choice. The primary role of
national jurisdictions in the prosecution of crimes has
been thrown into greater relief as international justice
has evolved and as the International Criminal Court in
particular has become operational. The principle of
complementarity is the bedrock of international
criminal justice.
International justice mechanisms, whether
permanent or ad hoc, are not intended to supplant
States where there are organized criminal justice
systems that are willing and able to ensure that there is
accountability for the crimes concerned. They are not
substitutes for national mechanisms. Thus we see that,
within the statutes of the international criminal courts
and tribunals, there is ample room for the exercise of
national jurisdiction.
Any discussion on the rule of law at the
international level should address the ongoing issue of
Security Council sanctions regimes. These regimes
perform a necessary role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In so doing, it is
critical that, as with any decision of the Council,
sanctions be adopted in accordance with international
law, consistent with the objectives enshrined in the
Charter.
Over the past years, the Council has put emphasis
on setting out and strengthening the international legal
framework and norms for addressing these issues.
The recent adoption of resolution 1904 (2009)
reflects the significant effort to address the rights of
due process and, in particular, that of an effective
review of decisions. The establishment of an Office of
the Ombudsperson is an important step by the Security
Council towards ensuring fair and clear procedures for
individuals and entities listed by the Committee. We
will follow with great interest how the interaction
between the Ombudsperson and the Committee on the
one hand, and between the Ombudsperson and the
petitioners, on the other, works in practice. Much may
depend on how the Ombudsperson’s observations will
be dealt with by the Committee. It will also be
instructive to see what impact resolution 1904 (2009)
and its implementation will have on the jurisprudence

6

of national and regional courts seized with relevant
cases.
No discussion regarding rule of law and the
United Nations would be complete without addressing
the system for the internal administration of justice,
particularly since we are about to reach the first
anniversary of the new system.
For 60 years, the internal mechanism for
resolving employment disputes consisted of review by
a peer review body composed of staff members,
followed by a review by the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal. The new system called for by
the General Assembly in 2005 has introduced two tiers
of judicial review. This became operational on 1 July
2009. The Dispute Tribunal has issued over
200 judgments to date. By the end of this week, the
United Nations Appeals Tribunal will have already
convened two sessions this year and reviewed over 60
cases.
The reform of the United Nations internal system
of administration of justice was achieved in a
remarkably short period of time, demonstrating the
capacity of Member States, management and staff to
act swiftly and in a coordinated effort. The new system
stands as a milestone in strengthening the commitment
of the Organization to the rule of law, justice and
accountability.
The concept of the rule of law in the United
Nations embraces the most classic and fundamental
principles of the international legal order and allows us
to use these principles to face the most urgent and
contemporary concerns of the international community.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for this initiative,
which will no doubt assist the Security Council — and,
through it, the international community at large — in
discharging its special role of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. O’Brien, United Nations Legal Counsel, for her
statement.
Before giving the floor to other speakers, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes, in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are requested to circulate their texts

10-42676

S/PV.6347

in writing and deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
With the Council’s permission, I will now make a
statement in my national capacity.
Strengthening the rule of law in the work of the
United Nations is a priority for Mexico. We thus
welcome the fact that, four years after the Council’s
most recent open debate on this subject, which was
organized by the Danish presidency, today we can
come together to build on and discuss the progress
achieved and the challenges we still face.
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace and
security represents two different, though closely
interrelated, notions. On the one hand, it entails the
idea of integrating international law to a greater degree
in the daily work of the Security Council. On the other,
it refers to the tools at the Council’s disposal with
which it can enhance compliance with international
law in its various areas of competence. Both
components are essential for the Council to fulfil its
primary responsibilities.
Given today’s ever-changing global challenges,
the Council has learned to respond effectively, using
the discretion it has under Article 39 of the Charter, in
expanding, on a case-by-case basis, the very concept of
a threat to peace. At the same time, however, it is very
important to recall that, according to Article 24,
paragraph 2, of the Charter, the Council is bound to
discharge its duties in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations. These include
essential components of the rule of law, such as respect
for the principles of justice and adherence to
international law and human rights.
Four years ago, it was stressed that many
controversies spring from disputes of a legal nature.
If — as has often happened — such disputes give rise
to situations that constitute a threat to or a breach of
the peace or an act of aggression, we can logically
suppose that both the determinations made by the
Council pursuant to Article 39 and the actions that it
decides to take should be grounded in and motivated
by international law. In the past four years, there have
certainly been important improvements in this regard,
as demonstrated by resolutions on, for example,
non-proliferation or the most recent one, on Iran.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done.

10-42676

In this context, I would like to recall the words of
the then President of the International Court of Justice,
Judge Rosalyn Higgins. At a 2006 debate on this
subject, she reminded us that:
“International law is, of course, the law that
governs relations between States and between
States and international organizations. It is the
law of each and every one of us. In a world often
divided by politics, it is our common language.”
(S/PV.5474, p. 5)
Now, in 2010, we can note with satisfaction the
progress that has been achieved with respect to
effective compliance with international law. Suffice it
to mention the series of Security Council resolutions
urging the parties to armed conflicts to comply with
international humanitarian law. There has also been
marked progress in the area of the protection of
vulnerable groups, such as women and children.
Indeed, the Council has become the collective
guarantor of international humanitarian law, as
provided for in the Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the
Protection of Victims of International Armed
Conflicts — Protocol I.
However, we recall that compliance with, and
enforcing compliance with, international law are
mutually reinforcing objectives. Those who promote
respect for the law must strengthen it with their own
actions. The primary responsibility conferred on the
Security Council carries broad powers designed to
guarantee its effectiveness, which is viable only to the
extent that the Council and its Member States conduct
themselves in accordance with those norms. That is not
only an ethical imperative, but also the most important
premise of the rule of law in its most fundamental
concept. It has been reflected in a series of concrete
measures, many of which have been articulated in
previous debates. One useful guideline in that respect
is, for example, the 2008 final report and
recommendations emerging from the Austrian initiative
on the Security Council and the rule of law.
The Security Council can play a key role in
promoting a fundamental principle of the Organization.
That is to achieve the settlement of disputes through
peaceful means and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law. That dual
responsibility — the obligation to settle disputes by
peaceful means and the power of the Council to

7

S/PV.6347

promote that outcome — should be exercised more
often in practice. In particular, in cases in which a
dispute has its origins in divergent interpretations of
the law, the Council can promote a legal solution by
investigating a dispute or a situation pursuant to
Article 34.
In recent years, we have been pleased to note a
tendency to have more frequent recourse to the
International Court of Justice, in particular through
special arrangements between parties, but its potential
has not been fully exploited and its advisory role could
be put to greater use. For many years, Mexico has
supported and advocated the idea that the General
Assembly should authorize the Secretary-General to
request advisory opinions on matters related to its
functions in order to also strengthen the role of the
Secretary-General, and thereby that of the
Organization. However, we should bear in mind the
fact that the Council also has the power to request
advisory opinions on any legal matter, which would
lead to strengthening international law in the its daily
work in cases where that is required.
A separate issue is the role that the Council
should play in the execution of a decision of the Court.
There have been situations of non-compliance with the
Court’s rulings in the past, and these could continue to
arise. In cases of non-compliance, paragraph 2 of
Article 94 sets out the path to follow. However, we
know and experience shows that States have rarely
activated that mechanism. By contrast, we can
encourage the Secretary-General’s good offices to
facilitate and ensure the implementation of a decision,
as has already happened in some cases. Mexico
reiterates its call on States that have not done so to
draw up declarations of acceptance of the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court, and on those that have lodged
reservations of a non-technical nature to consider
withdrawing them.
While we have much to do to ensure the entry
into force of the amendment that has just materialized
at the Kampala Review Conference of the Rome
Statute, which established the International Criminal
Court, we already have a definition of the crime of
aggression that allows us to fit the conduct being tried
with the principles of international law. More
important, the due relationship that should exist
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court has been preserved, with full respect
for the Charter.

8

We welcome the fact that the Kampala
Conference resolved the judicial mechanism that the
International Criminal Court must activate in those
cases in which the Council refrains from determining
the existence of an act of aggression. That will allow
the Court to exercise its jurisdiction and ensure that
such serious acts as that of aggression do not remain
unpunished.
Mediation is one of the most effective ways to
resolve conflicts peacefully that can be resorted to once
a conflict has started or in the post-conflict phase, with
great peacebuilding potential. I wish to recall the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/8) that the
Council adopted in 2009, during Mexico’s first
presidency, which underscores the need to put
mediation processes in place from the earliest stages of
conflicts through the peacebuilding phase. Thus,
Mexico believes that an essential task of the Council in
establishing mandates for peacekeeping operations is
to contribute to strengthening the rule of law in
countries affected by conflicts or in the immediate
aftermath when they are emerging from them. My
delegation recognizes that the Council has increasingly
used that idea in its decisions.
Reviewing the developments that the Council has
seen since 2006 with regard to the rule of law, it is
clear to us that there has also been progress in the area
of sanctions. The sanctions regimes concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, in accordance with
resolution 1267 (1999), have seen fundamental
changes. Resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009) are
very important steps in that direction, and we therefore
welcome the recent appointment of the Ombudsperson,
which constitutes a change in the area of targeted
sanctions. However, we believe that the right to an
effective remedy is still pending. We are on the right
path, but we still need to strengthen the delicate
balance between effectiveness and legitimacy.
I conclude by recalling the brilliant jurist Hersch
Lauterpacht, who reminded us that the principal
function of international law is “the subjection of the
totality of international relations to the rule of law”. By
promoting compliance with international law through
its actions and decisions and by functioning within the
framework of international law, the Security Council
helps to fulfil its primary responsibility.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening

10-42676

S/PV.6347

this meeting of the Security Council to discuss such a
significant issue. Noting that our last debate on this
issue took place in 2006 (see S/PV.5474) and that this
very month we deliberated the progress and
contributions of the ad hoc tribunals, as well as the
achievements of and challenges to the Security Council
counter-terrorism committees, we find that the timing
of this debate is excellent. It will further reflect the
Council’s dedication and support to strengthening and
promoting the rule of law. Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully supports you in this initiative.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro and the Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and Legal Counsel of the United Nations,
Patricia O’Brien, for their contribution to today’s
discussion, as we consider their comments to be of
great value and significance.
Today’s discussion focuses on three key issues:
the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of sanctions regimes. Allow me to address
each of these issues.
Promoting justice and the rule of law means
enabling a fragile post-conflict society to avoid further
damage from the conflict and to reconstruct itself and
build sustainable peace. As Kofi Annan stated in 2004:
“[W]e cannot forget the political context. Peace
and stability can prevail only if the causes of
conflict are addressed in a legitimate and fair
manner — causes such as ethnic discrimination,
gross disparities in the distribution of wealth and
social services, abuse of power, and the denial of
the right to property or citizenship.” (S/PV.5052,
p. 3)
Peacebuilding activities in a post-conflict society
must be integrated, coordinated and based on a
comprehensive approach to the establishment of good
governance, the rule of law and promotion of human
rights, institution-building, security sector reform,
economic reconstruction and development. The right to
return and the reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons should be an integral part of
peacebuilding strategies.
Particular attention should be paid to the full
integration of the rule of law component into the
strategic and operational planning of peace operations.

10-42676

We believe that the policy framework of United
Nations activities in the area of the rule of law should
be based on careful consideration of the country’s
needs and capacities, taking into account the social,
cultural and justice system specificities of the host
country and complying with international norms and
standards.
Transitional justice and restoring the capacities
and legitimacy of national institutions should continue
to be at the very heart of the United Nations rule of law
action aiming to establish lasting peace in post-conflict
countries. Coming to terms with a legacy of gross
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and ensuring accountability are of
crucial importance for stabilization, reconciliation and
overall reinforcement of the peace process.
Strengthening the rule of law must be
accompanied by efforts to ensure sufficient capacity
and bring to justice the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes. We firmly believe that addressing impunity is
of the utmost importance. Therefore, the establishment
and support of independent national judicial
institutions that will be given the task of dealing with
the domestic processing of gross human rights
violations is of vital significance for addressing the
legacy of the past. Also, in order to ensure the
effectiveness of these institutions, other segments of
the judiciary system — such as humane prison
services, victim protection and reparations measures,
juvenile justice systems or institutions in charge of
civil claims — should be simultaneously developed.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
considers
the
establishment of the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to be a positive step towards
assuring
effective
coordination
in
providing
comprehensive United Nations rule of law engagement
during conflict and post-conflict recovery. We look
forward to working together in further strengthening
the work of the Office.
It is crucial to emphasize the central role of the
United Nation in strengthening international justice
and the importance it gives to promoting the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We recall that one of the main
purposes of this Organization, which is firmly
embedded in its main document, is to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of

9

S/PV.6347

international law can be maintained. As stated in the
Secretary-General’s report of 2006 (S/2006/980),
the Charter of the United Nations, together with
the four pillars of the modern international legal
system — international human rights law, international
humanitarian law, international criminal law and
international refugee law — and the wealth of the
United Nations human rights, crime prevention and
criminal justice standards set out a normative
foundation and provides the means for all United
Nations activities in support of justice and the rule of
law.
Following on from this, I should like to touch
upon the judicial institution that, as a principal organ
of the United Nations and as set out in Chapter XIV of
the Charter, has a fundamental role in determining the
law, establishing facts and defining legal situations.
The judgments and the growing number of advisory
opinions of the International Court of Justice have
made a valuable contribution to the cause of peace and
the building of an international order based on law
through the unified interpretation and clarification of
the key points of international law.
Bearing in mind the fundamental principle of the
international legal system that States settle their
differences through peaceful means, we can only agree
with the Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and
recognize once again the important role of the Court in
those peaceful settlements.
This also prompts us to underline the very strong
connection and overlapping roles that the Council and
the Court have in those situations. As the majority of
disputes are perceived to be politically charged and
diplomatically sensitive, many of them are by their
nature concerned with supposed legal rights, in which
cases Chapter VI of the Charter refers to the Court as
the principal organ for their settlement. Since the
enforcement of the Court’s judgments lies ultimately
with the Security Council, we are of the opinion that
the Council, through its own actions, should give
stronger emphasis and exploit this body more as one of
the central tools in maintaining peace and security.
Finally in this regard, it is of great importance to
underline that States today have many different means
of settling their disputes, through a vast range of highly
specialized forums and tribunals. We believe that all
efforts towards peaceful resolution further promote the

10

culture of dialogue and contribute to respect for the
principles of international law. We therefore strongly
encourage the further strengthening of existing
international dispute settlement mechanisms and the
use of alternative mechanisms and informal systems
for peaceful dispute resolution.
As I stated at the outset, this month the Council
also deliberated upon several other topics that, in their
nature, represent essential aspects of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law and international justice.
It once again emphasized the significant contribution
of the ad hoc tribunals to international criminal law, as
they have brought and continue to bring justice to
countries deeply wounded by mass atrocities and
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Their role in fighting impunity and restoring peace and
the rule of law is indisputable, and their legacy has
been honoured with the creation of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
We hope that this Court will draw its strength not
only from the vast experience of the ad hoc tribunals,
but also from the experience of the mixed tribunals and
truth and reconciliation commissions, as they proved
on numerous occasions to be a valuable tool in the
quest for justice.
In that context, the Council should consider
measures to further support and strengthen the ICC’s
important role in the international judicial system. We
urge all those States which have not yet done so to
consider becoming party to the Rome Statute, but we
also take this opportunity to remind them of their
obligations under Article 103 of the Charter.
As many rightly pointed out during the debate in
2006 (5474th meeting), it is of the utmost importance
that sanctions are adopted in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and that they have a high
degree of legitimacy. At that time, the Council was
urged to improve the efficiency and credibility of
sanctions regimes. Today, we can rightly say that the
Council has made a significant achievement in that
regard: resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009) have
contributed further to the credibility of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban sanctions regime. They targeted the key
issues of concern for the Council in 2006 and, what is
of even greater importance, set up an institution to
address the issue of listing and delisting in an efficient
and transparent way.

10-42676

S/PV.6347

By establishing the institution of the
Ombudsperson, this Council took a step further in
strengthening the work of the sanctions regime,
underlining its firm commitment to and respect for due
process guarantees. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes
the appointment of Judge Kimberly Prost to that
position and firmly believes that her work within the
framework of the sanctions committee will further
compliment our commitment to the rule of law.
It is important to emphasize that, besides the
establishment of the Ombudsperson, the Committee
continues to tirelessly address the requirements set out
in resolution 1822 (2008), always bearing in mind the
importance of fair and transparent procedures when
deliberating on the facts and evidence provided.
As a result, and drawing from the example of the
Al Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime, we support
other sanctions regimes in their practice of periodically
reviewing and evaluating targeted sanctions. All the
efforts they invest in further improving their
procedures and their careful consideration and
deliberation in this sensitive matter firmly underline
and demonstrate the credibility of such measures.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the importance
that Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches to justice and the
rule of law in rebuilding post-conflict societies, as
parts of a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding
strategies aimed at achieving reconciliation, stability
and lasting, irreversible peace.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Patricia O’Brien, for their statements.
The Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations expresses the determination of the peoples of
the United Nations to establish conditions under which
justice and respect for obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can be
maintained. It envisages an international community
grounded in law. Justice and law are therefore
fundamental conditions for international peace and
security. The international community must rekindle its
commitment to fundamental human rights and to the
dignity and worth of the human person.

10-42676

It is often said that there can be no peace without
justice. Justice and peace are complementary variables,
neither of which can last or even exist without the
other. Durable peace must be built on social, economic
and political foundations that serve the needs of the
people. We therefore welcome the continuing efforts of
the Security Council to address the critical issue of
early consideration of peacebuilding activities, right
from the peacemaking and peacekeeping stages. In that
regard, support for building the capacity of institutions
for justice and the rule of law is critical if justice is to
be meaningfully delivered at national levels.
Promotion of justice and the rule of law is
critical, especially in fragile post-conflict situations in
order to avoid impunity and the danger of relapse into
further conflict. It is essential to insure national
ownership and support of the people for programmes
for justice and the rule of law.
In intractable conflict situations it would be
unrealistic to expect effective delivery of justice and
the rule of law where there is no functioning police,
judicial institutions or custodial facilities. Therefore a
holistic approach is needed to situations leading to or
arising from conflict. The international community
should contribute to comprehensive and holistic
solutions, rather than to half measures that ultimately
would not lead to the results envisaged.
Uganda supports mechanisms for dispute
prevention and settlement, which include international
as well as regional courts and tribunals. We are
convinced that such mechanisms offer States the
options for settling disputes peacefully.
The promotion of the rule of law is crucial in the
maintenance of international peace and security. As a
State party to the Rome Statute, Uganda is committed
to the role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
ending impunity for the perpetrators of the most
heinous crimes of concern to the international
community. Our commitment is further evidenced in
our hosting in Kampala of the recently concluded
Review Conference of the Rome Statue, which resulted
in historic adoption of a resolution (resolution
RC/Res.6) on the crime of aggression as a crime
punishable by the International Criminal Court.
Uganda has institutionalized the rule of law by
promulgating the necessary legislation domesticating
the Rome Statue and establishing equally appropriate
institutions to dispense justice. The War Crimes

11

S/PV.6347

Division of the High Court of Uganda is thus
complementary to the ICC in the pursuit of justice for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community.
My delegation is not oblivious to the challenges
arising from situations of armed conflict and the fight
against terrorism. Nevertheless, it is important to
ensure that human rights law and international
humanitarian law are observed. All parties to armed
conflict must respect international law applicable to the
rights and protection of women and children and other
vulnerable persons.
Finally, we thank the Mexican delegation for the
draft presidential statement, which Uganda supports.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on the
important subject of the promotion of the rule of law as
a complement to the maintenance of international
peace and security. I also wish to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro
for
her
unrelenting commitment to the cause of the rule of law,
and Under-Secretary-General Patricia O’Brien for her
very insightful exposition on the subject under review.
This debate proceeds from the premise that
justice and peace are mutually reinforcing ends,
essential for a healthy society. The demonstrable truth
of this assertion impels, in our view, a thorough
examination of how best to promote and strengthen the
rule of law as part of the United Nations commitment
to maintain international peace and security. The
examination must take into account the need for a
common language and understanding of the concept of
justice in the United Nations and at the international
level.
Without the critical underpinnings of legislative
and judicial infrastructure in any society, and in the
absence of broad acceptance of legal norms, economic
and social development will inevitably be retarded, as
legal rights cannot be effectively claimed. The
vulnerable are not protected from violations of criminal
and humanitarian law and, in such circumstances, there
is a pressing need for justice to be done and, indeed, to
be seen to be done. Only then can confidence in the
organs of society and in Government be restored.
The centrality of the rule of law cannot therefore
be overemphasized, particularly with regard to
transitional and fragile States. It is gratifying that the

12

consideration of the issue of the rule of law is by no
means new to the Council’s agenda. Apart from the
debates of 2004 and 2006, the rule of law has featured
in many Council resolutions in the context of children
and armed conflict — such as in resolutions 1325
(2000), 1612 (2005), 1674 (2006) and 1820 (2008).
Prominence was also given to the subject with the
establishment of the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group, in 2007. Since then, United Nations
actors have benefited from an excellent resource
through which efforts at reform are pooled and best
practices sifted.
We have been challenged by the concept paper
before us today (see S/2010/322) to identify ways of
rooting activities deeper within the framework of
international law and to encourage adherence to the
rule of law and international law within the domestic
sphere. All too often in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, the architecture of order and justice becomes
fragmented as a result of violence, meaning there are
few mechanisms for bringing violations of criminal or
humanitarian law to light. This, in turn, leads to a
culture of impunity that is readily exploited by armed
groups. In such circumstances, there is a pressing need
for justice to be done, or to be seen to be done. Only
then can confidence in the organs of society and in
Government be restored.
We note with satisfaction that rule of law values
are beginning to find their way into peacekeeping
operations led by the United Nations and regional
organizations like the African Union. For example, in
the Sudan, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur is mandated to assist in promoting
the rule of law through institution-building and
strengthening local capacities to combat impunity.
The Council has also mandated the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to assist with the investigation
of human rights violations in that country, with a view
to ending impunity and implementing a transitional
justice strategy. Such best-practice models should
continue to be replicated with due regard to the
particular historical, political and institutional
backdrop. Ideally, such initiatives should also receive
early programmatic funding in peacekeeping mission
budgets for that purpose.
We would also encourage the use of the
integrated mission planning process advocated under

10-42676

S/PV.6347

the capstone doctrine to ensure that, as far as possible,
the multiple arms of the Organization act in concert to
support a return to lawfulness, accountability and
justice, as part of peacebuilding processes. In that way,
the United Nations may stimulate an approach that
integrates security, human rights, development and rule
of law activities into all strategies for peacebuilding.
In the context of conflict situations, we would
like to underscore the need for close collaboration
among the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council in the task of
facilitating the restoration and consolidation of the rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict societies. It is
essential that the United Nations develops a strategy
that allows peacekeepers to undertake, prioritize and
sequence peacebuilding tasks from an early stage. The
strategy should focus on the police, the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, security
sector reform and quick-impact projects.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
civil society entities in post-conflict reconstruction
cannot be overstated. Regional organizations can also
contribute positively to global efforts to consolidate the
rule of law.
We must also stress the need to craft initiatives in
partnership with legitimate national and local actors to
foster long-term local ownership of the processes and
institutions administering justice. The primary role of
the United Nations should focus on assistance, and
must not seek to transplant judicial systems. We
believe that reform efforts that incorporate public
participation in their design would enjoy more
credibility and more legitimacy vis-à-vis the ultimate
beneficiaries. Clear anti-corruption strategies from the
United Nations might also ensure a culture of integrity
within judicial systems.
Strategies such as these would strengthen
transitional justice processes where the ultimate
objective is to reconcile as well as to punish. We would
welcome a report from the Secretariat that covers more
recent case studies to assess how far the United
Nations system has achieved an integrated approach to
rule of law activity in societies transitioning from
conflict. The recommendations therein would serve as
milestones against which to measure progress.
In the area of inter-State disputes, Nigeria
supports the use of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) as an effective and authoritative arbitrator of

10-42676

international disputes. Indeed, in the context of
Nigeria’s boundary dispute with Cameroon concerning
the Bakassi peninsula, the ICJ mechanism proved itself
a very crucial part of the United Nations pacific
dispute settlement armoury under Chapter VI of the
Charter.
With respect to ad hoc tribunals, while we
recognize their value in ending impunity and bringing
violators to justice in the aftermath of violent
confrontation, resource constraints can limit their
effectiveness. We are now witnessing the winding
down of the mandate of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. We hope that all the necessary
support will be given by the United Nations to the
relevant domestic justice systems to ensure that they
are equipped to adequately take on the mantle of
punishing crimes against humanity and other conflictrelated violations of international law.
Nigeria has previously stated, and reiterates
today, that the International Criminal Court is an
invaluable tool for ensuring the development of
international law. We hope that its decisions will help
us to keep pace with the changing nature of
international relations. It would be to the benefit of the
entire community of nations if those Member States yet
to do so would accede to the Rome Statute.
We are encouraged by the Council’s unanimous
decision to appoint an ombudsman to analyse the
de-listing of terror suspects from the consolidated list.
Such procedural steps shore up due process within
appropriately targeted sanctions regimes and, as such,
should be considered in relation to other sanctions
regimes.
In conclusion, it is incumbent upon the Council to
pay due regard to the value of the rule of law as an end
as well as a means. Unless the standards of lawfulness
are maintained, there is a high risk that the call for
adherence among nations and non-State actors to the
rule of law could possibly be undermined. The Council
should engender adherence to international legal
standards through uniform implementation and
consistent enforcement instruments and regimes. Our
quest for justice and the rule of law should not be
limited to the domestic sphere. Those same standards
should also apply at the international level. It is our
collective responsibility to manifest a just international
order, and thus empower all peoples to live in peace
and harmony.

13

S/PV.6347

Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I thank you, Sir, for having organized this
open debate on strengthening the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

whom we are training. France welcomes the role
played by Ms. Migiro in this effort to identify
priorities. We take note of her proposals to further
strengthen the coherence of the system.

We would also like to convey our gratitude to
Ms. Migiro,
Deputy
Secretary-General,
and
Ms. O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, for their contributions. Ms. O’Brien
underscored the scope of the activities of the
Organization in strengthening the rule of law. She
mentioned in particular the administrative tribunals,
which we sometimes forget.

Turning now to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, France also takes note
of progress achieved. The peaceful settlement of
disputes is one of the pillars of the Charter of the
United Nations, and the International Court of Justice,
as the main judicial body of the United Nations, plays a
central role in the maintenance of peace and security.
The number of inter-State disputes and requests for
opinions by bodies of the United Nations brought
before the Court clearly demonstrate its vitality. To rule
on matters of law is a vital responsibility that structures
the international order; however, as other speakers
have said before me, it is just as important to apply this
law, and it is to that issue that we must devote our
attention in years to come.

I will address three issues: the strengthening of
the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict situations,
international justice and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and the efficiency of the sanctions regime. In
these three fields, without being too optimistic, the
distance covered in the four years since the adoption of
the 2006 presidential statement (S/PRST/2006/28) is
substantial.
On the strengthening of the rule of law, the
promotion of justice and the rule of law enables a
weakened country emerging from conflict to rebuild
and move towards a lasting peace. Notable progress
has been achieved since our last debate, as I just
mentioned. The Permanent Representative of Nigeria
spoke of the role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the fact that provisions regarding the promotion of the
rule of law are now systematically included in the
specific mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations, such as the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.
The Rule of Law Assistance Unit approved in the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) and
which is backed by the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions is now operational, as was
underscored by Ms. Migiro. It devotes special attention
to the specific needs of each country and enables us to
ensure better coordination of capacities on the ground.
This is above all a matter of identifying real needs. At
recent meetings in which we participated, we have
noted that aid has often focused on fields such as
training and the building of infrastructure to the
detriment of more complex programmes that are just as
essential aimed at ensuring, for example, in the judicial
field, the independence and protection of magistrates

14

The international community has acquired new
tools to assist it in its work in preventing and settling
disputes. As underscored in the concept note submitted
to us by the Mexican presidency (S/2010/322), the
fight against the impunity of the perpetrators of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes is
an essential aspect of our mission to promote peace and
security. To fight against impunity, the international
community and the Council can now count on the
International Criminal Court, the first standing tribunal
mandated to prosecute the perpetrators of the worst
crimes when national authorities do not have the will
or the capacity to bring such perpetrators to justice.
France has frequently reiterated that we
unreservedly support the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court and his work, in particular
in his prosecutions of crimes committed in Darfur, a
situation referred to him by the Security Council. The
Security Council deemed that the intervention of an
independent, impartial tribunal would contribute to
prosecuting crimes in the Sudan. The Court has carried
out its work. It is now incumbent upon the Security
Council to ensure that its own decisions are respected.
At stake is respect for the Charter and for the referring
Rome Statute. It is also important that all
representatives of the Secretary-General should, as
Mr. Ban Ki-moon asked them to do, respect and
support the international criminal justice actors within
the framework of their missions on the ground,
especially when the Court works within the framework

10-42676

S/PV.6347

of a Security Council resolution adopted on the basis of
Chapter VII of the Charter.
As to sanctions and their efficiency, the Council
has consistently improved this essential political
instrument by specifically targeting individuals and
entities that breach embargoes, impede peace processes
or are linked to Al-Qaida, as well as individuals
responsible for hate crimes or incitement of hatred.
The efficiency of this Council hinges in part on
its ability to ensure that States vigorously implement
its decisions. That is especially important in the field
of the fight against terrorism. We have noted a loss of
trust by a number of States in the mechanisms for
de-listing individuals by the sanctions committees. In
order to ensure that the United Nations targeted
sanctions system remain a transparent tool to
effectively fight against threats to peace, France
proposed in 2006 the creation of a focal point that
would take requests for de-listing and exemptions
directly from individuals on the list. A shared focal
point was set up. Four years later, pursuant to
resolution 1904 (2009), we have moved even further
through the appointment of an Ombudsman for the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), responsible for considering de-listing requests
made to the Committee and to put Member States’
questions to individuals requesting de-listing. France
welcomes the appointment of Judge Kimberly Prost to
that post. These developments enable us to better take
into account respect for human rights in the fight
against terrorism.
Exercising the responsibility to protect,
combating
impunity
and
strengthening
the
effectiveness of sanctions are the missions that France
would like to see the Security Council work on more
diligently. That is the way we interpret the draft
presidential statement that has been circulated by the
delegation Mexico, which we support.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to welcome you to the Council, Mr. President.
It is a great pleasure to see you presiding over our
meeting today, and I take this opportunity to
congratulate the Mexican delegation on its initiative of
organizing this open debate on a topic of great
importance in the daily work of the Security.
(spoke in English)

10-42676

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro for her statement and for her
leadership on this issue. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Patricia O’Brien for her very interesting
remarks, which reminded us of the many important
dimensions of the rule of law and the implications of
the increasing trend towards the international rule of
law.
An international system based on legal principles
and norms is simply indispensable for ensuring lasting
peace and security. Outside the boundaries of
international law, there can be no justice or friendly
relations amongst States, much less cooperation for the
good of the billions of individuals we represent.
Today, I will address the three main topics
suggested in the concept paper prepared by your
delegation, Sir, for this debate (S/2010/322, annex),
namely, the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of sanctions regimes.
The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations entrusted with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, is
expected to help ensure the effective implementation of
international law. That means, first and foremost,
ensuring compliance with its own resolutions. It also
implies upholding international law applicable to
conflict situations — an obligation that the Council
should strive to consistently fulfil on all issues on the
agenda.
Our challenge is therefore to reconcile the
political nature of this body with the imperative to
strengthen the rule of law. In fact, there is no
opposition between the two goals: in the long term, the
observance of international law serves the interests of
all of us.
The need to restore and sustain the rule of law is
even more evident in post-conflict situations. In wartorn societies, fragile national institutions usually
hamper consolidation of the rule of law. It is important
that the international community be able to assist
national efforts to re-establish State institutions. In the
context of such efforts, my delegation greatly values
the measures that have been taken to include the ruleof-law perspective in United Nations activities,
including creation of the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group and the Rule of Law Unit.

15

S/PV.6347

Numerous bodies have worked towards the
settlement of disputes, thus avoiding the occurrence of
possible deadly conflicts. Among them, the
International Court of Justice has a particular
importance, as it adjudicates very sensitive cases, thus
significantly contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The International Criminal Court also deserves
special mention. It has become a powerful tool against
impunity and thus a means of prevention. The deterrent
effect is a central part of the work of the Court and
probably its most important contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security. If
leaders and persons vested with authority around the
world understand that they are not above international
law, they will probably use power in a manner less
likely to cause instability and conflict and therefore
violence.
Furthermore, as the Court’s jurisdiction is
complementary to national criminal jurisdictions,
States still have the primary responsibility of bringing
to justice those responsible for the most serious crimes.
This approach has led many States to enact appropriate
legislation concerning those crimes, which in turn
contributes significantly to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Another positive note on the Court is the
important outcome of the first Review Conference of
the Rome Statute, in Kampala. The Conference
highlighted the strong commitment of the international
community to the Court and resulted in an historic
agreement on the definition of the crime of aggression
and the trigger mechanisms for exercise of the Court’s
jurisdiction over one of the most serious crimes. It is
our expectation that in 2017, States parties will agree
to activate the agreed mechanisms.
Sanctions may play a role in efforts to maintain
international peace and security. But they should be
used sparingly and wisely and never to the detriment of
negotiated solutions to differences. As highlighted in
the document annexed to General Assembly resolution
64/115, they should be carefully targeted in support of
clear and legitimate objectives and should be
implemented in ways that balance effectiveness to
achieve the desired results against possible adverse
consequences,
including
socio-economic
and
humanitarian.

16

It is worth recalling that the purpose of sanctions
should be to modify the behaviour of the targeted State,
party, individual or entity threatening international
peace and security. The purpose must never be an
indirect or undeclared means to cause regime change or
punish or otherwise exact retribution. The further we
depart from the original concepts, the less legitimacy
and effectiveness sanctions will have.
In devising and implementing sanctions regimes,
the Security Council should avoid adverse effects for
individuals and entities not targeted or for third States.
When sanctions include measures against certain
individuals or entities, listing and de-listing procedures
need to be clear and fair and must observe the due
process of law. There have recently been important
improvements in this regard, especially in the 1267
sanctions regime, related to Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
Further efforts will have to be made to ensure the
Security Council continues to fully respect
fundamental freedoms and human rights.
We believe the strict observance of international
law is closely linked to long-lasting peace and security.
Efforts made in that regard merit our unwavering
support. We hope they will be sustained and expanded
throughout the United Nations system.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me congratulate the Mexican presidency for organizing
today’s open debate on the subject, “The promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security” and for preparing
the concept note (S/2010/322, annex). Let me add that
in view of your outstanding personal experience in this
matter, Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure to have
you presiding over the Council today. Austria warmly
welcomes the initiative. I would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for their statements and
their presence here today.
Austria reaffirms its firm commitment to an
international order based on international law,
including human rights law, and the rule of law with
the United Nations at its core. We believe that
international law and the rule of law are the
foundations of the international system. Clear and
foreseeable rules, respect for and adherence to these
rules and an effective multilateral system to prevent or
sanction violations are preconditions for lasting
international peace and security. In our view, it is

10-42676

S/PV.6347

imperative to strengthen the rule of law in all its
dimensions — the national, international and
institutional levels.
For many years Austria has particularly focused
on the role of the Security Council in strengthening a
rules-based international system. You, Mr. President,
have already kindly referred to our initiative launched
in 2004 on the rule of law and the Security Council.
We started this with the New York University School
of Law and launched a series of panel discussions on
the topic. Together with you, Sir, in your then-capacity
as Permanent Representative of Mexico, and with
Liechtenstein and other like-minded members of the
Group of Friends of the Rule of Law, prepared a final
report on this subject. It was presented in New York in
April 2008 and published as a Security Council
document (S/2008/270, annex). The report contains 17
specific recommendations on how the Security Council
could strengthen the rule of law in its various fields of
activity. During our membership on the Council we
have consistently worked with other delegations to
implement and mainstream these recommendations in
the Council’s daily business.
In this context, Austria also commends the efforts
of the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions to
strengthen the transparency of the Council’s working
methods by reviewing and updating the relevant
presidential note (S/2006/507), thereby enhancing the
rule of law in the everyday work of the Council.
Since the last open debate on the rule of law, in
June 2006 (5474th meeting), significant progress has
been made with the establishment of the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit. We are grateful for the personal involvement
of the Deputy Secretary-General in this important
matter. We strongly support the Group and the Unit in
their efforts to ensure a coordinated and coherent
response. We also support the specific proposals made
by the Deputy Secretary-General on the subject.
Among the topics raised in the concept paper, let
me first address the importance of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In resolution 1894
(2009), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
deliberate targeting of civilians and the commission of
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
applicable international humanitarian and human rights

10-42676

law in situations of armed conflict may constitute
threats to international peace and security and imply
the adoption of appropriate measures by the Council.
Respect for international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict is essential for the protection of
civilians and should be an important aspect of any
comprehensive strategy for resolving conflict. We
stress the special rights and protection of women and
children under international law, which we urge all
parties to conflict to respect.
The rule of law is the cornerstone of all
peacebuilding efforts. We call on the Council to
express its commitment to ensure that all United
Nations efforts to restore peace and security
themselves respect the rule of law. The promotion of
the rule of law in post-conflict situations can only be
achieved through an integrated and coordinated
approach that encompasses all the actors involved. In
that context, the Peacebuilding Commission has a vital
role to play. We commend the important contributions
made by international and regional organizations in
this area, including the European Union and the
International Development Law Organization.
Turning now to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Austria strongly
supports the role of the International Court of Justice
as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
We call on all States that have not yet done so to
consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in
accordance with its Statute. For its part, Austria
accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court four
decades ago.
With regard to international efforts to end
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern, Austria stresses the important role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), ad hoc and mixed
tribunals and specialized chambers of national
tribunals. Austria strongly believes that the permanent
International Criminal Court is one of the most
effective tools for buttressing the rule of law and
combating impunity. In that regard, we commend the
stocktaking of international criminal justice undertaken
by the first Review Conference of the ICC, held from
31 May to 11 June in Kampala at the invitation of the
Government of Uganda. While the ad hoc Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are only temporary
institutions, as Chair of the Security Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, Austria is
working to establish a mechanism to take over their

17

S/PV.6347

residual functions, and thus preserve justice and the
rule of law.
We believe that the United Nations and the
Security Council must continue to be at the forefront of
the fight against impunity and to ensure that alleged
violations are investigated and those responsible for
crimes held accountable. Accountability must be
ensured by taking measures at the national level, such
as through domestic prosecutions, truth-seeking,
providing reparations for victims and through
institutional reform. Justice is essential to achieving
lasting peace and reconciliation, as well as to avoiding
the recurrence of violations in the future.
As Chair of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee, Austria is also committed to enhancing the
efficiency and credibility of sanctions regimes — and
almost all the representatives who have spoken so far
have brought up that subject today. Sanctions play an
important role in promoting compliance with
international law and fighting international terrorism.
However, when they target individuals, sanctions also
raise questions about procedural guarantees and due
process. Austria welcomes the adoption of resolutions
1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009), which provide for
substantial improvements in the listing and de-listing
procedures of the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions regime.
Like others, we warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recent appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost,
who is an outstanding lawyer, as the Ombudsperson. I
would specifically like to assure Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien, who made the point, that the
Committee is looking forward to working with her very
closely.
Finally, my delegation would like to express its
strong support for the draft presidential statement that
the Council will adopt today and for the request to the
Secretary-General to prepare a follow-up to his 2004
report on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2004/616).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Austria for the kind words addressed
to the presidency.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes this debate and is grateful
to the Mexican presidency and to you, Minister Gómez
Robledo, for your initiative. I would also like to extend
our appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General for
her introductory remarks, which set out some of the

18

challenges faced in this area, and to express our
gratitude for the thoughtful intervention by UnderSecretary-General Patricia O’Brien, who is a fellow
member of Middle Temple.
For the United Kingdom, the rule of law is at the
heart of its foreign policy. Since the United Nations
was founded, the importance of respect for the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace and
security has been self-evident from the principles and
provisions of the Charter. There is now widespread
recognition that the rule of law is a principle that
applies much more broadly across the spectrum of
issues dealt with by the United Nations, and by the
Security Council in particular. I want to set out a few
examples, many of which are dealt with in the draft
presidential statement that we will adopt today, which
the United Kingdom fully supports.
The United Kingdom believes it is important for
all States to settle their disputes by peaceful means.
Judicial settlement remains a vital part of the
mechanism for the peaceful settlement of disputes and
for advancing the rule of law at the international level.
The International Court of Justice stands at the apex of
the international judicial machinery. Its contribution to
the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
advancement of international law is profound. While
there are other roads to the Court, the option exists for
Member States to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court in accordance with Article 36, paragraph 2,
of the Statute. The United Kingdom is the only
permanent member of the Security Council to have
accepted the Court’s general jurisdiction in this way.
We call on other Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to consider taking a similar step.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and actively
participated in all the discussions that took place at the
recent Review Conference in Kampala. The ICC
continues to play a key role in delivering international
justice and combating impunity. The United Kingdom
also strongly supports the various international
criminal tribunals and courts. These bodies should
receive the full support of the Security Council as they
seek to carry out their mandates.
The United Kingdom remains committed to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols. Last July we co-hosted, with the British Red
Cross, an event to celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of

10-42676

S/PV.6347

the Conventions. That provided us with an opportunity
to focus on the excellent work carried out by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
British Red Cross in the field of international
humanitarian law. We need to focus on the challenges
ahead and respond to the changing nature of warfare.
The United Kingdom has long been a champion
of improving sanctions listing and de-listing
procedures. As such, we strongly welcome reforms that
build on the significant improvements that have been
achieved in recent years. Such reforms are evidence
that the Security Council has listened to, and acted
upon, the concerns of the wider international
community. By doing so, it has ensured that United
Nations sanctions continue to be a vital tool in the fight
against terrorists such as Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
The rule of law is not only a part of relations
between Member States. As the remarks made this
morning by the Deputy Secretary-General succinctly
demonstrate, there are major challenges and constraints
facing the delivery of rule of law assistance in conflict
and peacebuilding situations. Improving security and
justice and committing to a functioning rule of law is
an essential component of peacebuilding in postconflict States. As the Permanent Representative of
Uganda said earlier, justice is not an alternative to
peace; the two are complementary. Re-establishing and
reinforcing the rule of law and associated institutions
are vital steps in helping to create and sustain the
necessary conditions under which activities such as
effective peacebuilding can take place.
Finally,
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s 2009
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304) is key to ensuring a more
effective and coherent international approach to
peacebuilding. We need to see tangible improvements
on the ground in sectors such as the rule of law.
We welcome therefore the call in the draft
presidential statement for a Secretary-General’s report
to the Council on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict settings. With this
in mind, we urge the Secretary-General to focus that
report on a review of the delivery of rule of law
assistance in the countries on the Council’s agenda.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mexico for choosing the
topic under discussion today. The rule of law at the

10-42676

international level is a cornerstone of the maintenance
of international peace and security, and the Security
Council must retain it as a method of work and a goal
in view at all times.
I would like to thank Ms. Migiro for her presence
here today and her important remarks, and Ms. O’Brien
for her comprehensive statement.
International law is the accumulation of written
and unwritten rules that regulate international relations.
Notwithstanding the differences between States in
terms of population, geography, national culture,
identity, religion and political, economic and social
considerations, we are all united by the obligation to
abide by the provisions of international law. That is the
common element that unites us all. We have all
contributed to establishing this system on the basis of
our belief in the importance of creating an international
framework
that
guarantees
the
sovereignty,
independence and security of States, provides for
stability in relations on the basis of justice and
equality, and guarantees respect for basic human rights.
This law has been expanded and developed over
previous decades so that it now includes, in addition to
international legal norms and the United Nations
Charter, international humanitarian law, the law of
treaties, international trade law, the law of the seas, the
outer space law, various counter-terrorism agreements,
and numerous conventions on economic, social,
cultural, civil and political human rights.
The core objective of the establishment of the
United Nations at the end of the Second World War
was to maintain international peace and security, as
stated in Article 1 of the Charter, and to deter and
punish any State that chooses the military option
except in cases involving collective security and
legitimate defence.
For this purpose, Article 33 of the Charter lists
the peaceful means for conflict prevention and
resolution. These options must remain the alternatives
to war and violence. In that regard, we commend the
role of the Secretary-General, the International Court
of Justice, the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea, the Permanent Court of Arbitration and other
international, regional and local mechanisms that also
contribute to the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
However, we continue to witness a selective
application of the principle of preventing the use of

19

S/PV.6347

force. This reality threatens to render that concept
meaningless. It also constitutes a blatant violation of
the rule of law. Unfortunately, there are many examples
of this, the most serious of which are such Israeli
practices as the annexation of territory, the building of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian West Bank and
in the occupied Syrian Golan, the various
transgressions against holy sites, the identity of the
land and its history, such as in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the
policy of collective punishment and siege practiced in
Gaza, the various threats of war and destruction against
Lebanon, and the daily violations of its sovereignty by
land, sea and air.
This reality is extremely dangerous because it
creates the public perception that the international
community is incapable of preventing these practices,
which violate the principles of the United Nations and
of international law, specifically the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, the right of peoples to
self-determination, and the non-use of force. It also
suggests that Israel is a State with no accountability
and above international law and that the United
Nations is an incompetent and incapable entity. This
harms the Organization’s image, reputation, efficiency
and role in the service of peace.
Lebanon, like many other States, refuses to
employ discretion and double standards. Lebanon
believes that it is its right and indeed its duty to
question why certain international resolutions are
implemented while others are ignored. Why are
sanctions enforced against some but not all States that
do not comply with international resolutions? Does not
Article 25 of the Charter oblige everyone to respect the
resolutions of the Security Council? Where is the
actual implementation of the principle of respect for
contracts — pacta sunt servanda — when certain
countries do not abide by the Charter? What is the
value of legal opinions issued by the International
Court of Justice when not all countries abide by them?
For how long will war criminals and those who commit
crimes against humanity be punished in some States
and not in others?
Equality among States is one of the main
principles of the United Nations and a pillar of the
concept of the rule of law. The international scene
today is vastly different from that of 1945.
Accordingly, the credibility of the Security Council is
being tested today because, although it calls for the
spread of democracy and justice, there is no review of

20

the structure of the Council itself and its practices
aimed at making the Council more democratic in its
representation and more fair in its methods of work.
Despite all this, Lebanon cannot help but
welcome the role that the Security Council is currently
playing in the protection of civilians in conflict and
war situations, especially women and children, and in
ensuring compliance with the rules of international
humanitarian law. We hope that the Council will firmly
abide by these rules, because they have now become
binding for everyone.
Lebanon also welcomes the other significant
steps taken by the Council, including the creation of
international tribunals to prosecute those who commit
the most heinous crimes and to contribute to ending
impunity. This is an inseparable part of the
implementation of the rule of law and the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The Lebanese people therefore look forward to
the activation and work of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon aimed at finding truth and delivering justice
and equity to the victims, healing wounds and deterring
criminals without resorting to the logic of vengeance or
politicization.
Lebanon commends the role that the Security
Council plays in post-conflict situations. This role
involves establishing and building peace by achieving
national reconciliation, strengthening national unity,
enabling countries to move on and to leave the painful
past behind, building national capacities and creating
the legislative and institutional foundations to
guarantee good governance, democracy and respect for
human rights. These are the fundamentals of the rule of
law at the national level.
Sanctions are a tool to be used for the
maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter. The
Security Council, in abiding by the principles of
justice, transparency and basic human rights in the
work of its sanctions committees, will enhance the
effectiveness of these committees and will not hinder
them from achieving their objectives. The appointment
of an Ombudsman to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
consideration of humanitarian exceptions in sanctions
are two very important steps. However, we need to do
more because if we were to agree to combat terrorism

10-42676

S/PV.6347

at the expense of respect for human rights law,
terrorism would have won the fight.
In conclusion, Lebanon reiterates its conviction
that the basis for maintaining international peace and
security and for guaranteeing justice and equality
among States and respect for basic human rights is the
might of the law and not the law of might. International
law is a social contract between States; we are all its
legislators and we all must respect it.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to New York to preside over
today’s meeting. We would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro and Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien for their statements.
The rule of law is an important symbol of human
civilization and social development, and strengthening
the rule of law in international relations is conducive to
maintaining world peace, promoting common progress
and strengthening efforts to build a harmonious world.
The Security Council’s fulfillment of its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security within the framework of international law is of
great significance in strengthening international law
and furthering the process of strengthening the rule of
law in international relations.
In that connection, I would like to stress the
following points. First, the Charter of the United
Nations is the cornerstone of the international rule of
law. The Charter and the basic principles of
international law established by it are the basis of the
existing international legal order and the foundation for
building the international rule of law. At the 2005
World Summit, world leaders unanimously committed
to stricter compliance with the United Nations Charter
and international law. That solemn commitment must
be translated into practical action. In international
affairs, countries should abide by the basic principles
of international law, such as sovereign equality,
fulfilling obligations in good faith, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the non-use or threat of
force. They should engage in building harmonious
international relations, seek to prevent and reduce
conflicts, and preserve world peace and security.
Secondly, in strengthening the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, the many political,
economic and social factors should be taken fully into
account. Strengthening the rule of law in conflict and

10-42676

post-conflict countries is both a prerequisite for the
transition from conflict to peace and a fundamental
guarantee for building sustainable peace. Far from
being merely a legal matter, strengthening the rule of
law is closely related to various political, economic
and social factors. Post-conflict reconstruction covers
many elements and the task of building the rule of law
should be integrated into and coordinated with the
political
process
and
economic
and
social
reconstruction, and not separate from them, so that
they can be mutually reinforcing. That is the only way
to eliminate the root causes of conflicts.
Thirdly, when conflict and post-conflict countries
are assisted in strengthening the internal rule of law,
their sovereignty must be respected. Basically,
strengthening the rule of law in such countries falls
within the realm of internal affairs. While the
international community can provide support and
assistance in terms of finance, technology and
capacity-building, it is necessary to respect the
autonomy of recipient countries, take full account of
local history, culture and legal systems, and avoid
imposing anything from outside.
Fourthly, it is necessary to strike the right balance
between maintaining peace and pursuing justice.
Ensuring compliance with international humanitarian
law is an important aspect of strengthening the
international rule of law. We condemn all criminal acts
that violate human rights and international
humanitarian law and support the international
community in pushing to resolve the issue of impunity
in conflict regions and to punish serious international
crimes, such as war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity. In our view, the issue of impunity
can be fully resolved only if tension is eased and
political stability achieved in the relevant regions.
Efforts to seek criminal justice should further rather
than interrupt the relevant peace process, and foster
rather than hamper national reconciliation and
peacebuilding.
Lastly, the efficiency and credibility of United
Nations sanctions should be enhanced. Over the past
decade, the Security Council has increasingly resorted
to sanctions as a means of deterrence or punishment.
Despite the Council’s efforts to improve sanctions
procedures, the effects and negative impact of
sanctions continue to be matters for widespread
concern. China has always taken a cautious approach
to the use of sanctions and advocated for strict criteria

21

S/PV.6347

and appropriate time frames for sanctions so as to
avoid, as far as possible, their negative impact on
people’s livelihoods and economic and social
development.
China supports strengthening United Nations
sanctions in accordance with the following principles:
undertaking broad consultations on the basis of
Security Council resolutions and moving forward
cautiously; emphasizing facts and evidence and
avoiding double standards; and taking fully into
account the practical situation of the countries
concerned and the nature of the relevant sanctions
committees, as well as enhanced efficiency.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s debate clearly shows that interest in
the issue of the rule of law has not diminished. Russia
is resolutely committed to an international order based
on the rule of law. Respect for international norms is
one of the main prerequisites for a fair, stable and
predictable system of international relations.
Given its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has a particular role in strengthening
the standing of international law. In that respect, the
Council has accumulated tremendous experience.
Suffice it to recall its role in restoring the rule of law in
peacekeeping operations, governing territories in times
of crisis, establishing ad hoc international criminal
courts and joint tribunals, referring issues to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and protecting
civilians from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity.

standards of international law in its activity, it sets an
example by complying with the law.
We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for again
drawing our attention to the importance of ensuring the
primacy of the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
societies. Many conclusions contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s 2004 report on this topic (S/2004/616) are
still relevant. We believe it important to pursue efforts
to resuscitate those valuable ideas and to monitor
progress on those matters. The mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations need to be further
improved. It is necessary to better understand the
causes of conflicts and to incorporate international
standards of justice, taking due account of local
conditions and customs. Resources are needed to
support national dialogue on legal reform. It is
important to seek a prudent relationship between legal
bodies and truth and reconciliation commissions.
We are not the first to say that a robust peace is
impossible without punishing the guilty, just as justice
is not possible without robust peace. We are convinced
that the actions of international structures should
complement and stimulate national efforts, rather than
replace them.
Russia has consistently supported the fight
against impunity. However, it believes that matters of
justice cannot be an end in themselves. In many
situations, excessive and untimely action in that regard
becomes an obstacle to peace, complicating the
reaching or implementation of peace agreements.

The Council’s activity in the area of the rule of
law has had a clear impact on the establishment and
interpretation of international legal norms. Its decisions
have important legal consequences. I refer not only to
the Council’s setting of legal obligations in individual
cases, but also to the emergence of general norms and
standards as a result of its work. That is true, for
example, for the Council’s decisions in the areas of
counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

We share your view, Mr. President, regarding the
key role of the International Court of Justice in
resolving disputes between States. That body sets the
high standard for legal proceedings, which is the
starting point for ensuring the rule of law at the
international level. We believe that the trust placed in
its political neutrality in its adherence to the principles
of international law makes it possible to encourage an
increasing number of States to recognize the Court’s
jurisdiction and to lift reservations on the Court’s
jurisdiction over a broad range of international
agreements, in particular in the areas of human rights
and counter terrorism.

The Council’s promotion of the rule of law is a
holistic and organic process. On the one hand, in
addressing conflict and crisis situations, the Council
dictates respect for the law; on the other, in adhering to

The great variety and broad range of cases on its
docket speaks for itself. We very much hope that, in
today’s complex political reality, the Court will not
lose its standing as the standard-bearer of international

22

10-42676

S/PV.6347

justice. The Court is a unique organ that has the final
say on the most ambiguous international legal issues.
The Russian Federation notes the importance of
the ICC as the first genuine standing body of
international criminal justice. We believe that the Court
has found its place and has every chance of becoming
an effective instrument in the fight against impunity.
The universalization of the Rome Statute is a vitally
important factor for the ICC. In that regard, we believe
that a great deal will depend on the Court’s level of
professionalism and impartiality in discharging the
lofty mission entrusted to it.
Sanctions are another key element of the
international order. With skilful use, targeted
application and careful analysis of negative side
effects, sanctions can serve as an effective instrument
to strengthen international peace and security and
restore respect for the law. It is of fundamental
importance that sanctions be imposed on a strictly legal
basis — that is, in strict compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations and with clear objectives and an
understanding of the conditions for lifting or easing
them.
Over the past two years, the Council has done
much to uphold individual rights and freedoms during
the application of targeted sanctions, first and foremost
by significantly improving listing and de-listing
procedures. We believe that those procedures should be
implemented based on criteria that are clearly
enshrined in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We also believe that there is a need at this stage to
focus on the implementation of what has already been
achieved, rather than on creating additional
mechanisms that might have a negative impact on the
effectiveness of coercive Council measures.

other fundamental principles of contemporary
international law have been robustly enshrined as the
undisputed and universally accepted canons for
conduct on the international stage. That is one of the
great achievements of civilization and serves as the
guarantee of a peaceful and prosperous future.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to welcome
you, Sir, as you preside over today’s debate. I would
also like to express my sincere appreciation to the
delegation of Mexico for having taken up the very
important issue of the rule of law. We are also grateful
to the Deputy Secretary-General and to Ms. Patricia
O’Brien, Legal Counsel of the United Nations, for their
thoughtful statements.
The rule of law is one of the most important
norms for ensuring the peaceful coexistence of human
beings. It is a fundamental principle to which the
United Nations must always adhere. It is especially
important for the Security Council to honour the rule of
law in discharging its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We are able to concretely see the operation of the
rule of law first in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The law serves both to prevent disputes and to provide
means to resolve them when they occur. It is desirable
to make active use of international judicial frameworks
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, including the
International Court of Justice (ICJ). It is therefore
important to universalize acceptance of the compulsory
jurisdiction of the ICJ. I should like to call upon States
that have not yet done so to accept it as early as
possible.

It should be noted that not only the Security
Council but the General Assembly, too, have devoted
attention to the task of enhancing the effectiveness of
sanctions and their application in accordance with
international law. In that connection, in 2009 the
General Assembly adopted a Russian-sponsored
document on criteria and conditions for imposing
United Nations sanctions that contained leading work
on this issue and was mindful of established practices
in the Security Council.

When efforts to seek peaceful solutions to
disputes do not bear fruit, the Security Council may
resort to sanctions as an important tool to reduce
threats to peace and security. Once decided upon by the
Council, it is important that all States fully implement
sanctions to ensure their effectiveness. Securing due
process and transparency and giving due consideration
to the human rights aspect in implementing sanctions
will lead to the strengthening of their effectiveness.
Japan therefore attaches great importance to the
establishment, under resolution 1904 (2009), of the
Office of the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime.

The sovereign equality of States, the rejection of
the use of force in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, the peaceful settlement of disputes and

Japan also attaches great importance to the
promotion of the rule of law for forging a peaceful,
free and orderly international society. The rule of law

10-42676

23

S/PV.6347

is in fact at the core of the nation-building process, in
particular in post-conflict situations. At the Security
Council debate on post-conflict peacebuilding under
Japan’s presidency in April, the Council emphasized in
its presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/7) that the rule
of law was a requisite element of sustainable
peacebuilding, along with political reconciliation,
security, development, social stability and human
rights. An integrated approach is essential to
strengthening coherence among those elements.
Preventing the recurrence of conflict by promoting and
strengthening the rule of law is indispensable for
effective peacebuilding strategies.
The rule of law in international society has
developed not only among the relationships between
States, but also in the area of the responsibilities of
individuals. In that regard, the Security Council has
played a pivotal role in creating international criminal
tribunals, such as for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. But the establishment of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to punish the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes of international concern was
epoch-making in the development of the rule of law.
The Review Conference of the Rome Statute held
recently in Uganda adopted a draft amendment on the
crime of aggression. In order for the ICC to better
discharge its mandate, it is imperative for States parties
to make steady progress on effectiveness, universality
and institutional sustainability.
The rule of law is also an essential component of
the social framework in the process of post-conflict
nation-building. In particular, the legal system is
treated as a key soft infrastructure, similar to physical
and hard infrastructure such as roads, electricity and
other networks. Once created, however, law is neither
complete nor able to function automatically, any more
than other types of infrastructure. It is a responsibility
of all of us to constantly re-examine how the law may
best be disseminated, understood and utilized by
people.
In that regard, Japan attaches importance to the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching,
Study,
Dissemination
and
Wider
Appreciation of International Law. The United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law, which is part
of that Programme and to which Japan has contributed,
is an innovative system that enables anyone in the
world with Internet access to study lectures by eminent

24

international scholars. We urge everyone to support the
programme.
The raison d’être of law lies in implementation
and compliance. Every State must implement law and
enforce the rule of law within its domestic affairs.
States also have the responsibility to observe
international law and to be ruled by it. To promote and
strengthen the rule of law at the international level,
each State must constantly confirm its adherence to the
fundamental principle of pacta sunt servanda. Member
States are bound by the Charter of the United Nations,
including Articles 25 and 94, to faithfully implement
the decisions of the Security Council.
Together with dissemination and awarenessraising efforts, we need to build judicial institutions
and human capacity to ensure implementation and
compliance, particularly in developing countries. To
facilitate compliance with the law of the international
community, Japan will continue to help in capacity
building efforts by developing countries, such as in the
areas of drafting laws, creating legal institutions and
training legal professionals.
Ms. McLeod (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having brought
this critical debate before the Security Council. I
should also like to recognize the statements made by
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs Patricia O’Brien.
On a daily basis, we address matters related to the
rule of law through much of our work in the Chamber
and in the General Assembly, including in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Sixth
Committee. We therefore welcome the opportunity to
participate in this thematic debate on these critical
issues.
The rule of law lies at the heart of my country’s
democracy. It is also central to the maintenance of
international peace and security and the pursuit of
global progress. President Obama has said, “In an
increasingly interconnected world, legal issues of
human rights, criminal justice, intellectual property,
business transactions, dispute resolution, human
migration and environmental regulation affect us all.”
My Government is deeply committed to enduring
legal principles: due process, equal protection under
law, judicial independence and justice for all. Beyond
our fierce dedication to the rule of law at home, we are

10-42676

S/PV.6347

also working to support and expand respect for the law
and human rights around the world.
As a member of the Security Council, we have
worked to ensure that the rule of law is an important
component of peacekeeping missions. We have brought
that same commitment to the General Assembly
committees responsible for operationalizing and
financing peacekeeping. By integrating the rule of law
into the mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions and following through on those precepts, the
Security Council and the United Nations can help to
achieve more lasting, stable and sustainable peace in
nations emerging from conflict.
In addition, the United States supports the
important work done by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly its
capacity-building activities to strengthen national rule
of law systems and respect for human rights around the
world. As a member of the Human Rights Council, the
United States is working to promote human rights and
strengthen international law and to create a more
credible Human Rights Council that can be a voice for
those suffering under the world’s cruelest regimes.
Our commitment to the rule of law is also
reflected in our strong support for ratification of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and our signing of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities — the first new human rights convention
of the twenty-first century.
In that the international rule of law does not
depend on multilateral discussions alone, international
judicial mechanisms can help peacefully resolve
conflicts and end impunity.
One such institution is the International Court of
Justice, which plays a vital role in the peaceful
resolution of international disputes. The United States
was pleased that its national group co-nominated
Ambassador Xue to fill the seat vacated by the
retirement of the distinguished Judge Shi. One of my
fellow citizens, Judge Thomas Buergenthal, has also
served with great distinction on the Court. He will be
retiring effective in September, and I am pleased that
the United States national group has nominated as his
replacement, Joan Donaghue, the State Department’s
Principal Deputy Legal Adviser and a lifelong advocate
of respect for international law.

10-42676

The United States strongly supports international
tribunals to bring to justice those who commit horrific
atrocities. We have been proud to serve on the
Management Committees of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and
to provide major funding for these two vital tribunals.
The United States also recently joined the Steering
Committee of the Khmer Rouge Tribunal and
announced a major contribution to it. The United States
continues to play an active role with the International
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
serving on the Security Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals as it grapples with the
challenges of the successor institutions to those two
important bodies.
The United States was pleased to participate as an
observer in the first Review Conference of the
International Criminal Court’s Assembly of States
Parties. We did so with a clear recognition that
international tribunals such as the International
Criminal Court can be an important part of the effort to
prevent and combat crimes that shock the universal
conscience.
At its heart, the rule of law depends on
developing strong domestic institutions around the
world. The United States therefore continues to provide
strong bilateral support for the rule of law. We are now
working with scores of countries, as well as with
international
and
regional
organizations,
on
programming that supports domestic rule of law. For
2011, for instance, the State Department and the United
States Agency for International Development have
proposed nearly $900 million for rule of law and
human rights programmes, a 28 per cent increase from
fiscal year 2009.
When we plan our bilateral work, we try to work
closely with the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, donors, other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations. The
number of actors working on promotion of
international rule of law can be daunting, but we must
coordinate and prioritize together to provide a better
future for host nations.
The responsible departure of United Nations
peacekeepers in post-conflict situations often requires
improving and expediting United Nations and other
efforts to build up national criminal justice sectors and
security institutions, which are central to local

25

S/PV.6347

authorities’ abilities to sustain a hard-won peace on
their own. The political development and recovery
challenges that post-conflict countries face are often
complex, and a broad array of actors may be helping
host countries strengthen the rule of law. We must
ensure that our efforts are mutually reinforcing and
helping to build national capacity. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recent efforts to further develop
civilian expertise in these areas.
The rule of law is one of the founding values of
the United States, and we believe that strengthening the
rule of law around the world reinforces peace, progress
and security.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): First of all, I would like
to welcome you, Mr. Deputy Minister, and I wish to
commend Mexico’s presidency for organizing this
meeting. I would like to thank to Ms. Asha-Rose
Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General, and Ms. Patricia
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and Legal Counsel, for their valuable and insightful
contributions to today’s debate.
The founders of this Organization expressed their
resolve to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained, in
the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations.
Today, we are more than ever bound by their
determination and commitment to an international
community based on the rule of law.
During the 2005 World Summit, our leaders also
reaffirmed their commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law, which are indispensable foundations
of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and they
reiterated their determination to foster strict respect for
them.
Indeed, upholding the rule of law is an ongoing
endeavour, and we Member States, as well as the
United Nations, are part of this essential process. We
welcome the developments and arrangements made in
the Organization for ensuring the coordination,
coherence and quality of the work of the United
Nations on the rule of law, as we heard this morning
from the Deputy Secretary-General and the United
Nations Legal Counsel.
One of the primary purposes of our Organization
is the maintenance of international peace and security.

26

But what is even more important is the emphasis given
to the peaceful settlement of international disputes in a
way that will respect international law. Indeed, the
Charter clearly indicates that international situations
that might lead to a breach of peace should be settled
by peaceful means and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law.
In this regard, the role of the International Court
of Justice (ICJ), as the principle judicial organ of the
United Nations, is of significant importance. The ICJ is
one of the key mechanisms available to Member States
for the peaceful settlement of their international
disputes. We commend the Court for its contribution to
this end, as well as its contribution to the evolution of
international law.
Today, the diverse and complicated nature of
conflicts, the multiplicity of the actors involved, the
indivisibility of security and the wide-reaching impact
of any conflict irrespective of geographical
considerations all require us to pursue a strategic
approach to conflict management, with a particular
emphasis on the durability of the solutions.
Of course, preventing conflicts is a more
desirable approach, and it should continue to be one of
the prime objectives of the Organization. However, in
cases where prevention is not possible, States should
resort to mechanisms available to them for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Furthermore, when conflicts
cannot be prevented, adherence to international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, is of utmost
importance so that the appalling consequences of
conflicts can be prevented or at least mitigated.
The rule of law and a properly functioning
judicial system appear as the key deterrent factors for
potential perpetrators of crimes. Sustainable prevention
is possible only if there is no impunity. The
international community has a duty to do more in this
direction through capacity-building and technical
assistance.
In recent years, international criminal justice has
evolved and continues to progress through the work of
various institutions, such as the International Criminal
Court and ad hoc and mixed tribunals. We must not
allow a culture of impunity to prevail. Those
responsible for atrocities must be brought to justice.
In his speech at the Review Conference in
Kampala, the Secretary-General said that the old era of

10-42676

S/PV.6347

impunity is over and stressed the birth of a new age of
accountability. This new age of accountability should
cover all serious crimes of concern to the international
community,
including
terrorism.
Moreover,
accountability should also be promoted in inter-State
relations. Thus, States that violate international law
must be held accountable for their acts.
The last point I would like to touch upon is
sanctions. As stated by others, a sanctions regime is an
important tool in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In our view, sanctions should be
resorted to only when there is a threat to peace, a
breach of peace or an act of aggression and when other
peaceful options are inadequate. Sanctions should be
resorted to with the utmost caution so as to keep them
from being counterproductive. Moreover, sanctions
should be carefully targeted in order to minimize
adverse consequences on populations and third-party
States.
On the other hand, sanctions regimes have
undergone some important changes in the recent past.
The most recent development is the appointment of an
ombudsperson for the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), which we also welcome.
Bearing in mind that enhancing the credibility of
sanctions regimes would greatly assist in the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
should continue to focus on how to further strengthen
sanctions
regimes’
legitimacy
and
overall
effectiveness.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
collective responsibility of all States to work towards
the strengthening of international law, the rule of law
and maintenance of peace and security by practicing
good governance and accountability as well as
observing
and
implementing
all
applicable
international instruments.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Mr. President, my delegation would like to
start by welcoming your presence in this debate and to
congratulate your country on its initiative to allow the
Security Council to again consider the issue of the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Your
country’s choice of this topic is most pertinent, given
the central role played by the rule of law in the
Council’s work, mostly in its efforts to re-establish and
build peace in States emerging from conflict.

10-42676

We also wish to convey our gratitude to Deputy
Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro for her enriching
contribution to our debate and we support her efforts to
strengthen the rule of law at the international level, in
particular through her coordination of the work of the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group. We
would also like to thank Ms. Patricia O’Brien, United
Nations Legal Counsel, for her enlightening statement.
The Mexican presidency has invited us to speak
about the three aspects of our debate: the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of the sanctions regimes.
For my delegation, the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law have as their corollary
good governance, democracy, respect for human rights
and the effective functioning of institutions. Indeed,
the authority of the State is fully exercised in a
political and institutional environment that guarantees
equality for all before the law, respect for human
dignity and fundamental freedoms.
We welcome the progress achieved since the
holding of the last debate on this issue, held in 2006
(See S/PV.5474). We are thinking in particular of the
creation of the Peacebuilding Commission which, since
its inception, has contributed, inter alia, to a better
taking into account of the primacy of law and
transitional justice in peacebuilding processes in postconflict situations, as seen in Burundi and Sierra
Leone.
We also welcome the fact that the Security
Council has for some years incorporated into
peacekeeping mandates aspects specific to the rule of
law, security sector reform, and the strengthening of
judicial and penal institutions and political institutions
in countries emerging from conflict, which greatly
contribute to creating an institutional framework based
on the rule of law, without which no lasting peace can
prevail.
Similarly, the significant number of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council in this field
contributes to strengthening the normative framework
conducive to the establishment of the rule of law and
the protection of populations made vulnerable by
conflict, especially women and children. Resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894
(2009) bear witness to this fact.

27

S/PV.6347

The promotion of the rule of law in nations goes
hand in hand with an international justice based on law
and peaceful coexistence among States pursuant to
Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter. In that
respect, the settlement of political and jurisdictional
disputes among States strongly contributes to restoring
and building peace.
With regard to the modes of diplomatic and
political settlements, my country has always
encouraged and practiced dialogue and political
cooperation in the search for solutions to crises and
conflicts. For example, we welcome the subregional
mechanisms established in Central Africa to strengthen
confidence-building measures among our States and to
prevent conflicts, such as the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa and the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa. Instead of resorting to the use of force,
these tools provide real prospects for peace in keeping
with the ideals and principles enshrined in the Charter.
Turning now to jurisdictional methods, the role of
the International Court of Justice, which is the
jurisdictional body par excellence for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, is crucial. Its decisions and
opinions reaffirm international law as the basis for
relations among States rather than the use of force. If
applied well, the opinions and rulings of the Court can
contribute effectively to the settlement of disputes and
thus serve as a necessary tool for the prevention of
conflicts. Gabon supports the activities of the Court
and encourages countries that have not yet done so to
accept its binding jurisdiction.

28

Our task is to go further still by establishing a
genuine culture of rule of law solidly anchored in
strong tradition and legal institutions. It is here that the
effective administration of justice acquires its true
meaning. Action to end impunity must be its ultimate
goal. I underscore here the key role played by
international criminal tribunals in delivering justice to
the victims of grave crimes and violations, as well as
other contraventions. At a time when the Council is
considering the establishment of residual mechanisms,
it is important to preserve the legacy of these tribunals
in the promotion of international law and the fight
against impunity.
On the effectiveness and credibility of sanctions
regimes, my delegation welcomes the Council’s
increasingly targeted and concerted sanctions, which
contribute to enhancing their legitimacy. The
appointment of an Ombudsman to ensure in an
equitable and transparent way the de-listing procedures
of entities and individuals is part and parcel of this
approach.
To conclude, my delegation wishes to voice its
full support for the adoption of the draft presidential
statement that will close our debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list. I therefore
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m.

10-42676
