102 (1953). Resolution du 3 decemhre 1953

l02 (1953). Resolution of 3 Decembe-r 1953

(c) An undertaking to contribute to the expenses of
the Court such equitable amou nt as the G eneral
Assembly shall assess from time to time, after consultation with the Japanese G overnment.

Le Conseil Jr sernrire
Recommar..i,· que l"As~em blee generale, conformement
au paragrapt:.: 2 de !'Article 93 de la Charle des Nations
Unies, deterr.::ne commc suit les conditions que le Japon
doit remplir pour devenir partie au Statut de la Cour
nternatiooaJ:- de Justice :
l e Japon deviendra partie au Statut a la date ou
ii deposera entre les mains du Secretaire general de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies un instrument signc
au nom du Gouvcmement du Japon et ratifie conformemcnt
la Constitution du Japon . Cet instrument
cnoncera :
a} L'acceptation des dispositions du Statut de la
Cour intemationale de Justice;
b) L ·accepta tion de toutes lcs obligations qui
incombent a u n Membre de !'Organisation des Nation~
Unies en \'Crtu de !'Article 94 de la Charle;
c) L 'engagement de vcrser, pour participer aux
dcpenses de la Co ur, une contribution equitable do nt
l'Assemblee generale fixera de temps autre le montant.
apres avoir consulte le Gouvernement japonais.

Adoptt!d at the 645th muting
by JIJ votes to none, with 1
abstention ( Union of Soviet
Sodalist Republics ).

Adopter II la 64.5• seance par·
10 volx t'Ontre zero, avec UII('
abstention ( U11io11 des Republiqun sorialisres snvieriq~s ).

The Security Council
Recommends that the General Assembly, in accordance
with Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Natioas determine the conditions on which Japan may
become a party to the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, as follows :
i
Japan will become a party to the Statute on the
date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations of an instrument, signed on behalf o f
the Government of Japan and ratified as may be required
by Japanese constitutional law, containing:

a

(a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute of
the International Court of Justice:
(b) Acceptance of al l the obligations of a M ember
of the United Nations under Article 94 of the Charter:

a

103 (1953). Resolution of 3 December 1953

103 (1953). Resolution du 3 decemhre 1953

Le Conseif de securitt
Recommends that the General Assembly, in accordance
Recommande que l'Assemblce gcnerale, conformement
with Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the , au paragraphe 2 de !'Article 93 de la Charle des Nations
United Nations, determine the conditions on which the , Unies, determine comme s uit Jes conditions que la
Republic of Sao Marino may become a party to the Repu blique de Saint-Marin doit remplir pour devenir
Statute of the International Court of Justice, as follows:
panic au Statut de la Cour internationale de Justice :
San Marino will become a party to the Statute on
Saint-M arin dcviendra partie au Statut la date ou
the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of
ii deposera entre les mai ns du Secretaire general de
the United Nations of an instrument, signed on behalf
I 'Organisation des Nations Unies un instrument signe
of the Government of the Republic and ratified as
au nom du Gouvernement de la R epublique et ratifie
may be required by the constitutional law of San
cooformement a la Constitution de Saint-Marin. Cet
Marino, containing:
instrument cnoncera:
(a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute of
a) L ·acceptation des dispositions du Statut de la
the International Court o f Justice;
Cour internationale de Justice;
(b) Acceptance of all the obligations of a Member
b) L 'acccptation de to utes Jes obligations c.iui
of the United Nations under Article 94 of the Charter:
incombent i1 un Membre de !'Organisation des N ations
Unies en vertu de !'Article 94 de la Charle;
(c) An undertaking to contribute to the expenses of
c) L 'engagement de verscr, pour participer au x
the Court such equitable amount as the General
depcnses de l:l Cour, une contri bution equitable dont
Assembly shall assess from time to time, after consulta1· Assemblce gcnerale fixera de temps a autre le montant.
tion with the Govt:rnmc.:nt or San M arino.
aprc:,; avoir consuitc ic Gouvernement de Saint-M arin.

The Security Council

a

A dcptee a la 6 4,S• StQII(<' par
JO 1·oix ronrre zero. arer une
<1bsre11 tio11 (U11io11 des RepuMiques .w ria/ittrs s<o1·ietiq11e.f I

Adop1ed at the 6161/r meetir;r;

hy /1} 1•otes to nn11l'. •<"ith I
abstention f Uninn of
s,,,·iaii" Rtpr,Nin , ·

s..riet

9
