S/2020/1322

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 28 December 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter dated 20 December 2019 (S/2019/1012),
in which I informed the President of the Security Council of the progress made by the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, and to her reply dated 27 December 2019
(S/2019/1013), in which she took note of my intention to continue the activities of
the United Nations support team to the Mixed Commission, with funding from the
regular budget. In this regard, I would like to inform you of the latest activities and
achievements of the Mixed Commission.
As you may know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002, on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial dispute. Through
my good offices, and with the support of the Secretariat, I have continued to facilitate
the implementation of the judgment.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and the delineation of the maritime boundary; facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority; addressing the situation of affected populations;
and making recommendations on confidence-building measures. Achievements to date
in the implementation of the judgment include the withdrawal of Nigeria and the
transfer of authority to Cameroon in the Lake Chad area (December 2003), along the
land boundary (July 2004) and on the Bakassi Peninsula (a process that began in June
2006 and was completed in August 2008); the delineation of the maritime boundary
(May 2007); and the end of the special transitional regime of five years and the exercise
by Cameroon of its full right of sovereignty over the Bakassi zone (August 2013).
The Mixed Commission also approved the recommendations of the Working
Group on the Maritime Boundary, including the provisions for cross-border
cooperation on hydrocarbon deposits straddling the maritime boundary (March 2011).
Over the course of 2020, the Mixed Commission, chaired by my Special
Representative for West Africa and the Sahel, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, continued to
make progress towards the implementation of the judgment, including by supporting
dialogue and communication between the two parties.
However, the attainment of the objectives outlined for 2020 was severely
constrained by restrictions resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic. Field operations had to be postponed following the closure of airspaces, as
well as land borders in Cameroon, Nigeria and Senegal, starting in mid-March. The
United Nations support team was able to convene the parties via videoconference in
order to continue its work, albeit in a very limited manner. Field operations resumed in

20-17905 (E)

050121

*2017905*

S/2020/1322

November with meetings of the Subcommission on Demarcation and the project
steering committee in Cameroon. Pillar construction will resume in January 2021, with
the expectation that approximately 322 pillars will be constructed in the Gotel
mountains in Taraba and Adamawa States in Nigeria, which correspond to the Adamawa
Region of Cameroon. The next phase of construction will continue until late 2021.
The following activities are required to conclude the work of the Mixed
Commission:
(a) Agreement by the two parties on outstanding demarcation areas using an
in-office, desktop evaluation and demarcation methodology;
(b) Facilitation of the construction and emplacement of boundary pillars
financed by the trust fund for demarcation activities;
(c)

Production of final maps and a boundary statement;

(d) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and coordinated security monitoring along the land boundary;
(e) Finalization of confidence-building initiatives for local communities
affected by the demarcation process;
(f) Implementation of the completion strategy by progressively handing over
the activities of the Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other
subregional structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission had been funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. Thereafter, from 2004 to 2020, its activities were
funded through the regular budget. The Governments of Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay have provided in-kind
contributions for the substantive and technical work of the Commission (military and
legal experts). In addition, logistical support has been provided by the Governments of
Cameroon and Nigeria, and voluntary contributions to the trust fund for de marcation
activities have been made by both countries, as well as by Germany. Between 2018 and
2019, the parties contributed $6 million to the demarcation trust fund.
As has been the case in recent years, and given the cost-effectiveness of the
operation and the important tasks remaining at this juncture to help to advance the
peaceful implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice, it is
my intention to ask for resources from the regular budget for the United Nations
support team to cover the year 2021.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

20-17905
