s

UNITED
NATIONS

.. ,.. . ,, .,

Security Council

,. :

'

Distr.
GENERAL
S/21026
14 December 1989
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At ti~ 2898th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 December 1989, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item "The situation in Cyprus",
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
members:
"The members of the Security Council take note of the Secretary-General's
report l/ on the United Nations operation in Cyprus and express their full
support for his continuing efforts in pursuing the initiative launched in
August 1988,
"The members recall the statement made on their behalf by the President
of the Council on 9 June 1989, 11 in which they expressed their regret that,
in the more than 25 years since the establishment of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), it had not been possible to achieve a
negotiated settlement of all aspects of the Cyprus problem.
"The members note the Secretary-General's assessment that a basis for
effective negotiations exists provided both leaders manifest the necessary
good will and recognize that a viable solution must satisf) the legitimate
interests of both communities.
"The members also share the Secretary-General's disappointment that it
has not been possible to achieve concrete results to date in developing an
agreed outline of an overall agreement. In this regard, they share the
Secretary-General's hope that direct and meaningful talks can be resumed early
next year.

ll

S/21010 and Add.l •

.V

S.20682.

89-32951

1383b (E)

I • ••

S/21026
English
Page 2
"The members urge both leaders to proceed as suggested by the
Secretary-General during their most recent meetings and, as agreed in June, to
co-operate with him and his Special Representative in completing work on an
outline. The members also urge the two parties to make a further determined
effort to promote reconciliation. They share the Secretary-General's view
that the adoption of ~~od will measures could prove useful in this regard.
"The members are concerned by the difficulties encountered by UNFICYP
during the last mandate period. They call on all parties to co-operate with
UNFICYP and to take effective measures to ensure that the integrity of the
buffer zone is safeguarded.
"The members also note the continuing financial difficulties facing
UNFICYP as indicated by the Secretary-General. They take note of hi~ appeal
for greater financial contributions to UNFICYP, which would help it continue
its important peace-keeping role in Cyprus and would reduce its financial
difficulties.
"The members request the Secretary-General to report back to the Council
by l March 1990 on what progress has been made in resuming intensive talks and
developing an agreed outline of an overall agreement."

·'

,-

,)•'
\

__..,,.,/
