ISO

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its eighth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction that a draft convention
on the carriage of goods by sea has been prepared by a
working group of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law and that this draft convention
has been transmitted to Governments and interested
international organizations for their comments;
4. Further notes with satisfaction that work on uniform rules governing the international sale of goods is
nearing completion and that in the near future a draft
convention on the international sale of goods will be
transmitted to Governments and interested international
organizations for their comments;
5. · Approves the decision of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law to maintain
on its agenda the item concerning multinational enterprises and to keep that subject under review pending the
identification by the Commission on Transnational Corporations of specific legal issues that would be susceptible of action by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for the international symposium on the teaching of international
trade law, held in connexion with its eighth session;
7. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention to
the topics to which it had decided to give priority,
namely, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
( b) Continue to consider the advisability of preparing uniform rules governing the liability for damage
caused by products intended for or involved in international trade, in accordance with the decisions thereon
adopted by the Commission at its eighth session;
( c) Continue its work on training and assistance in
the field of international trade law, taking into account
the special interests of the developing countries;
(d) Maintain close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to collaborate with international organizations
active in the field of international trade law;
( e) Maintain liaison with the Commission on Transnational Corporations with regard to the consideration
of legal problems that would be susceptible of action
by it;
(f) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(g) Keep its programme of work and working methods under review with the aim of further increasing the
effectiveness of its work;
8. Calls upon the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law to take account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the sixth and seventh special sessions of the General Assembly that laid
down the foundatjons of the new international economic

order, bearing in mind the need for United Nations
organs to participate in the implementation of those
resolutions;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its eighth session.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3495 (XXX). Report of the International
Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-seventh
session, 3
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing the
purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of
the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States,4 and
to give increa~ importance to its role in relations
among States,
Taking note with appreciation of the draft articles
prepared by the International Law Commission on State
responsibility, succession of States in respect of matters
other than treaties, the most-favoured-nation clause
and treaties concluded between States and international
organiza,tions or between international organizations,
Noting with satisfaction that the adoption by the
International Law Commission of general goals towards which its efforts should be directed in the years
to come is a means of rationalizing further the organization and methods of work of the Commission,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its twenty-seventh session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1976;
4. Recommends tha-t the International Law Commission, in the light of the observations on its plan of
work made at the present session of the General Assembly, should:
(a) Complete at its twenty-eighth session the first
reading of draft articles on the most-favoured-nation
clause;
( b) Continue on a high priority basis its work on
State responsibility, taking into account relevant General Assembly resolutions adopted at previous sessions,
with a view to completing the preparation of a first set
of draft articles on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts at the earliest possible time and
take up, as soon as appropriate, the separate topic of
international liability for injurious consequences arising
out of acts not prohibited by international law;
( c) Proceed with the preparation on a priority basis
of draft articles on succession of States in respect of
matters other than treaties;
3 Ibid., Supplement No. JO (A/10010/Rev.1 ).
4

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

Re10lutiona adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(d) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles on
treaties concluded between States and international
organizations or between international organizations;
(e) Continue its study of -the law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses;
S. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will review the progress of its work and
adopt 1 in the light of such a review, the methods of
work best suited to the speedy realization of the tasks
entrusted to it;
6. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with future sessions of the International Law Commission, further seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing
number of jurists of developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3496 (XXX). Succession of States
in respect of treaties
The General Assembly,
Having conside~ed the item entitled "Succession of
States in respect of treaties",
Recalling that, in its resolution 3315 (XXIX) of
14 December 1974, the General Assembly invited
Member States to submit to the Secretary-Gen~ral their
written comments and observations on the draft articles
on succession of States in respect of treaties contained
in the report of the International Law Commission on
. the work of its twenty-sixth session,11
Taking note of the report of ·the Secretacy-General6
containing the comments and observations submitted by
a number of Member States in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3315 (XXIX),
Taking note also of the views expressed by Member
States during the debates in the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions,
1. Urges Member States which have not yet been
able to do so to submit to the Secretary-General as
soon as possible their written comments and observations on the draft articles;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirty-first session of the General Assembly,
the comments and observations submitted by Member
States;
3. Decides to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries in 1977 to consider the draft articles on succession of States in respect of treaties and to embody the
results of its work in an international convention and
such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Conference of
plenipotentiaries on succession of States in respect of
treaties".
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975
r; Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/9610/Rev.1).
SA/10198 and Add.1-6.

151

3497 (XXX). Question of diplomatic asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3321 (XXIX) of 14 Decemher 1974,

Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the
question of diplomatic asylum and the views on that
question expressed in writing by twenty-five Member
States, 7
Believing that it is desirable to give Member States
more time in which to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the question of diplomatic asylum and
a further opportunity to express their views on this
question, including in particular any action that might
be taken by the General Assembly,
1. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
his report on the question of diplomatic asylum;
2. Invites Member States wishing to express their
views or to supplement views already expressed on the
question of diplomatic asylum to communicate those
views to the Secretary-General by 31 December 1976;
3. Decides to give further consideration to this question at a future session of the General Assembly.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3498 (XXX). Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 8
Drawing attention to its resolutions 2747 (XXV) of
17 December 1970, 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December
1971, 3033 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3107
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 and 3320 (XXIX)
of 14 December 1974, in which it urged the Government of the host country to make certain that the measures taken to ensure the protection and security of permanent missions to the United Nations and their
personnel were adequate to enable those missions to
perform properly the functions entrusted to them by
their Governments,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Government of
the host country with respect to the United Nations
and the missions accredited to it, their personnel and
their correspondence under the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 9 the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations 10 and general international law,
Noting with deep concern the illegal acts of individuals or groups against the inviolability of various missions accredited to the United Nations involving the
commission and the repetition of violent and other
criminal acts, including in some cases the use of bombs
or firearms, against their premises and the residences
of their personnel and also the assaults, the uttering of
threats and insults against such personnel, and picketing accompanied by violence,
7 A/10139 (Part I) and (Part I)/Add.I and A/10139
(Part II).
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 26 (Al 10026).
9 Resolution 169 (II).
10 Resolution 22 A (I).
