S/2007/281

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 May 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 15 May 2007 from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1664 (2006), I have the honour to
convey the attached letter from Prime Minister Siniora of Lebanon, dated 14 May
2007 (see annex).
I have studied the letter carefully and concur with him that, regrettably, all
domestic options for the ratification of the Special Tribunal now appear to be
exhausted, although it would have been preferable had the Lebanese parties been
able to resolve this issue among themselves based on a national consensus.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-34441 (E) 160507

*0734441*

S/2007/281

Annex to the letter dated 15 May 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
Letter dated 14 May 2007 from the Prime Minister of Lebanon
to the Secretary-General
Further to my letter of 10 April 2007, I write to you again regarding the
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
As you will recall, in my aforementioned letter I explained the impasse that
had been created by the refusal of the Speaker of parliament to convene a session of
parliament to formally ratify the statutes of the Tribunal and the bilateral agreement
with the United Nations. As you will have also seen from the communication from
members of parliament, a parliamentary majority has expressed its support for the
Tribunal and readiness to formally ratify it in parliament if only a session could be
convened. Unfortunately, this situation has continued since my last letter, as also
reported to you by Nicolas Michel after his visit to Beirut last month.
We view Mr. Michel’s most recent visit as a natural and welcome step on your
part to enable the Secretariat to assess, at first hand, the prospects of formal
domestic ratification of the Tribunal and the views of various parties regarding the
Tribunal and its statutes. Mr. Michel’s report to you and to the Security Council will
have confirmed that (a) for all practical purposes the domestic route to ratification
had reached a dead end, with no prospect for a meeting of parliament to complete
formal ratification; and that (b) despite their stated support for the establishment of
a Tribunal, the opposition has declined to discuss with Mr. Michel any reservations
they may have on any of the agreed statutes.
In the light of the above, the Lebanese Government believes that the time has
come for the Security Council to help make the Special Tribunal for Lebanon a
reality. We therefore ask you, as a matter of urgency, to put before the Security
Council our request that the Special Tribunal be put into effect. A binding decision
regarding the Tribunal on the part of the Security Council will be fully consistent
with the importance the United Nations has attached to this matter from the outset,
when the investigation commission was established. Further delays in setting up the
Tribunal would be most detrimental to Lebanon’s stability, to the cause of justice, to
the credibility of the United Nations itself and to peace and security in the region.
I would also like to request that the present letter be circulated to the members
of the Security Council.
(Signed) Fouad Siniora

2

07-34441
