UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
\ Qq f jr:,.; 2-:.i”

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

JUN 19 1985
MEETING:

9 JULY

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/l939)

.. ... ... .. .. ... .. .. ... .. .. .. .... . ... .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ............................

1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Chowteh, Chairman of the Standing Committee
of the National. People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China ......

1

Adoption of the agenda ...............

1

. ................................

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against the
Republic of Uganda:
(rr) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the
Organization of African Unity to. the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(h) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);
(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
@) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12124) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

S/PV. 1939

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officiul Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it aptiears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions rind
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

,

1939th MEETING
Held in New York, on Friday,
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI

(Italy).

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdbm
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l939)
1.

Adoption

of the -agenda

2.

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
current Chairman of the Organization of African,
Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against
the Republic of Uganda:
(rr) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant
Executive Secretary of the Organization
of
African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(h) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Mauritania
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12128);
(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/12123);
((1) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge
d’Affaires c1.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Uganda to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12124)

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT:
My first words, as President
of the Council, are addressed to my predecessor in
this chair, Mr. Frederick R. Wills, the Minister for
‘Foreign Affairs of Guyana, and to his compatriot and
our colleague here, Ambassador Rashleigh E. Jackson. On behalf of all the members of the Council, as
well as on my own behalf, I wish to express our admiration and gratitude for the dedication and skill with
which they presided over the 15 formal meetings
and numerous consultations held during their tenure
of office. The Security Council was faced with a
number of delicate and complex issues, and thanks to
the wisdom, patience, great impartiality and admirable

9 July 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
sense of fair play with which our presiding officers so
efficiently
guided the proceedings,
none of those
issues, I am pleased to note, has been handed over
uncompleted
to the President for July. Accordingly,
I can speak for all my colleagues in voicing our appreciation for the work carried out by the delegation of
Guyana last month.
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Chou-teh, Chaiiman of
the Standing Committee of the National People’s
Congress of the People’s Republic of China.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to convey to the
delegation of China, on behalf of the Council, the
most sincere condolences
upon the demise of
Mr. Chou-teh, Chairman of the Standing Committee
of the National People’s Congress of the People’s
Republic of China, who was an outstanding political
personality
closely associated with the history of
China and who devoted his whole life to his country.
Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
The provisional
agenda for
this afternoon’s meeting of the Council is contained
in document S/Agenda/l939.
I understand that the
representative of the Soviet Union would like to make
a short statement in this connexion. I give him the
floor.
4. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (irtterpr~~trrtic~rl .fiant Russion):
Mr. .President, before the agenda is adopted, I should like to
make sure our understanding of the question is clear
as ,formulated in the text before us. We believe, and
our understanding is, that the words in inverted commas, “act of aggression”, are taken from the telegram
from the current Chairman of the Organization
of
African Unity, the Prime Minister of Mauritius which
refers to “this unprecedented
aggression against
Uganda by Israel” [S/12126, (l/l/l(>.r]. I should like this
to be borne in mind.
5. The PRESIDENT:
The statement of the representative of the Soviet Union has been recorded.
6. If I hear no objection, I shall consider the agenda
contained in the document I just mentioned adopted.

Mr. von Wechmar (FedeyaC Republic- of Germany),
Mr. Camara (Guinea), Mr. Waiyaki (Kenya), Mr. El
Mr. ;lamal
(Qatar)
and
Hassen
(Mauritania),
Mr. Oyono (United Republic $%ameroon)
took the
pla?es reserved for them at thP,side of the Council
I#‘:
chirmher.
?r?l,
10. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the SecretaryGeneral, who has asked to make a short statement.
_
.: ~.
11,. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. president,
I should like to join you in paying a tribute to the
memory of Mr. Chou-teh, Chairman of the Standing
Cpmmittee of the National People’s Congress of the
PeepIe’s Republic of China. I sent a message of svmpathy of his passing to the Primer of the State Council
of the People’s Republic of China as soon as I rebeived
the sad news. His devoted and outstanding leadership
will long be remembered, not only in his own country
but throughout the world. I should like to take this
opportunity to. convey once again to gmbassador Lai
Ya-Ii and to the members of the Permanent Mission
of China my most sincere condoletices.

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of
the “‘act of aggression” by Israel against the Republic
of Uganda:
(a) L&er dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the Organization of African Unity
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12126);
(6) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania
to the United Nations
addressed to the .President of the Security Council
(S/12128);
(cl Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary General (S/12123);
(4 Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the ChargC d’affaires
a.i. of the’ Permanent Mission of Uganda to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12124).
7. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the
attention of the Council to certain documents in addiiion to the documents listed on the agenda which are
relevant to the item before the Council. They.are the
following: letter dated 7 July from the Chargi d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Kenya [S/12/3/];
note verbale dated 8 July from the Permanent Mission
of Algeria, transmitting
a message addressed to the
. Secretary-General
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Algeria [s//2/32];
letter of 9 July from the representative of the United State& transmitting
the text
of the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Seizure of Aircraft signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970’ [S//2134]; letter dated 8 July from the representative of Somalia [S/12/36]; letter dated 9 July from
the representative of Mexico [S//2135].

12. I thank the Council for allowing me to‘speak &
the very outset of this important debate. As the meml
bers of the Council are no doubt aware, I issued a
public statement on 8 July, immediately
after my
return from Africa, in which I gave a detailed account
of the role I had played in efforts to secure the release
of the hostages at Entebbe. I also included an account
of the statements I had made on this incident during
my trip back from Africa to New York.
13. Of course, the case now before the Council raises
a number of complex issues because, in this instance,
the response of one State to the results of.an act of
hijacking involved ati action affecting another sovereign State. Indeed, in reply to a specific question,
I said: “I haven’t got all the details, but it seems to be
clear that Israeli aircraft have landed in Entebbe and
this constitutes a serious violatioh of the sovereignty
of a Member State of the United Nations.” Given the.
responsibilities
which I have as Secretary-Gene~ral
of the Organization, I consider that it is my obligation
to uphold the principle of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of every State.

8. I should now like to inform the members of the
Council that I have received letters requesting invitations to participate in the discussion from the following
Member
States: Federal Republic
of Germany,
Guinea, Israel, Kenya, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Qatar,
Uganda and the United Republic of Cameroon. In
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose that the Council, in accordance with
the usual practice, should invite the representatives
of those States to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.

14. However, I am fully aware that this is not the
only element involved in considering cases of the kind
which the Council is discussing today. This is particularly true when the world community is now required
to deal with unprecedented problems arising from acts
of international
terrorism, which I have consistently
condemned and which raise many issues of a humanitarian, moral, legal and political character for which,
at the present time, no commonly
agreed ‘rules or
solutions exist.

9. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I invite the representatives of
Israel, Mauritius
and Uganda to take seats at the
Council table, and the other representatives to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited
to take.a place at the Council table when it is their
turn to address the Council.

15. With regard to the respective positions which
will, no doubt, be put’ before ‘the Council, it is, of
course, for the Council td make its own
determination
I
on the merits of the.case.

At the invitation
of the Preside/if;
Mr. Herzog
(Israel), Sir Harold Waiter (Maaritirrs) and Mr. Ah‘dalla (Uganda) took places at the Corrncil table and
2

Entebbe airport. A contingent of security forces was
positioned to. guard against any possible danger. To
avoid interference with the normal air traffic and also
to enable the Ugandan authorities to ascertain the
character and nature of the hijackers, the plane was
directed to taxi to the old airport, which is about one
mile away.

16. Let me conclude by expressing the hope that,
despite the strong’views
which will undoubtedly
be
expressed in the debate, the C&mcil will find a way.to
point the world commu,nity in a constructive direction
so that we may be spared a repetition of the human
tragedies of the past and the type of conflict between
States which the Council will now be considering.
w
‘I::.
17. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China)(rrcrns/rric~n~~~nI
Chinese):
Chairman Chou-teh, a member of the Standing Committee of the Political
Bureau of the Communist
Party of China and Chairman of the Standing Cdmmittee of the National People”s Congress of the People’s Republic of China, passed away on 6 JulyTin
Peking. Chairman Chou-teh was a great revolution$ry
fighter and proletarian revolutionary
of the Chinese
people and one of the outstanding leaders of our Party,
our country and the army. His death is a great loss to
the Chinese people.
..
I
:

23. It took several hours before the initial contact
with those in charge of the aircraft was made. After
the initial contact the ,Ugandan authorities
learned
that the hijackers of the aircraft were members of the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP)
and that they had with them over 250 hostages on
board of different nationalities
and different age
groups. The hijackers stated that they did not want
anybody to go near the aircraft and that, whatever
arrangements
the Ugandan” authorities
security
intended to make, the security officers concerned
should not go within a radius of 50 metres of the aircraft. After further communication
with the hijackers,
the President of Uganda was able to convince them to
allow the’hostages to be supplied with refreshments.
At that point the hijackers informed the Ugandan
authorities that they were waiting for further instructions from their leaders and to that end they wanted
the fact of their’ being at Entebbe to be publicized.
It was also at this point that they issued a long statement of the general policy of the PFLP, demanding
that it be given as wide publicity as possible. Being
anxious to co-operate for the sake of the hostages, the
Ugandan Government agreed that the statement would
be repeatedly broadcast by the Uganda Broadcasting
Corporation and publicized in the local press so as to
keep the hijackers appeased.

18. At the present meeting, the Presideni of the
Council and the Secretary-General
have extended to
the Chinese delegation
their condolences on the
passing away of Chairman Chou-teh. In the name of
the; Chinese delega’tion, I should like to. take this
opporturiity~ to express our heartfelt thanks to them,
and we shall convey their cordial sentiments to the
Chinese Government and people, and to the’bereaved
family.
19. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the
representative
of Uganda,’ Lieutenant-Colonel
Juma
Oris Abdalla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda,
on whom I now call.
20. Mr. ABDALLA
(Uganda): The Ugandan delegation wishes to express its thanks to the members-of
the Organization. of African Unity for requesting the
convening of, the Security Council to consider the
aggression of Zionist Israel against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Uganda. My delegation would
like also to thank you, Mr. President, as we1.l as all
the: other’ members of the Court&l, for agreeing to
conze,ne ,t,his meeting.

24. Initially the Ugandan authorities’
intention was
to offer the hijackers fuel and food supplies and request
them to proceed elsewhere. They were extremely
reluctant, and refused to proceed anywhere until
they had made contacts with their leaders and made
their motives for the ~hijacking known. This situation
continued for most of that day, during which very
tricky and delicate negotiations were being conducted
by President Amin personally, resulting in the hijackers agreeing that the hostages would be allowed
out of the aircraft and securely transferred to the old
airport building. That process was a very delicate one,
carried out at a time when the hijackers had become
highly irritable and very suspicious of any possible
disarming action by Ugandan authorities. It involved
the aircraft being moved as near as possible’to the old
airport transit launch. For this process, the hijackers
demanded that they first inspect the transit launch and
the entire building to ensure their own security and
that of their hostages. Some of them accordingly went
ahead of the aircraft, placed explosives in strategic
positions and demanded the withdrawal of the Ugandan
security forces to a position 200 metres away from the
aircraft terminal buildings.

21. At about 4 o’clock local time, 0100 hours GMT,
on 28 June, His Excellency Al-Hajji
Field-Marshal
Dr. Idi Amin Dada, Life President of the Republic of
Uganda, was informed by a telephone call from
Entebbe Air Control that a hijacked French plane
with 250 persons on board was circling over Entebbe,
having. only 15 minutes’ fuel left, and was seeking
permission to land. President Amin was placed in .a
dilemma: whether to refuse permission for the air&aft
to land, thereby, risking every likelihood
of crashing
and killing all those aboard, or to allow it to land
safely at Entebbe and face the consequences of a
hijack situation. s
22. Taking those facts into account, and motivated
by humanitarian
considerations,
the President directed that the aircraft be allowed to land safely at

25. At this point it is relevant to mention that, in
addition to having high explosives which included
3

hand grenades, the hijackers
also had automatic
weapons. As Uganda has clearly stated in various
communiquts
on the hijacking, the Ugandan armed
forces were not allowed by the hijackers to go near
the airport building. That was part of the bargain.
However, once the hostages and hijackers were in the
airport building, after further bargaining, many facilities were made available to the hostages, such as
medical and food supplies and other welfare maintenance, which were administered by the few civilians
while negotiations continued with the hijackers.

received a number of messages from world leaders,
such as the President of France, who, in ‘two messages
within two days, expressed his deep appreciation for
the strenuous efforts President’Amin
was exerting to
have the hostages released, and,urged him to continue
so that all the hostages could be released.
!I :29. On 2 Ju!y,.President
Amin’had to go to Mauritius,
where he was to open the thirteenth session of the
Organization of African Unity’s Assembly of Heads
of State and Government,
and also to hand over the
ch’airmanship of the Organization to the new chairman.
While in Mauritius, President Amin took the opportu’nity fully to brief his colleagues on his efforts to have
the hostages released. In his statement to his colieagues, President Amin included an appeal to al! the
Governments
concerned to do everything possible
to save the lives of the remaining hostages. He also
took the occasion to brief the Secretary-Genera!,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, fully on the matter, urging him
also to use his good offices to impress upon the Governments concerned the gravity and urgency of the
matter.

26. Most of 29 June was spent in finding out the
modalities of concrete negotiations while waiting to
learn the wishes of the hijackers. By the end of the
day, the hijackers proposed that the Somali Ambas-sador to Uganda, in his capacity as the dean of the
League of Arab States, should be their spokesman.
Also during the course of the day, the hijackers circulated a questionnaire to the hostages seeking information about their nationalities,
professions and ages.
The demands of the hijackers had not yet been made
known by the end of that day. Also during that day,
the hijackers
accepted the Ugandan authorities’
request that, in addition to food supplies, a medical
team consisting of one doctor and several nursing
staff be made available to hostages in need of medical
attention.

30. Because of the delicate situation back home,
President Amin had to cut short his stay in Mauritius
to return home early on the evening of 3 July. Immediately on his return, the President quickly re-established
contact with all those concerned, including the hostages, whom he personally addressed in the presence
of the Somali Ambassador, now for the third time,
reassuring them of his untiring efforts to secure their
release. Specifically,
President Amin took the occasion to thank the hostages for the message of appreciation which they had issued earlier in the day for the
efforts he was making on their behalf.

27. On 30 June, following the report by the medical
team and President Amin’s persistent appeals, the
hijackers agreed to release 47 hostages including the
old, the sick and some children. It was on the same
day that for the first time the hijackers issued their
demand. This was for the release of certain persons
imprisoned in Israel, West Germany, France, Switzerland and Kenya, totalling in a!! 53. The demand
was given to the Somali Ambassador as we!! as to the
Ugandan authorities. The Ugandan authorities in turn
passed it on to the French Ambassador. On that occasion also, the hijackers set a new deadline of 2 p.m.
local time, 1100 hours GMT, on I July, by which time
a!! the persons whose release they had requested
should be transported to Entebbe for an exchange of
hostages.

31. Hardly had President Amin settled down when
Israel’s invading force landed at Entebbe. As you
were informed, Mr. President, in a message sent to
you by my President on 4 July [S/12124, annex], at
2120 hours GMT, three Zionist Israeli transport planes
landed by surprise and without any authority from
the Ugandan Government
at Entebbe International
Airport. Soon after landing, they proceeded straight
to the old airport building where the hostages and the
crew of the French airbus, which was hijacked in flight
between Tel Aviv and Paris, were being held by Palestinian commandos. Out of the aircraft, two military
jeeps drove and the invaders, using hand grenades,
machine-guns, bazookas and other explosives, indiscriminately
attacked the airport building
and the
Ugandan soldiers who were guarding the building at
a distance of 200 metres and who were armed only
with lights arms in accordance with the conditions laid
down by the hijackers. As a result of this attack on
the building, the invaders killed seven hijackers and
some hostages and a number of Ugandan soldiers,
injuring many others as well. The Israeli invaders also
blasted the old airport terminal building, damaged the
runway and destroyed a number of Ugandan aircraft
and extensive installations.

28. On I July, which was the first deadline the hijackers had set for the release of the 53 persons who
were allegedly held by the aforementioned
five Governments, President Amin was not only able to persuade the hijackers to extend the deadline to 4 July,
but also continued to plead for the release of the
remaining hostages. The response received from the
hijackers was the release of 100 hostages belonging
to nations other than Israel or having dual nationalities, and the extension of the deadline to 1100 hours
GMT on 4 July for the hijackers to secure their demands. Up to this point, as can be seen, President Amin
had ,persona!!y,p!ayed
a very vital part in talking the
hijackers into agreeing to the release of their hostages.
He had spent virtually the whole time without any
sleep. In appreciation of his efforts, for example, he
4

this humanitarian
gesture by Zionist Israel-the
vehicle of imperialism-was.
to invade Uganda, once
again living up to its record of barbarism and ban- .”
ditry. By this act of naked aggression against Uganda,
the Zionists killed Ugandans .who were trying. to
protect the hostages and inflicted great damage on
Ugandan property.

32. I should like to draw the attention of the Council
to some aspects of the Israeli invasion that clearly
indicate that Israel did not mount the invasion without the knowledge, rcollaboration
and assistance of
a few other count&s,
Africa should not allow ,any
part of its soil to be used by the Zionist Israelis and
their imperialist
masters or collaborators
to attack
another sister country.
..

36. Is this a worthy Member of the Organization?
Uganda has made its view on Israel’s membership in
the United Nations repeatedly clear in many international forums, the last of which was the address to
the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly by
President Amin.*

33. According to the information
available to: us,
which information
has been confirmed by the international press, Zionist Israel’s plan to invade Entebbe
was decided upon in Tel Aviv on 1 July. That is.the
very day President Amin had convinced the hijackers
to extend the deadline for their demands and has also
succeeded in getting the hijackers to release more of
the hostages. The Ugandan delegation has further
knowledge that the Israeli plan to invade Entebbe
must have been conceived as far back as when the
hijacked plane touched down in Uganda. It is of interest to note, for example, that on the very night of the
invasion, exactly one hour and forty minutes after the
Israeli force landed-at Entebbe, the Voice of America
was broadcasting the success of the mission. This was
in its broadcast of 2 a.m. local time, 2300 hours GMT.
All the British Sunday papers that normally
are
published by midnight of Saturday had, in great detail,
the story of the so-called successful operation at
Entebbe. The Srtndny Express,
for example, in its
edition of 2.30 a.m. of that same day, gleefully reported that

37. We call upon the Council unreservedly to condemn in the strongest possible terms Israel’s barbaric,
unprovoked
and unwarranted aggression against the
sovereign Republic of Uganda. Uganda demands full
compensation
from Israel for the damage to life and
property caused during its invasion. Our authorities
are in the process of working out the particulars of
the claim arising out of the damage,
38. I can only hope that no other African State can
in any way be tainted with suspicion in this sordid
affair, for this would mean that no one on the whole
continent could trust or support the ideal of African
unity. This unity has been forged through the sweat,
brains and blood of all our African brothers. Let not
today be, even in doubt, a day of suspicion.

“An Israeli commando force today rescued all
hostages held by pro-Palestinian
guerrillas
at
Entebbe Airport,
Uganda, an Israeli spokesman
said in Tel Aviv early today. The Air France crew
was also freed, the spokesman said. Explosions
rocked Entebbe Airport after three Israeli aircraft
swooped down.”

39. I wish, on behalf of President Amin, the Govemment and all the people of Uganda, to end my delegation’s submission by expressing our thanks to all those
countries and organizations,
especially the Organization of African Unity, that have since the unwarranted
aggression against the innocent people of Uganda sent
messages of sympathy, solidarity and support, which
we very much appreciate.

34. I should like to make it clear that Uganda has
never condoned and never will condone international
piracy. It is not therefore true to say, as has been
alleged by the ruling circles in Israel, that Uganda
collaborated with the hijackers. The Ugandan Government got involved in this affair accidentally
and
purely for humanitarian
reasons. Perhaps the crew
of the French airbus will be in a better position to tell
us how the hijacking ended in Uganda. According to
what we know from press reports, the French airbus
belonging to Air France, flight 139, started from Tel
Aviv en rorrtc for Paris via Athens. It was after it
took off from Athens that the hijackers took over and
forced the aircraft to land in Benghazi, from where it
took off after refuelling. Its request to land at Khartoum
was refused and, possibly, that is why it ended up at
Entebbe with only a fifteen-minute
supply of fuel. It
can be deduced from this story that the hijackers
wanted to go to Khartoum.

40. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Mauritania.
I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
41.

Mr.

EL HASSEN

(Mauritania)
(interpretntion
I am speaking in this
debate on behalf of the Group of African States in the
United Nations. I should like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council and by saying how pleased we are in
our Group to see a man of your -competence and
experience presiding over the work of the Council in
such difficult and tragic circumstances. I should also
like to thank you and the other members of the Council
for having been kind enough to convene this meeting
of the Council on the request of the Organization of
African Unity and on the request of the African Group.

.fiwnl Frcwch): Mr. President,

42. Before going into the substance of the matter,
I wish to address our condolences to the delegation
of the People’s Republic of China on the death of

‘35. Uganda gave all the help and hospitality it was
capable of giving to all the hostages. The response to /
5

Chairman Chou-teh, who was well known throughout
the world and who certainly played an important
historic role in the liberty of peoples and in their
emancipation.
We hope that the Chinese delegation
here will find this an expression of our deepest condolences.

tolerate. The consequences of the outrage committed
by the Tel Aviv authorities against the Republic of
Uganda are sufficiently serious to warrant Israel’s
condemnation
by this Council., 1
46. But these consequence.$‘however
serious they
may be, are not the only reason”for the alarm expressed
by the African Heads of State at the last summit
meeting of the Organization of African Unity. It is the
seriousness of the act itself, and particularly the dangerous precedent it constitutes, that prompted the
most highly placed African leaders to condemn Israel
and call for the convening of this meeting of the Security Council so that a similar position could be adopted
by the Council.

43. The date of 4 July 1976 is of course an important
date in the history of the United States; it was quite
rightly a joyful occasion for the great American people. But for the people and Government of Uganda,
and indeed for Africa as a whole, 4 July 1976 was a
date of mourning and alarm-mourning
and alarm not
because of the loss of any given person, not. because
of a natural disaster, but because of the flagrant violation committed
by Israel against the Republic of
Uganda, whose Government had spared no effort to
save innocent persons from almost certain doom. On
4 July 1976 several units of the Israeli Army, deceiving
international public opinion and abusing the good faith
of the countries of transit, as well as the good faith
of the Government of Uganda itself, landed at Entebbe
airport to sow death and destruction. Several Ugandan
civilians and soldiers were killed without any reason
or justification
whatever.
Considerable
material
damage was done to the Government and people’ of
Uganda. This act of aggression and its human and
material consequences are familiar to the Council;
-they have been made known to you, Mr. President,
and to the members of the Council by the President
of the Republic of Uganda [S//2/24] and in the clear
statement just made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Uganda. I therefore do not need to repeat the
details.

47. No country, and certainly no African country,
can henceforth be secure against such acts, on which
the Israeli Government
seems to wish to confer the
status of State practice. By committing
the act with
which we are dealing, Israel violated the sovereignty
and independence of a State Member of the United
Nations and member of the Organization of African
Unity. That is aggression within the meaning of article 1 of the Definition of Aggression in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX),
which
provides:
“Aggression is the use of armed force by a State
against the sovereingty,
territorial
integrity
or
political independence of another State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Charter of the
United Nations.”
Now, it is clear that Israel used force against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda. It is
clear also that this act of aggression is incompatible
with Article 2 of the Charter, and particularly para-’
graph 4 of that Article.

44. The pretext invoked by the Tel Aviv authorities
for undertaking
this adventure was to free Israeli
citizens being held hostage by so-called Palestinians
or pro-Palestinians.
But everyone knows what efforts
were being made not only by various Governments
and by the Secretary-General
but also by the Govemment of Uganda itself, to find a solution to a problem
for which Uganda was in no way responsible. Everyone knows also that this action of the so-called Palestinians or pro-Palestinians
had been disapproved
of by everyone, and particularly by the Arab countries. Everyone is aware, furthermore, of the attitude
adopted in this respect by the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO), to which these persons were
supposed to belong.

48. I think that the facts are clear. International
law
has been flouted and it is the duty of the Council to
ensure that all the Members of the Organization enjoy
the rights guaranteed to them by the Charter.
49. The adventure launched by the Tel Aviv authorities is represented to us today as being an exceptional
political and military act, and consequently something
worthy of praise. However, if we take the trouble to
look beyond the technical aspect of this adventure, it
is easy to see that it is the work of people who are
almost reckless and that it really belongs to the world
of childhood. Not only could this adventure have ended
in catastrophe for all those whom the Israelis wanted
to rescue from captivity, but we are convinced that
in future it will make even more difficult any peaceful
solution to similar tragedies. It is clear, indeed, that
those who, regrettably, go in for the hijacking of aircraft and the taking of hostages will draw a conclusion
which can in no way be to the advantage of innocent
people. Henceforth,
this is nothing to prevent the
hijackers of aircraft from carrying out their threats,

45. .But the Israeli Government,
defying the international community,
deceiving international
public
opinion, preferred to take the law into its own hands.
There is nothing so surprising about the fact that that
Government
had decided to do everything it could
to free innocent persons. But that it should have gone
so far in its action as to attack a small country that
had done and was doing everything it couId to prevent
a tragedy-the
kind of tragedy that is, das, occurring
only too frequently
these days-demonstrates
an
attitude which I believe no country of good faith can
6

strate to Israel,
disapproval.

knowing the risk and the danger of death which will
be involved, in.any case, in negotiations undertaken
with them. The result of the IsraeE adventure cannot,
therefore, be to the benefit of innocent people who
may, unfortunately,
one day find themselves taken
hostage by individuals
who are often irresponsible,
having everything to gain and nothing to lose.

clearly

and

unequivocally,

your

53. In conclusion, it seems to met that it is the duty
of the Council to ensure that international
law is respected, and to guarantee the rights recognized by the
Charter to all Members of the Organization,
particularly the weak ones, whose only defence reposes in
their legitimate rights and their voice in the Organization. The Republic of Uganda has been the victim of
aggression; its sovereignty and independence
have
been violated.
Uganda, like the whole of Africa,
expects from you, the members of the Council, an unequivocal condemnation
of this violation of Uganda’s
sovereignty; it expects you to demand for it just and
equitable
compensation
for the material
damage
inflicted.
If, unfortunately,
the Council does not
measure up to this responsibility,
the very ruison
d’2tre of the Organization
will be threatened.

50. It is worth considering, too, Ghat would be the
attitude of a given country if, for humanitarian
reasons, it were to agree to accept a hijacked aircraft:@
order to save innocent people from death, and for that
reason fell victim to the same kind of Israeli aggression. Let us suppose for a moment-and
this could
easily have happened, as it may well happen in the
future-that
the Air France airbus that was hijacked
had gone, not to Uganda, but to the United States,
France, Belgium or the United Kingdom, for example.
Would those countries have simply folded their arms
when confronted not only by the violation of their
sovereignty but also by the death of their fellow citizens, civilian and military? We believe that the answer
to that question can only be in the negative and that
the press of those countries would have been unanimous in blaming the Israelis for the aggression. But
since we are dealing here with a third-world country,
an African country, there is a rush to claim victory,
to lavish praise and even to extend congratulations,
flying in the face of logic and common sense. It seems,
indeed, that there is applause for the introduction
of
the law of the jungle into international relations. There
seems to be some delight at the prospect of seeing
anarchy and mayhem erected as a system in the relations between States.

54. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
55. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): Mr. President, at the out-set may I extend to you my delegation’s best wishes
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council,
and express my highest regard for your wide-ranging
experience and personal qualities, which will stand
you in good stead in the deliberations of the Council.
It is particularly
appropriate
that a son of Rome
should be presiding on this occasion-Rome,
in which
the principle civis rornonNs sun? was enunciated-the
principle cited on the occasion when a State’s duty to
defend its nationals abroad was proclaimed.

51. Aerial hijacking and certain forms of violence
do exist. It is an undeniable fact. Even if in certain
cases they reflect the despair of those who have been
driven from their homes, of those who have had their
dignity trodden down, and those who have been
deprived of the most elementary human rights, no one
can possibly approve the form, much less the consequences, of such violence. This is a form of violence
which is unforeseseeable because it is the work of
persons or individuals who are difficult to control. The
international
community
has every right to be concerned about his form of violence, and is seeking to
eliminate its causes so as to remove the reasons for
it.

56. From a purely formal point of view, this meeting
arises from a complaint brought against the Government of Israel. However, let me make it quite clear
that sitting here as the representative of the Government of Israel, as I have the honour to do, I am in no
way sitting in the dock as the accused party. On the
contrary, I stand here as an accuser on behalf of the
free and decent people in this world.
57. I stand here as an accuser of the forces of evil
that have unleashed a wave of piracy and terrorism
which threatens the very foundations
of human
society.
58. I stand here as an accuser of all those evil forces
which in their inherent cowardice and abject craven
attitude see blameless wayfarers and innocent women
and children-yes,
even babes in arms-as a legitimate
target for their evil intentions.

52. But the violence indulged in, unfortunately,
by
certain uncontrollable
individuals becomes an outrage
when it is built into a system by a Government which
not only publicly assumes responsibility
for it but
even bases national pride on it. The act committed by
the Tel Aviv authorities
against the Republic of
Uganda is a new form of violence infinitely
more
dangerous because it is the work of an organized
authoriy which, moreover, is a Member of this Organization. Israel wants to introduce the law of the jungle
into international
relations-and
it may well succeed
if you, the members of the Council, do not demon-

59. I stand here as an accuser of the countries that,
because of evil design or lack of moral backbone,
have collaborated with these bloodthirsty
terrorists.
60. I stand here as an accuser of all those in authority
throughout
the world who for reasons of cynical
expediency have collaborated with terrorism.
7

61. I stand here as an accuser of this world Organization, the United Nations, which has been unable,
because of the machinations
of the Arab representatives and their supporters, to co-ordinate effective
measures in order to combat the evil of world terrorism.

have risen behind us and proclaimed
“enough”
to
this spectre of terror, have cried out ?enough” to this
world body of pontificating diplomats in which on so
many occasions moral cowardice and cynical expediency have combined to drag it down to the depths
to which it has plunged.
,iJ

62. I stand here as an accuser of those delegations
which for reasons of political expediency have remained silent on this issue-an issue which is bound
to affect every country in this Organization.
In so
doing they have themselves become accomplices.

68. In more ways that one, ‘%is Organization
is in
the dock today. Mankind will judge it by its behaviour
on this occasion, because nevei has the issue been
clearer, never has the issue been so clear-cut, There
&ill be no excuse in history for this body, or for the
constituent Members of this body, if it fails to condemn terrorism. The issue before this body is not
what Israel did at Entebbe Airport: the issue before
this body is its own future in the eyes of history.

63. Seated in the dock today with the accusing finger
of enlightened world opinion directed against them
are the terrorist organizations which are plaguing this
world, and whose representatives
have in the past
been seated here by the world body with rights equal
to those of Member States. In the dock are all those
countries which have collaborated with the terrorists
and which have aided and abetted them. There stand
here accused those countries which have blocked
every international
move to deal with this plague of
terror which besets the world.

69. The representative
of Uganda has very conveniently avoided the main issue before us. Let me
recount the events as they occurred.
70. On Sunday, 27 June, an Air France airbus,
flight 139, en route from Tel Aviv to Paris, was hijacked by a group of PLO terrorists with 256 innocent
passengers aboard in addition to a crew of 12. The
terrorists took advantage of the lax security measures
obtaining at Athens airport and brought on ‘. board
pistols and approximately
20 grenades.

64. In the dock before us stand all those countries
-they
are all too numerous-that
cry to the high
heavens when they are affected by terrorists, that
fulminate in the Council when their citizens or diplomats are threatened, and that remain silent when the
same thing happens to citizens of other countries.
Some of them do not even have the doubtful grace to
remain silent; they have the wicked effrontery to join
in condemnation
of a country which tries to prevent
these acts.

71. Thus began a methodically
planned and carefully executed act of air piracy by the PFLP, one of
the several terrorist groups joined together to form the
PLO. Thus began another in a long list of PLO crimes
against innocent civilians.
72. Having commandeered the aircraft, the hijackers
forced the French pilot to land in what is by now
internationally
accepted as the first haven for such
criminals, namely, Libya. This was, it will be recalled,
the first stop in the flight of the ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries kidnapped
in Austria last year. The Council will recall that the
hijackers, holding at pistol point the ministers of the
member countries of that organization,
of which
Libya is a member, were greeted effusively by Prime
Minister Jalloud of Libya, who embraced the crimi-i
nals-who
at that time were holding his Arab minis-‘
terial colleagues as hostages and who had ‘only the
day before killed a member of the Libyan delegation
in Vienna. On the occasion which we are now discussing, last week the Prime Minister did not greet
the terrorists. He was doubtless preoccupied with
preparations for a Libyan sponsored coup d’e’tut in
Sudan, judging by the complaint
submitted to the
Council by my Sudanese colleague [S/12122]. All this
in addition to his preoccupations with bringing in socalled Libyan peace-keeping forces to Beirut in order
to fan the flames of hatred, to enlarge the scope of
murder, and to increase the peril for the Chiristian
population in Lebanon.

65. In the dock before us stand the representatives
of all those countries which stood and .applauded the
entry into the hall of the General Assembly of a guntoting terrorist who, according to the President of
Sudan, personally
gave the order to execute the
American and Belgian diplomats bound hand and foot
in the basement of the Saudi Arabian Embassy in
Khartoum on 1 March 1973.
66. Yes, before us stands accused this rotten, corrupt, brutal, cynical, bloodthirsty
monster of international terrorism and all those who support it in one
way or the other, whether by commission or omission.
Facing them today are the ordinary decent human
beings throughout the world who seek nothing more
than to live a life free from terror and from intimidation, free from the threats of hijackers, the indiscriminate bombs of terrorists and the blackmail of criminals
and murderers.
67. Israel’s action at Entebbe in order to release its
hostages has given rise to a world-wide wave of support and approval, such as has rarely been seen from
every continent, including Africa; from every walk of
life: from countries hostile, as well as friendly; to
Israel The ordinary man and woman in the street

73. Having mentioned Libya, I think it is appropriate
to draw attention to the central role which this country
8

plays in the’ promotion
and encouragement
national terror in the world today.

separation of Jewish passengers from non-Jewish
passengers. This was a development
of a nature so
sinister and so pregnant with memories of the past
that no member of the Jewish peopie, whether in Israel
or abroad, could fail to recall its bnrrible significance.
There flashed immediately
upon the inward eye of
every member of our people the memory of the terrifying selections carried out during the most horrifying
holocaust that mankind has ever seen and which beset.
our people. We recalled the selections carried out by
the Nazis in the concentration camps as members of
the Jewish people were singled out for the gas chambers and extermination.

of inter-

74.. This is the country which has for years acted as
paymaster of international
terror movements,
Arab
and non-Arab, throug,hput the world.
75. This is’the country which has been condemn&d
by Sudan and Tunisia only recently for its acts of
terror and for the sinister and dangerous part it has
played in planning to assassinate.the leaders of these
States and to overthrow their Governments.
,,’ ’
76. This is the country whose ambassador wgs
expelled but a few days ago by the Government
of
Egypt for its subversive activities.

82. Following the never-to-be forgotten experience
of the holocaust in Europe during the Second World
War, an oath was taken-whether
consciously or
unconsciously-by
every member
of the Jewish
people, wherever he or she might have been, that
never again would this happen; that never again would
circumstances be allowed to develop in which such a
catastrophe could happen; that Auschwitz, Dachau
and Buchenwald belonged to the past and would never
again return. On this occasion, I solemnly reaffirm
before this body the oath which has been taken by
our Jewish people, wherever they may be. It will
never happen again.

77. It is, I submit, a disgrace to this world Organization that the representative
of this world sponsor
of terrorism is seated as a member of the Security
Council, the purpose of which is to encourage the
maintenance of international
peace and security.
78. To return to our story, the Air France plane was
refuelled in Benghazi. The destination of the hijackers
was, in accordance with a previously prepared plan,
Entebbe Airport, outside Kampala in Uganda. The
airbus landed at Entebbe Airport on Monday, 28 June,
and the hijackers were met by a reinforcement
of
terrorists, who awaited them at the terminal armed to
the teeth with sub-machine guns and explosives. President Idi Amin of Uganda arrived at the airport shortly
before the hijacked plane landed and embraced the
hijackers in a gesture of welcome and with a promise
of support and assistance. Ugandan soldiers were then
positioned with their guns trained, not on the hijackers, but on the innocent civilians-men,
women
and children.

83. And so, when this ominously reminiscent selection began, when the separation of the Jews was
undertaken,
it became apparent to the Government
of Israel that there was no alternative but to conduct
a rescue operation to save the lives of its citizens.
The Government of Israel’s apprehension was heightened by a knowledge of President Amin’s attitude
towards the Jewish people. In September 1972, President Amin sent a cable, which was published on
13 September,
to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, with copies to the Prime Minister of Israel
and to the leader of the PLO, Yasser Arafat. In this
cable, President Amin applauded the murder of the
Israeli sportsmen at the Olympic Games in Munich
who, bound hand and foot, were gunned down by the
PLO. Moreover, in the same message, he had the
obscene ghoulishness to praise Hitler for his role in
destroying over 6 million Jews.

79. On Tuesday, 29 June, the hijackers spelt out
their demands. These included the release of 53 terrorists gaoled in Israel, West Germany,
France,
Switzerland and Kenya by a deadline of 3 p.m., local
time, on Thrusday, 1 July. They threatened to put the
innocent passengers to death if their terms were not
met.
80. When the hijackers released 47 women and
children and some other passengers on Wednesday,
30 June, it gradually became apparent that President Amin was in fact co-operating with the terrorists
under a cloak of deception and false pretence. This
was the situation on the evening of 1 July, the first
deadline set by the terrorists. It became obvious that
the Israeli passengers-men,
women and childrenwere in serious and grave danger of their lives.

84. The members of the Council will recall that but
nine months ago, in the General Assembly*, President Amin called for the extinction of Israel as a State.
The combination
of the move to separate Israeli and
Jewish passengers from other passengers, the offtcial
endorsement of Hitler’s policies by the President of
Uganda, his call for the extinction of Israel and the
horrible fate of hundreds of thousands of his own
countrymen who did not find favour in his eyes-in
this connexion I refer members to the terrifying recital
of the brutalities of what it refers to as the “dictatorial
fascist ruler of Uganda” published on 7 July by the
Government
of Kenya-all
these taken together
brought home to the Government of Israel the realization that, unless action were taken, the hostages,

81. When the hijackers released a further 100 hostages, their story, when they arrived in Paris, revealed an ominous development.
They described to
the waiting reporters how Ugandan soldiers, under
the direct orders of President Amin, supervised the
9

men, women and children, were doomed and could
expect no mercy in Entebbe. What more sinister
indication of the wicked and maniacal intentions of
the hijackers and murderers and -of their Ugandan
allies could there have been that that among the hostages held until the last moment before the deadline
were I1 children and 34 women doomed to be shot in
cold blood by those bloodthirsty murderers?
85. There, under the watchful guns of Terror International and President Amin, a kindergarten
was
organized by the hostages in the shadow of impending
death. The tragic scene this evokes in one’s mind is
devastating. It is so much in character with. the style
of these bandits. They were there prepared to shoot
down a kindergarten of innocent children, just as their
Colleagues in Somalia but a few months ago-as ‘we
were informed by the representative of France ‘here
[1899th ITteuting]-threatened
to cut the throats of
30 French children aged six to twelve who were being
held hostage.
86. At this point, let me quote from the statement of
Prime Minister Rabin to the Knesset on 4 July:
the expiry of the first ultimatum
was drawing
ever closer; the release of non-Israeli passengers
blatantly exposed the sinister conspiracy against
‘Israeli citizens. Political efforts bore no fruit. The
sand in the hour-glass was about to run out, leaving
no possibility for an independent rescue effort.

operation was planned
are proud of it.

and executed -by‘ ‘ Israel.
:, ;.:e

We

89., During that rescue operation, three of the hostages were killed by the terrorists before the terrorists
were gunned down by Israeli troops. A senior Israeli
officer was killed, shot in the back, and several soldiers and hostages were wounded,
‘$iiJ,
‘;
90. The ,weight of evidence before us reveals ‘prior
knowledge and active connivance on the .part of the
Government of Uganda in this whole episode. Even
if the evidence were not available-and
.I say it is
a&able
in abundance-it
is sufficient to read the
letter addressed by President Amin to you, Mr. President, on 4 July [S/12124, annex] in order to see that
he implicates himself in his own statement, It is quite
evident from his letter that the Ugandan troops
mounted guard not over the terrorists and the hijackers
but over the hostages. In the fourth paragraph of his
letter he states, “I directed that the plane be guarded
properly”.
He then goes on, in the fifth paragraph, to
make the most incredible statement: “the. Uganda
Armed Forces were’not allowed by the hijackers to,
go near the airport building”. This is known to be false.
The Ugandan troops were in and around the building.

.L

.

. .

“Under
these conditions,
the Government
of
Israel unanimously decided to declare its readiness
to release terrorists detained in Israeli prisons.
Following the Cabinet’s decision, we informed the
French Government,
through which the negotia-,
tions with the terrorists were being conducted. In
default of any other alternative we were even prepared to adopt this course to rescue our people. It
was not a tactic to gain time and, had it been the only
choice left, we would have stood by our decision
as a last resort.” [S//212.3. (rnne.~.]
87. The hijackers raised their demands. They announced that Israel would be held responsible for all
the terrorists whose release they demanded,
including those terrorists not held in Israel, and they
refused to allow the exchange to be made in France
or on neutral territory outside Uganda. Their sinister
tone and new demands, boded evil for the hostages.
The Government of Israel was left with no alternative.
On the night of 3 to 4 July, the Israel Defence Forces
mounted a most remarkable operation which will go
down in history, rescued the hostages and escorted
them to safety.

91. He then reveals his comphdity in relating the
story of the release of the 147 hostages on 30 June and,
I July by openly admitting his part in separating the
Israeli passengers from the other passengers. We learn
also from his letter of the sinister ‘part played by the
Somali Ambassador to Uganda, the representative of
a country which has become a prime troublemaker
in
the area and a threat to its neighbours-Kenya,
Ethiopia and the area of Djibouti,-and
which only
a few months ago was involved in holding hostage
30 French children, on which occasion the Govern-’
ment of France, motivated by the same sentiments
which motivated the Government of Israel this time,
took armed action in exercise of its rights under international law to save the children from Somalia. It is:
no coincidence that one of the terrorists at Entebbe
Airport was the head of the PLO o&e in
*,:: Somalia:,
:
92. The entire story is one of collusion from begin-’
ning to end on the part of the Ugandan Government.
Let me spell out only a small proportion of the facts
as recounted by members of the Air France crew and
the hostages who were released.
93.

On advance complicity;

(cr) The captain of the Air France plane has stated
that the German hijacker, Wilfred Bose, knew in
advance that Entebbe was the plane’s destination.
(h) When the plane landed at Entebbe,
woman hijacker declared, “Everything
army is at the airport”.

88, ’ I wish. to ,reiterate .on this occasion that Israel
accepted full and soIe responsibility. for the. action,
that no other Government was at any stage party to
the planning or the execution of the operation. The

the German
is OK; the

‘.
(c) Bose announced to the passengers when they
landed that they had arrived at a safe place.
10

.

((1) Immediately
on arrival,
Ggandan
soldiers
surrounded the plane. They were accompanied
by
five armed Arab terrorists who embraced and kissed
the hijackers on the ?plane. After that, the terrorist
reinforcements
took p&t in the guard duties andein
$7
‘.k>J,
the negotiations.
:.d
i!.
(e) Before landing,%hile
they were still,in the -air,
the hijackers advised the passenger‘s that buses would
come to collect .them.
‘Fi,;
v) After the passetigers- had been concentrated,‘ih
the terminal’s
large hall, President Amin was s&n
embracing and shaking hands with the hijackers. .,y;

k) Every time President Amin appeared in the area
of the terminal and before the passengers, he was
closeted with the terrorists in a most friendly atmosphere.
(h) At the outset of the negotiations President Amin
dismissed the French Ambassador and prevented him
from establishing
contact with the terrorists. This
contact was. conducted by him in person.
(i) President Amin warned the hijacked
not to dare to try to escape.

0’) Apparently for reasons of bravado and to frighten the hijacked passengers, two jet aircraft overflew
from time to time the terminal in which they were
being held. Near the building an armored vehicle armed
with a heavy machine-gun was parked, and close to it
stood two helicopters.

(q) As the plane landed and was taxiing along the
runway, a black Mercedes car drove up, two terrorists
emerged and one of them took over control of the
operation thereafter. He boarded the plane, embraced
B&e and talked to hi&

(k) A mixed guard of hijackers and Ugandan Army
men guarded the hostages; contact between them was
constant and free. The Ugandan soldiers were on
guard both inside the hall, on the-second floor of the
terminal, and on the plane.

(h) Michel .Cojot, a French company executive
who acted as a go-between for the passengers and the
hijackers, reported that when the airport director
brought supplies for ‘the hostages, he, the director,
said ht was prepared with supplies as he had been told
to wait for approximately
260 passengers and crew.
94. Now,
sengers:

on the detention

of the hijacked

passengers

(0 The hijackers were unconcerned and very relaxed during the period on the ground. They left the
airport building from time to time and acted with an
abvious feeling of assurance that the Ugandan Army
would not attempt to overpower them. Mr. Tony
Russell, an official of the Greater London Council and
one of the Britons freed from the hijacked Air France
airbus, in an interview with the The Times of London
on 5 July, said that President Amin had been in a position to release all hostages if he had wishes. “Once
we were moved from the aircraft”, he said, “the terrorists were not in a commanding position. . ..I had the
feeling that if Amin wanted to free us after we were
transferred to the airport building, it could have been
done. The terrorists had had no sleep for 30 hours and
had no powerful weapons at their disposal”,
said
Mr. Russell.

pas-

(tr) In the first 24 hours, guard duty was done by
Ugandan soldiers, and the hijackers were not in sight.
When the hijackers returned refreshed, the Ugandan
soldiers supplied them with sub-machine-guns
to
guard the hijacked passengers. I ought to mention
here that the Foreign Minister of Uganda had said that
the hijackers were armed with sub-machine-guns.
What he omitted to mention was that on the plane all
they had was pistols and grenades. The sub-machineguns were supplied to them .tihen .,they landed at
Entebbe.
(h) In the following days the Ugandans were on
guard 0utsid.e the building, while a large force of them
was concentrated on the first floor of the building. .

(m) The commander of the hijackers in Entebbe
spent all his time in the company of President Amin,
who, incidentally,
recounted this fact by telephone to
Colonel Bar-Lev, who spoke to him from Israel.

(c) Ugandan soldiers escorted the hostages to, and
guarded them in, the toilets.

(n) While the passengers were being held, Radio
Uganda broadcast an announcement
of the hijackers
praising Amin for his stand against Zionism and imperialism.

(d) The terrorists came and went as if they were at
home with two cars driven by Ugandans, one of them
in uniform, at their disposal.
(e) The hijackers received logistic aid. and were
supplied with arms-sub-machine-guns,
pistols and
explosives-at
the airport. They also received a
mobile communications
set.

(u) And finally, the hijackers were burieh with full
military honours together with soldiers of the Ugandan
Army.
95. Uganda maintains close ties with the PLO, tihich
has a large presence there. The PLO office, operating
in Kampala under Khaled Al-Shaykh, organizes propaganda activities throughout East Africa. The PFLP,

cf) The terrorist who took control of the operation
in &tebbe took hostages aside, under Ugandai guard,
for interrogation.
11

under George Habash, has an intelligence
office in
Kampala responsible for the activities of the organization in the whole of Africa. This oflice is subordinate
to Wadia Haddad, the head of the branch for overseas
terror-strikes of the PFLP. Hundreds of Palestinians
are employed in administrative
posts in the administration and public services in, Uganda as substitutes
for the Asians who were expelled from that State.

diately after the hijackers were eliminated? Why was
she held in custody under guard in hospital in Kampala? Why was she not released to the British Consul
when he called her on Sunday, 4 July, after the rescue
operation?
Why have we suddenly been notified.
ominously that the Ugandan authorities, four of whose
employees reportedly dragged her screaming from the
hospital;. are unaware of her *hereabouts?
Either
the Government of Uganda exercises national sovereignty, in which case it knows where she is, or it does
not..

96. Uganda and the PLO maintain close co-operation also at the military level. In Uganda there is a
centre for the military training of Palestinians.
Palestinian pilots train in the Uganda Air Force on MIG
21 planes. Members of the PLO are to be found among
the bodyguards of President Amin.
/
97. The extent of Ugandan collaboration
can be
gauged from the news broadcasts in English on
Kampala Radio after the aircraft landed at Entebbe.
Records of these broadcasts are available from monitoring reports supplied by the British Broadcasting
Corporation.
If the representatives
will take the
trouble to read them, the reports will reveal a complete
identity of purpose with the hijackers and their demands on the part of the Ugandan authorities. There
is no attempt in the boradcasts to hide an atmosphere
of euphoric ecstasy over the hijacking, and of identification with the hijackers on the part of the Government of Uganda. Thus the enthusiastic broadcast on
29 June opens with: “We now bring you the special
announcement
you have been waiting for. The following are the demands of the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine...“.
The announcer then read
out the six-point statement issued by the PFLP.

101:. I ask my colleagues, Africans and others here,
wh;o have joined in condemning Israel for exercising
its inherent right of self-defence, do you or do you not
condone the horrifying behaviour which is reflected in
this act of “chivalry”
on the part of President Amin
against Mrs. Dora Bloch, aged 75? For once, have the
courage of your convictions
and speak out, or be
damned by your own silence..I-Iere you have a plain,
simple case which has no answer and cannot have any
answer for decent people wherever they may be. Here
you have the .unbelievable,
macabre spectacle of, a,
State waging a war against a 75-year-old lady, and
supported, presumably, by those who would associate
themselves with this despicable and cowardly behaviour. If the Government of Uganda is not implicated, let it now and forthwith produce Mrs. Bloch!
102. Does the Council
the fate of Mrs. Bloch?

propose to remain

silent on

103. The disappearance of this old lady and the’by
now all-too-familiar
picture of the terrifying
happenings in Amin’s Uganda provide ample justification
in themselves for the premonition which prompted the
action ‘taken by the Government of Israel.

98: One does not really require all this evidence in
order to prove that Israel was entirely justified by
every norm of natural and international
law in taking
the action which it took. In viewing the facts of the
case, one must reach one of two conclusions: either
the Government of Uganda was directly implicated
in holding as hostages innocent passengers, men,
women and children, or the Government of Uganda
does not exercise sovereignty over its territory and
was incapable of dealing with half a dozen terrorists.

104. This type of action, which in principle is not
unprecedented, is dealt with at considerable length in
international
law, and there is no doubt -whatsoever
but that the weight of international law and precedent
lies fully in Israel’s favour. However, the Israeli
action at Entebbe came to remind us that the law we
find in statute books is not the only law of mankind.
There is also a moral law, and by all that is moral on
this earth, Israel had the right to do what it did. Indeed,
it had also the duty to do so.

>

99. And what better evidence do we have to support
this contention of ours than the fact that to date the
Government of Uganda has not released a 75year-old
lady, Mrs. Dora Bloch, who was on her way to the
marriage of her son in this country when the plane
was hijacked? Moreover the refusal of the Govemmen1 of Uganda to release the Air France plane immediately after the hijackers were eliminated
tends
only to confirm the fact of complicity.
What other
reason should there be for the Government of Uganda
to refuse to return the plane to the French Govemment, in violation of the Hague Convention of 1970,’
of which Uganda is a signatory?

105. Uganda violated a basic tenet of international
law in failing to protect foreign nationals on its territory. Furthermore,
it behaved in a manner which
constituted a gross violation of the 1970 Hague Convention.’ This Convention had been ratified by both
Israel and Uganda. Article 6 of that Convention reads
as follows:
“Upon being satisfied that the circumstances so
warrant, any Contracting State in the territory of
which the offender or the alleged offender is present
shall take him into custody or take other measures
to ensure his presence. The custody and other mea-

100. If the Government of Uganda is not implicated
in this crime, why was Mrs. Bloch not released imme12

107. In The LNW of Nations, Sixth Edition,’ pages 427
and 428, J. L. Brierly states as follows:
“Whether the landing of detachments- of troops
to save the lives of nationals-under imminent threat
of death or serious injury owing to the breakdown
of law and order may be justifiable
is a delicate
question. Cases of this form of intervention
have
been not infrequent in the past and, when not attended by suspicion of being a pretext for political
pressure, have generally been regarded as justified
by the sheer necessity of instant action to save the
lives of innocent nationals, whom the local government is unable or unwilling to protect. . . . Every
effort must be made to get the United Nations to
act. But, if the United Nations is not in a position to
move in time and the need for instant action is
manifest, it would be difficult to deny the legitimacy
of action in defence of nationals which every responsible Government would feel bound to take if it had
the means to do so;-this is, of course, on the basis
that the action was strictly limited to securing the
safe removal of the threatened nationals.”
108. In support of this contention; D. P. O’Connell
states in I~tterncrtic~rttrl Ltrw, Second Edition,’
pages 303 and 304:
“Traditional
international
law has not prohibited
States from protecting their nationals whose lives
or property are imperilled
by political conditions
in another State, provided the degree of physical
presence employed in their protection is proportional to the sitation. When the Sixth International
Conference of American States at Havana attempted
to formulate a legal notion of intervention
in 1928,
the United States pointed out that intervention
would need to be clearly defined, for the United
States would not stand by and permit the breakdown
of government to endanger the lives and property of
American citizens in revolution-ridden
countries.
Interposition
of a temporary character’ would not,
in such circumstances, it was argued, be illegal...
‘6 . . . Article 2 (4) [of the United Nations Charter]
should be interpreted as prohibiting
acts of force
against the territorial
integrity and political independence of nations, and not to prohibit a use of
force which is limited in intention and effect to the
protection of a State’s own integrity and its nationals’ vital interests, when the machinery envisaged
by the United Nations Charter is ineffective in the
situation.‘*
109. The act of hijacking can well be regarded as one
of piracy. Pirates have been hastes hrtntmi generis
-enemies
of the human race-since
the early days of
international
law in the Middle Ages. During the war
againstthe slave trade and piracy, certain norms were
established
in international
law which permitted
intervention in the case of ships engaged in the slave
trade between Africa and America and against the
centres of piracy in North Africa. The principle of
national sovereignty was overruled by the higher
principles of man’s liberty.

sures shall be as provided in the law of that State
but may only be,continued for such time as is necessary to enable any criminal or extradition
proceedings to be instituted.”
i.
., Ji
i .:
“1. When any ;.of .the acts mentioned
in article 1 (cr) has occurred or is about to occur, Contracting States shall take all appropriate measures
to restore control of the aircraft to its lawful commander or to preserve his control of the aircraft.: -%
!:
“2. In the cases contemplated by the preceding
paragraph, any Contracting
State in which the
aircraft or its passengers or crew are present shall
facilitate the continuation
of the journey of the
passengers and crew as soon as practicable; and
shall without delay return the aircraft and its cargo:
to the persons lawfully entitled to possession.”

Article 9 statesi

106. The right of a State to take military action to
protect its nationals in mortal danger is recognized
by all legal authorities in international
law. In SelfDefence in Internationd
Luw,~ Professor D. W.
Bowet states, on pages 87 and 88, that
“The right of the State to intervene by the use
or threat of force for the protection of its nationals
suffering injuries within the territory of another
State is generally admitted, both in the writings of
jurists and in the practice of States.
“In the arbitration
between Great Britain and
Spain in 1925, one of the series known as the Sptrnish Morocccrn Cluitns, Judge Huber, as rapporteur
of the commission, stated:
*’ ‘However, it cannot be denied that at a certain point the interest of a State in exercising
protection over its nationals and their property
can take precedence over territorial sovereignty,
despite the absence of any conventional
provisions. This right of intervention has been claimed
by all States. Only its limits are disputed.*
(’ 6.. . .
“... We now envisage action by the protecting
State which involves a prima fir& violation of the
independence
and territorial
inviolability
of the
territorial State. In so far as this action takes effect
in derogation of the sovereignty of the territorial
State it must necessarily be exceptional in character
and limited to those cases in which no other means
‘of protection
are available.
It presupposes the
inadequacy of any other means of protection against
some injury, actual or imminent, to the persons or
property of nationals and, moreover,
an injury
which results either from the acts of the territorial
State and its authorities or from the acts of individuals or groups of individuals which the territorial
State is unable, or unwilling, to prevent.”
13

110. In this connexion it is perhaps appropriate to
recall here that the United States Marine Corps was
established for the purpose of waging war against the
pirates. And one cannot fail to note that the Marine
anthem refers to “the shores of Tripoli”.
Apparently,
that coast is not new as a haven for terrorists-then
for pirates and ships and today for hijackers and airplanes.
I1 1. Israel’s action in Entebbe was very similar to
the humanitarian
rescue operation which took place
in those days. The slave trade then could have claimed
that searching the slave ships was in violation of international maritime law. But civilized man’defined
a
higher law, namely, that of human freedom, above
which no national sovereignty can claim to be.
112. Had a Jewish State existed in the 193Os, we
might well have decided, with the rise of Nazism, to
endeavour to undertake an operation to rescue the
inmates of the concentration
camps. The logic of
those who criticize us today would maintain that by
so doing we would have been in flagrant violation of
the national sovereignty of the Third Reich. What
would have been more important:
Hitler’s
sovereignty or rescuing innocent people from a holocaust?
113. May I recall General Assembly resolution 2645
(XXV) of 1970, the consensus adopted by the Council
in document S/10705 on 20 June 1972 on the subject
of hijacking, and the 1970 resolution of the Assembly
of the Council of Europe condemning acts of hijacking,
sabotage, taking of hostages and blackmailing
of
Governments
by Palestinian
organizations
utilizing
the territory of certain Arab States as a refuge, training
ground and base for action. I draw those resolutions
and may other relevant resolutions by the United
Nations and other international
bodies to the Council’s attention to remind in that the problem is not new,
but that no practical and effective steps have been
taken to combat it.

2645 (XXV) and the Hague Convention of 1970 are
discussed and-1 would remind the Soviet representative-supported.
115. The right of self-defence is enshrined in international law and in the Charter of the United Nations
and can be applied on the basis of the classic formulation, as was done in the well-known Caroline Case,
permitting such action where the “necessity of selfdefence is instant, overwhelming,
and leaving no
choice of means, and no moment for deliberation”.6
That was exactly the situation which faced the Government of Israel.
116. In equivalent circumstances, other States have
acted in a manner similar to Israel. But a few months
ago the Council discussed actions taken by France
in freeing a busload of 30 children held hostage on the
Somalia border. I refer the Council to the remarks of
the representative
of France on 18 February 1976
[1889th meeting].. The representative of France was
addressing the Council on an incident which arose out
of the holding of 30 French children 6 to 12 years of
age in a school bus as hostages by a group of terrorists
in Somalia. The representatives of these terrorists in
Somalia made demands on the French Government
and announced that if their demands were not met the
terrorists would cut the throats of the children. The
French forces thereupon took action against the terrorists on the Somali border, killing them; in the
process one of the children was killed by the terrorists
and five others were wounded. As the French soldiers
rushed to save the children, fire was directed at them
from the Somali frontier post, seriously wounding a
French lieutenant. The French forces naturally enough
returned fire into Somali territory, causing casualties
and damage to the Somalis. In this case too one hostage was missing, and the child was found later to be
held in Somalia by terrorists. He was happily later
returned alive.
117. The debate is familiar to members of the Council. Suffice it, however, to say that France unequivocally rejected any accusation of aggression in this
regard. France on that occasion legitimately exercised
its rights under international
law in a situation which
is similar in many respects to the situation which we
had in Entebbe.

114. The problem of combating terror has exercised
countries throughout
the world. Thus the Soviet
Union on 3 January 1973 published a new law on
criminal liability for the hijacking of aircraft. That
law was discussed at length by V. Ivanov in lzvesti.?vr
on 16 January 1973. Indeed, the mounting
Soviet
official concern is evident in Soviet scientific and legal
literature and also in a series of official actions. On
4 December 1970 Prcrr&r reported favourably on the
International
Civil Aviation Organization’s
Conference at The Hague to draw up a new convention concerning the prevention of hijacking of aircraft. In
November
1970 Prcr~&r published
an article by
0. Khlestov praising General Assembly resolution
2645 (XXV). There was a further article by 0. Khlestov
in Izvestiyo on 16 January 1971 praising the Hague
Convention of 1970. Attention is drawn also to an
article by P. Yevseyev and Y. Kolo>ov entitled “Air
Bandits Outlawed”, published in Intrrnntionul
Affctirs
in Moscow in August 1971, in which both resolution

118. In the Muyglrez
incident last year, in which
the United States acted to rescue merchant seamen
and their ship, President Ford was quoted as saying:
“The decision to use force was based 100 per cent and
entirely on a single consideration, to get the crew and
the ship back”.
119. I could continue and present dozens of cases
which reveal that international
precedent and international law fully justify the Israeli action and show that
every country that respects itself would have taken
the same action in similar circumstances had it considered such action feasible.
14

120. This principle was emphasized by the British
Government
in the case of British merchant seamen
prisoners of war being transported Qn a German ship,
the AIrmrrk,
back to Germany through the territorial
waters of Norway in February 1940. The British
flotilla led by the destroyer Ci~sstrc~k entered the territorial waters of Nqzway, then a neutral country,
which had allowed passage to this German ship. And
in 1940 those British prisoners were‘prisoners of war
taken prisoner in accordance with the law of war.
Mr. Winston Churchill personally authorized British
ships to fire at the Norwegian naval ships in the area
should they open fire and thereby endanger the British
force. He sent the following order to Captain Vian on
the C~~~rrc*~ with regard to the Norwegian torpedo
boat: “If she fires upon you... you should defend
yourself using no more force than is necessary and
ceasing tire when she desists”. Sir Winston Churchill
in his history of the Second World War enunciates
the principle which guided him: “What mattered at
home and in the Cabinet was whether British prisoners
were found on board or not... This was a dominant
factor’*.
121. What mattered to the Government of Israel in
this instance was the lives of the hostages, in danger of
their very lives. No consideration
other than this
humanitarian
consideration
motivated
the Govemment of Israel. Israel’s rescue operation was not
directed against Uganda. Israeli forces were not
attacking. Uganda-and
they were certainly
not
attacking Africa. They were rescuing their nationals
from a band of terrorists and kidnappers who were
being aided and abetted by the Ugandan authorities.
The means used were the minimum necessary to fulfil
that purpose, as is laid down in international
law.
122. Some parallels could be drawn with the right
of an individual to use appropriate means to defend
himself if he kills someone who is trying to kill him.
He is not liable to be found guilty of murder. Judgement takes into account the context and the purpose
of the act. The same applies to the use of force in
international
affairs.
123. Over the years, Israel in pursuance of its policy
of aiding developing countries helped Uganda, as
indeed it has co-operated and continues to co-operate
with many fellow developing
countries throughout
the world, including countries in Africa. But there is
a limit to the aid which we were prepared to make
available to Uganda. In 1972 President Amin came to
Israel, produced maps describing his proposed plan
to invade Tanzania and asked for Israeli air support
in the planned action, including the bombing of Dar
es Salaam. Israel’s reply to this preposterous and
wicked proposition
was such as to bring about a
dramatic change in the attitude to Israel of Field
Marshal Amin. His frustration with Israel’s attitude
to his plans for dealing with Tanzania, coupled with
the lavish blandishments proffered to him by the ruler
of Libya, combined to produce an extreme, violent,

anti-Semitic,
anti-Israeli
ruler of Uganda.

attitude

on the part of the

124. The move by the Organization of African Unity
to bring this complaint to the Council must appear
to be completely incongruous were one’s senses not
completely dulled by the utter incongruity of some of
the proceedings of this Organization.
The deliberations on this occasion will doubtless be no exception.
125. Let me recall to my African colleagues the text
of a resolution of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity in 1970:
“The Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity, meeting in its fourteenth ordinary
session in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, from 27 February
to 6 March 1970,
“Htrving
hmrd
the declaration made by the Foreign Minister of Ethiopia regarding the repeated
sabotage and hijacking
of civil aircraft thereby
endangering the safety of passengers,
“Cimscious
of the disastrous .consequences
sulting from such criminal acts to international
travel,

reair

“I;
Condemns
all attempts and acts of hijacking
and sabotaging of civil aircraft;
‘“2. C&s upon all States to undertake strict
measures to protect civilian air travel from being
endangered;
“3.
Appeds
to all States to apprehend and
punish such criminals in order to ensure the safety
of international air travel.”

126. How do they reconcile their attitude with the
text of a resolution on this very issue which they all
accepted? Here we are again being selective. Do the
member States of the Organization
of African Unity
not realize that by condoning acts of piracy and hijacking they are laying themselves open to such acts
on their own airlines and in their own countries? Are
we to understand that there is to be a selective cataloguing of hijacking, of international
murder, of piracy, of brutality and of brigandage according to race,
colour or continent to which the murderer or transgressor belongs? We the Jewish people are only too
familiar with this type of selective behaviour and with
the awful catastrophe and doom which it brings to
those who engage in it.
127. In this context, may I recall that only last month,
in a discussion [19f9th meeting] at the Council table, in
reply to remarks made by the representative of the Soviet Union on the issue of terror, I recalled that a distinguished Soviet Foreign Minister, Maxim Litvinov,
had once said “Peace is indivisible’*.
I submitted then
that terrorism too is indivisible. You cannot be selec-

tive about it. The nations of the world will either join
hands to destroy this scourge which affects mankind,
or they will be destroyed by it. It is not enough to raise
your voice in horror when it affects only you. If terrorism is bad, it is bad for everybody, in every case,
on every occasion, by whomever committed, an whoever the victim may be. It must be eliminated.

133. We are proud of what we have done, because
we. have .demonstrated
to the world that in a small
country, in Israel’s circumstances,*’ ‘with which the
members of the Council are by now all too familiar,
the dignity of man, human life -and human freedom .
constitute the highest values. We are proud not only
because,we have saved the live&of over 100 innocent
people-men,
women and children-but
because of
the significance of our act for the cause of human
/
freedom.

128. Summing up the daring and imaginative operation which we are discussing, my. Prime Minister
stated in the Knesset on 4 July that:

134. We call on the Council to declare war on international terror, to outlaw it and eradicate it wherever
i&may be. We call on the Council, and above all we
call on the Member States and countries of the world,
to unite in a common effort to place these criminals
outside the pale of human society, and with them any
country which co-operates in any way in their nefarious activities.
.,
135. In calling the Council to’action I cannot ignore
its limitations,
which are daily demonstrated
by the.
fact that it has sat silent through 15 months of the
greatest tragedy besetting the world today in Lebanon,
while a nation is torn apart, tens of thousands are
killed, tens of thousands more are -wounded, andthe
cup of human suffering overflows daily.

“This rescue operation is an achievement of great
importance in the struggle against terrorism. It is
Israel’s contribution
to humanity’s struggle against
international
terror, but it should not be viewed as
the final chapter. It will give us encouragement as
we continue our efforts, but the struggle is not over:
new efforts, new methods and unremitting sophistication will be required. Terrorism
will find us
neither immobilized
or hidebound
by routine.”
[S/12123. crnncx.],
129. In many ways, this is a moment of truth for this
Organization.
If it will seize this opportunity
courageously and without flinching to join hands in a war
against international terror for the benefit of ordinary
men and women throughout this world, then it will
be serving the purpose for which it was established.
It can yet retrieve, perhaps, in small measure, the
prestige and good will which it has dissipated by becoming hostage to despots and extremists.

136. Let me remind you that, when the hijacking
took place, the Council was debating the report of the
so-called Palestine Committee. The Council held four
meetings on the Palestinian question while an act of
terror carried out by Palestinian terrorists was taking
place:Yet the Council did not even see fit to raise the
question and plead for the release of the innocent
civilians.

130. The murder of 11 Israeli athletes in Munich in
1972 moved the Secretary-General
to demand of the
General Assembly that it devise measures for the
eradication of the scourge of terrorism from the world.
The Arab States and their friends managed to bury
the subject by means of their automatic majority.
Today the question of international terrorism is before
the Security Council, not the General Assembly. If
the Council fails to seize this opportunity
which has
been granted it to eliminate the scourge of terrorists,
kidnappers,
hijackers and blackmailers
from our
midst, then it will plunge to the lowest depths in the
eyes of mankind and will disappear in history as yet
another great and tragic lost opportunity.

137. If the Council fails to take action, we call on aII
freedom-loving
.countries in the world to come together outside ‘the framework of the Organization,,
establish accepted norms of behaviour in relation to
terrorists, and declare in no uncertain terms that each
and every one of them will have nothing whatsoever
to do with any country which violates these norms and
which encourages terrorism. Once hijackers have -no”
country in which to land their ah-planes because
receiving such an ah-plane would mean exclusion
from the world community,
or part of the world community, whether in the field of air transportation,
trade, commerce or international
relations, there will
be no more hijacking.

131. It has fallen to the lot of my small country,
embattled as we are, facing the problems which we do,
to demonstrate to the world that there is an alternative
to surrender to terrorism and blackmail. It has fallen
to our lot to prove to the world that the, scourge of
international terror can be dealt with. It is now for the
nations of the world, regardless of the political differences which may divide them, to unite against this
common enemy which recognizes no authority, knows
no borders, respects no sovereingty, ignores all basic
human decencies, and places no limits on human
bestiality.
. _, s.
132.

138. We are proud to have given the lead in this
struggle against international
t&rorism.
This debate
is an opportunity for the world to take action on this
issue, which can effect the lives of every’man
and
woman and child in the world. Those countries which
fail to take a clear and unequivocal stand on the issue
for reasons of expediency or cowardice will stand
damned by all the decent people in this world and
despised in history.

We come with a simple message to the Council.
16

139. There is a time in the affairs of man when even
Governments’
must make difficult decisions guided
not by considerations
of expediency but by considerations or morality. Israel was guided by these considerations in risking much to save its citizens. May
we hope that’others wilt;be guided by these principles
‘.
too?
.
‘1i
140. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Mauritius on a point of order;

~.
141. Sir Harold WALTER
(Mauritius):
I wish to
offer a personal explanation as current Chairman ‘of
the Organization of African Unity. There is only one
point that I want to clear up, and the point is very
simple. I will quote what the previous distinguished
and brilliant orator has just said. He quoted the reso- ;
lution whereby the Organization
of African Unity
unanimously
condemned international
terrorism. As
a matter of fact I myself, took part in that debate and
I can recall the words I used. I said, “Such heinous
offences can only be dealth with by callous punishments”. Let no one come and say that the Organization of African Unity condoned. It did not, it condemned. The question which the Organization
of
African Unity wished to raise in the Council, through
the voice of its Chairman, is the violation of territorial
integrity.
142. I reserve my right to comment
subject.

6 July of one of the most distinguished leaders of China,
Mr. Chou-teh, member of the Standing Committee of
the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China
and Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of
China. During his long career, Mr. Chou-teh had been
in the forefront of the leadership and had played a most
constructive role in. his country. I should like’ to request the Chinese delegation through you, Sir, to
convey our most sincere Condolences to the Govemment and people of China on this sad occasion.
148. The Council has gathered here to discuss the
act of aggression committed against Uganda by Israel.
Unfortunately,
in lodging its complaint, in document
S/12124, Uganda has deemed fit to drag Kenya into
this affair. These, too, are very grave matters and
must be considered seriously by all members of the
Council and, indeed, the whole membership
of the
United Nations. The douncil should seek a solution
that will prevent such tragic events from occurring
again, not only in Uganda, but anywhere else in the
world. Kenya is most strongly opposed to the use of
force in the diversion of civil aircraft as a solution of
political problems. We consider it completely
inadmissible as it jeopardizes the lives of innocent passengers who are not in any way connected with the
political conflict in question. We therefore watched
with keen interest and concern the tragic events of the
hijacked Air France plane that landed in Uganda on
28 June. We watched and prayed for the safety of the
hostages. We were quite encouraged when 147 of them
were released without loss of life. This, indeed, was
a commendable
achievement
by those who were
involved in the negotiations with the hijackers. The
release of the 147 hostages created a lot of hope in
most of us that the rest of the hostages would be released unharmed. It is a matter of great regret to note
that our hope was not realized. Force was used to
release the remaining hostages with the consequence
that unnecessary loss of life occurred. We have already sent our condolences to the bereaved, and I
take this opportunity
to request those Governments
whose nationals lost their lives in this tragic and regrettable event to convey our sympathy and condolences to the families of the bereaved.

later on the

143. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Israel on a point of order.
144. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): I did not, in any of my
words, condemn the Organization
of African Unity.
I merely asked the Organization of African Unity how
it reconciled that resolution with its request to condemn Israel on this occasion.
145. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Kenya. I therefore invite’him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
146. Mr. WAIYAKI
(Kenya): Mr. President, permit
me first of all to express my gratitude to you and to
all the other members of the Council for inviting me to
participate in this important debate concerning acts of
aggression perpetrated by one Member State against
another sovereign Member State. I should also like
to thank you for the swift action you have taken in
convening this Council meeting. May I also express
my sincere pleasure and satisfaction in seeing you,
the representative of Italy, preside over this important
debate. Your long diplomatic
experience and your
wisdom will no doubt enable the Council to come up
with a fruitful solution of the problem at hand.

149. It is a matter of great regret also that the enemies
of Kenya whose aim is to sow seeds of mistrust and
to divide Africa did not hesitate to use this tragic case
of hostages to try to smear the good name of my
country. Everybody
must have read in the world
press ihat the hijackers were giving as a condition the
release of certain prisoners said to be held in a number
of countries, including my own. It was alleged that
Kenya is holding five Palestinian
prisoners whose
release from Kenyan gaols would secure the release
of the hostages. It was not the first time that these
fictitious prisoners appeared in the international press.
It will be recalled that in March of this year a certain
neighbouring
country laid claim to a good part of the
territory of my country, contrary to the principles

147. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to convey
our deepest condolences to the delegation of the
People’s Republic of China on the untimely death on
17

enshrined in the Charters of the,Organization
of African Unity and of the United Nations. When this
country, Uganda, was confronted
with the solid
opposition of the rank and file of the people of Kenya,
it attempted to divert attention from its aggressive
intentions against Kenya by uttering the invented
story of these fictitious Palestinian prisoners.

Kenya allowed Air France to station its aircraft and a
special medical team at the airport for any emergency
operations.
Indeed, twice Air France planes left
Ambakasi airport to go to Uganda to pick up the
147 released hostages. Our action in allowing the
Israeli aircraft to land at Nairobi was therefore neither
an unusual act nor one to be construed as collaboration
w,i,th Israel.
il.

150. Kenya knew why that country was doing so,
and we did not find it necessary to engage in a futile
exercise by replying to such groundless accusations
from a regime which had long lost any international
credibility. To tell the truth, we have had a long series
of incident after incident, vilification after vilification,
incitement and even murder, extending from 1971 to
date, and our patience is at the .point of exhaustion.
I .,
151. So it was understandable that the Government
and the people of Kenya were rightly indignant and
surprised when the case of the same fictitious Palestinian prisoners was introduced in this latest episode. Kenya promptly,
and in the clearest terms,
denied that it was holding any Palestinian prisoners
in its territory. On behalf of my Government,
I again
categorically deny these slanderous lies aimed at discrediting the good name of my country. Our position
on the struggle by the Palestinians is well known, and
I do not have to repeat it here. Sufftce it to say that
we will continue to support their legitimate
rights
regardless of attempts by our enemies to create friction between us and the Palestinians.

154. I should like to place it on record here that
Kenya views with great concern the aggression
committed by the Israelis against Uganda at Entebbe.
We would equally like to place on record our object&n to Israel’s violation of our airspace. As we pointed
out in Mauritius,
Israel must have violated the airspace of many African and Arab countries when it was
undertaking its exercise to rescue. the hostages forcefully at Entebbe. To single out my country simply
because we allowed the Israeli aircraft to land at
Nairobi on a humanitarian basis is therefore an injustice to my country. Our commitment
to the liberation
of all the oppressed peoples is total. Few nations in
Africa can surpass the supreme sacrifice Kenya
suffered in both human and material terms in its struggle for independence and nationhood. We continue to
support as well as we can the liberation of the colonized in Africa as a member of the Organization of
African Unity. Kenya cannot therefore collaborate
with any forces that might prove hostile to Africa.
155. Let us discuss here the means and ways of
getting rid of the situations and conditions that will
lead to many Entebbes. It is all too easy to stand up
and point an accusing finger at others. I am sure the
Security Council, which is the supreme body of the
United Nations, will rise to the occasion and not let
itself be confused by baseless accusations against one
State or another, for to do so would be to depart from
the supreme duty of this Council-that
of maintaining
international
peace. Kenya, if it wished, could point
out numerous cases and instances of aggression committed against it by ‘those .who have been so eager to
accuse it ‘of. collaborating
with aggressors. If the
Council wishes to have the list, we have it ready. But,
for the time being, Mr. President, may I request that
you and the Council take note of the latest accusation,
which is characteristic of the manufacture of the falsehoods we have put up with. I refer to a Ugandan
broadcast of 7 July last, which I shall now quote:

152. The aggression committed in Uganda by Israeli
commandos came to us as a complete surprise, contrary to some baseless accusations levelled at my
country that we had prior knowledge of it and collaborated with the Israelis. As my Vice-President
said during the debate on this matter at the recent
summit of the Organization
of African Unity in
Mauritius,
“Kenya is not and will not be used as a base for
aggression against neighbouring or indeed any other
country in the world, least of ail Uganda, which
Kenya has consistently assisted with supplies since
the conp ct’htat.”
153. The first time that Kenya ever had contact with
the Israeli planes was when the planes requested
permission to land at Nairobi International
Airport in
an emergency. They carried sick and injured people.
Kenya ‘was bound to allow the planes to land, on
purely humanitarian
grounds and in accordance with
international
law. As an alert nation, we had to take
precautionary
security measures at the airport. Any
other nation would have done the same. It is thus
preposterous for anyone to associate the presence of
our security forces at the airport with an alleged collaboration between Kenya and the Israelis. Kenya’s
humanitarian
approach to the problems facing the
hostages at Entebbe was manifested long before the
tragic events of last Sunday. The Government
of

“Uganda:
Enemy aircraft approaching Uganda,
says military spokesman. .The military spokesman
wishes to inform the whole country that 30 enemy
aircraft have been detected by the Uganda Radar.
The aircraft, believed to be Israeli and American,
were approaching Uganda from Kenya. The military spokesman advises the public not to panic, but
keep a close eye on any suspect western spies and
bring to the attention of the Government the activities of such people. All medical services in Uganda
should be on a stand-by, and the public are called
upon to be prepared to donate blood for emergency
cases.
18

161. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Qatar, who wishes to speak in his
capacity as current Chairman of the Group of Arab
States. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
_. .
/
162. Mr. JAMAL
(Qatar): Mr. President, in my
capacity as the Chairman of the Group of Arab States
for this mqnth, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council -for the month of July. Your
outstanding experience and tact will be a great asset in
ensuring the success of the deliberations ofthe Council.

“Uganda, says fh6 military spokesman, is capable
-of defending h&-self without assistance although
several friendly countries are prepared to come by
.air or otherwise in &.I+ defence.
.*.
j! I
“He appealed td @I%security forces and to eviiy
man and woman ‘@‘be on the alert. Should ?$,:
Ugandan notice any enemy aircraft landing atiiwhere near his area, use any weapon within your
reach to speedily finish off the occupant becay?$
the enemy has no synipathy.
‘<i-d
>‘d
“The military
spokesman further advises t&
.country to constantly listen ‘to the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation for any development.”
1

163. I should also like to pay a tribute to the President of the Council for the month of June, Ambassador Jackson, of Guyana. His skill and statesmanship had almost secured the adoption of a resolution
which would have brbught the Middle East conflict
closer to peace and justice.

Thdse Israeli and, American aircraft’ were’ supposed
to be coming from Kenya. B.ut no aircraft came from
Kenya. The question is: was rhis story, deliberately
manufactured
to confuse Ugandans and to inflame
their feelings against Kenya, intended to be a cover
for the arrival of military aircraft in Uganda from
wherever?

164. I should also like to extend my appreciation and
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and through you to
the members of the Council, for giving me the oppdrtunity to address the Council on this important issue.

156. ‘1s is not the wish of my delegation to continue
taking any more of the Council’s
valuable time.
I should, however, like to conclude by reiterating the
following points.

165. It is indeed a great honour for me to welcome
the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Uganda,
Mr. Juma Oris Abdalla, most cordially as the head of
the Ugandan delegation to the Council. I wish also,
on behalf of the Arab Group, to extend our sincere
cdndolences and sympathy to the Government
and
the people of the Republic of Uganda upon the,loss
of innocent Ugandan lives.

157. First, Kenya does not have and never has had
Palestinian prisoners.
158. Second, Kenya did not have prior knowledge
of nor did it collaborate with Israel in its aggression
against Uganda. On the contrary, Kenya was a victim
of aggression of its air space by Israel. As I stated
earlier, our permission for the Israeli planes to land
at Nairobi, and this after Entebbe, not before, was
granted purely,on a humanitarian
basis in accordance
w.ith internatiqnal
law.

,

166. I also wish to convey our sincere condolences
and sympathy to the representative of the People’s
Republic of China on the loss .of Mr. Chou-teh. 1
request that the representative df China to convey to
his Government and to the great people of China our
deep condolences.

l&.
Third, Kenya will always continue to co-operate
with its neighbours, including Uganda, in a spirit of
good-neighbourliness
and respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all nations, as enshrined
in the Charters of the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations. In this respect, we scrupulously observe and adhere to the principles of the
sovereign equality of all Member States; non-interference in the internal affairs of States; the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of each State and its
inalienable right to independent existence. We expect
others to respect the same principles too. But should
anyone not do so, Kenya will always be ready to
defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity by all
means available to it.

168. One more time, we meet here to discuss another
flagrant act of aggression committed on a peace-loving
country by the same old racist State ,implanted in the
Middle East. On 4 July, the Zionist forces of aggression unleashed their death squads on Uganda, a
Member State of the United Nations, which resulted
in the loss of many innocent lives, and’extensive property damage inflicted upon this developing African
nation.

160. Fourth, ,Kenya, as a faithful Member of the
United Nations, will implement the provisions of any
resolution that the Council may adopt as a measure
to curb and, indeed, eliminate the repetition of.the
events in Entebbe.

169. Even though we are not here to discuss .the
matter of the French airline hijacking, I wish to remind
all the Member States of the unanimous condemnation
of these acts, particularly the endangering of the lives
of innocent civilians, by the Foreign Ministers of the

167. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
welcome among us the Foreign Minister of Mauritius
and the Foreign Minister of Kenya, and to give them
our best wishes.

19

20 Arab States and by the Palestine Liberation Organization, which tried to intercede with the hijackers
at the French Government’s
request. The airplane
landed at Entebbe airport with 275 endangered civilians, and the brave President of the Republic of
Uganda, His Excellency Idi Amin Dada, took it upon
himself to see that food and medical care were provided to those involved in this unfortunate tragedy
and to start the negotiations for the release of the
hostages.

proval of those Governments whosk’slatements
might
be misunderstood as an encouragement of this act of
piracy; and to consider sanctions against this longtime violator of the United‘:Nations
Charter and of
international
law, including”the
suspension of its
membership until it pledges’&-espect
all provisions .
bf the Charter and the resoluti’dfis
of the various United
_.I
.I”
Nations bodies.
174. Having said that, I should like to add that our
patience is coming to an end. We can no longer pretend
to discuss world order and justice when the most
flagrant acts of aggression are sanctioned by prominent Members of the United Nations and protected
by the veto power of one of the permanent members
of the Council which is ignoring the racist Zionist
danger confronting the developing nations and endangering world peace and security.

170. On 30 June, the President of Uganda obtained
the release of 47 hostages. On 1 July, he obtained the
release of another 100 persons and the extension of
the deadline for the negotiations, and submitted the
:by now .well-known demands of the hijackers to the
various countries
involved,
which showed their
readiness to negotiate with the hijackers to avoid
bloodshed. But as the truth unfolded, the Zionist State
was buying time by declaring its desire to negotiate
and avoid bloodshed while preparing for aggression.
At the time when there should have been negotiations
for sparing the lives of the innocent people involved,
the Israeli storm-troops
invaded sovereign Ugandan
territory and committed a mean act of terrorism which
resulted in unnecessary bloodshed.

175. The United Nations has now arrived at a crossroad, it can either reassert its authority, backing its
decisions with action, or it can take the other road
which leads down to dishonour and oblivion, for what
use is the United Nations when an arrogant State like
Israel can defy it with impunity?
The world waits
expectantly for a meaningful decision which will put
an end to such actions. Now is the time for the Council
to make it clear to Israel that the world has had enough
of the Zionist State’s defiance, which must now end
its dissembling and meet without further argument the
requirements
of its United Nations membership
or
cease to have standing as a Member State.

171. What concerns us all today is the fact that a
Member State of this Organization has dared to violate
the territorial integrity of another Member State by
flagrantly landing its troops on that State’s territory
and menacing scores of people among its population
and security forces. There was no declaration of war,
as we recall, on Uganda. There was not even an offtcial
176. It is our conviction that the Council should face
to its responsibilities
by adopting a resolution unanihint of displeasure. On the contrary, while the Israeli
:murderers were preparing for their aggression, the
mously condemning
Israel’s aggression against the
Israeli Government was bluffing the rest of the world
Republic of Uganda.
and declaring its readiness to negotiate, all with the
intention of assuring success in its surprise attack
177. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretution
from
on this unsuspecting, peaceful country in the heart
French): Mr. President, my first words are to conof Africa. What is just as disturbing is that this illegal
gratulate you on behalf of my delegation on assuming
your responsible post. On 28 June last you said that,
act of State terrorism, endangering world peace and
security, was hailed and commended by some mem- . after a particularly heavy month, you hoped that in
bers of the world community
despite its flagrant
July the Council might be able to work in a more
leisurely way. Unfortunately,
this wish has not been
violation of international
law and the United Nations
Charter.
fulfilled. I regret this for you but less for us, because
we, in a particularly
difftcult situation, shall be able
172. The implication
is that the stronger countries
to benefit from your great experience and unique
can at any time land troops in smaller countries withtalents. The French delegation cannot but be gratified
out a declaration of war, and commit unpunished acts
at seeing an eminent representative of a Latin nation,
of aggression. Anyone who followed the Israeli media
a sister country, in charge of this work, an essential
before, during, and after the Israeli terrorist attack on
partner of ours in the work of European construction
Uganda, especially with respect to the coverage given
in which our two countries are involved side by side.
to the four Israelis killed in comparison to that given
to the many Ugandan lives lost, can already see a
178. I should also like to address my thanks to the
similarity
among the Rhodesian, the South African
representative of Guyana, who was sorely tested last
and the Israeli attitudes regarding the value of black
month and brilliantly
demonstrated the courtesy and
people as compared to white.
political tact which we knew were his outstanding
qualities. The month of June will go down in the Coun173. We therefore call upon the Council to condemn
cil’s annals not only statistically but also because it
Israel in the strongest possible terms for its aggression
was marked by the presence of a great President,
against the Republic of Uganda, to show its disapAmbassador Jackson, and, latterly, the Minister for
20

Foreign Affairs of Guyana, who did us the honour of
directing our work.,
.

conditions laid down by the hijackers for the return of
the hostages. The Ambassador of Somalia was present
at that meeting. He emphasized that as the senior Arab
ambassador, he had been chosen to represent the
hijackers. Thereupon, all the conditions of the hijackers were communicated
to the Governments
concerned.

179. It is my unhappy duty to present to our Chinese
colleagues the condole;lces of my delegation at the
death of Chairman C~hou-teh. He was one of the historic figures in the People’s Republic of China, involved
as he was in the fou.nding and consolidation
of that
country, to which he made an eminent contribution.
My delegation would like to echo the tributes which
ci
have been paid to his memory here.

187. On 30 June, the representative of the PLO in
Kampala informed our Ambassador that women and
children might be released by the hijackers in the
course of the day. Forty-seven passengers were in fact
freed at 1 p.m.

180. I have asked to .speak at this opening meeting
because of the evidence which my delegation is in-a
position to provide regarding the matter now being
dealt with by the Council.. We believe that this evidence can shed light on our work since France’ was
gravely implicated
from the very beginning in. the
Entebbe affair, which meant that it had to play an
active part in it.

188. On the same day, at 5 p.m., we learned from a
local radio station that the hijackers had told the President of Uganda that theywould- blow up the plane and
all the remaining hostages if their demands were not
met by the countries concerned the next day, 1 July,
by 3 p.m. In the course of the evening the Ambassador of France was received by Marshal Idi Amin,
whom he asked to secure an extension of the deadline.

181. As we are aware, this affair started with the
hijacking on 27 June, over Corfu, of an Air France
airbus which was flying from Tel Aviv to Paris with
250 passengers on board.

189. On 1 July, shortly after the time-limit
had run
out, the Ugandan Radio announced that the hijackers,
as a result of the intercession of Marshal Idi Amin,
had agreed, first, to release about 100 hostages, with
the exception of Israeli nationals and those with dual
nationality,
and secondly, to extend the deadline to
4 July, 11 a.m. The crew had asked not to be released
until all the passengers had been released.

182. The French authorities, when informed of this
hijacking, alerted some of their embassies, including
that in Kampala, asking them to take steps for the
plane to be given permission to land, since it was soon
going to run out of fuel. That is why our Ambassador
in Kampala approached the Ugandan authorities about
this, and permission to land was given immediately.
.

190. On 1 July, late in the morning, the Ambassador
of Israel in Paris informed the Minister for Foreign
Affairs that the Israeli Government was prepared, in
exchange for the release of the hostages, to free a
“certain number” of prisoners whose names appeared
on the hijackers’ list. He requested that that information be communicated
to the President of Uganda
by the Ambassador of France in Kampala. The Israeli
Government
expressed the hope that the terms and
conditions
for the exchange would be negotiated
through the intermediary of France.

183. The airbus landed at Entebbe on 28 June at
3.40 p.m. The French Ambassador went to the airport,
but he was unable to establish direct contact either
with the hijackers or with the crew and the passengers.
Marshal Idi Amin also went to the airport.
184. The French Ambassador immediately
hastened
to approach the Ugandan authorities and Marshal Idi
Amin, who received him at 7 p.m., for the purpose of
obtaining the release of the passengers and the crew.
He also conveyed to the Ugandan Head of State a
personal message from President Giscard d’Estaing
for the purpose of securing the release of all the persons-passengers
and crew-who were the victims of
this act, the reprehensible nature of which deserved
censure and called for firmness.

191. On the same day, at 3 o’clock, 100 passengers
of the airbus were in fact released and handed over,
by the Ambassador of Somalia, to the Ambassador of
France. The Ambassador of France was received in
the afternoon by the President of Uganda, in the
presqtlce of the Ambassador of Somalia. He transmitted to them the communication
received from the
Israeli Government.
He suggested, furthermore,
resorting to the good offices of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.

185. Through the efforts of Marshal Idi Amin, a few
minutes later the passengers were allowed to leave the
plane and food was brought to them. A doctor was
also able to attend them. From that time, the passengers seemed to be guarded, at least in part, by
persons who were not among the first group of hijackers; external security was provided, at a distance
of 50 metres, by Ugandan soldiers.

192. Towards the end of the day, the Ambassador of
Somalia informed our Ambassador in Kampala of the
hijackers’ reply. They stated that they were prepared
to study the terms for the release of the prisoners held
by the countries concerned. They made it clear that
they rejected the idea of involving the SecretaryGeneral.

186. On 29 June, at 1.15 p.m., Marshall Idi Amin
submitted to the French Ambassador the text of the
21

the necessary guarantees in a particularly
complex
and delicate affair where many human lives were at
stake. Unfortunately,
we were unable to obtain agreement on his playing an active role. Nevertheless, we
should like to thank him warmly for his efforts, particularly during his stay in Mauritius.

193. In the meantime,
the Foreign Ministry
had
indicated to the Israeli authorities that it agreed to
instruct our Ambassador to undertake the negotiation
for the release of the hostages, on the basis of the
replies received from the Governments concerned.
194. On 2 July, the Ambassador of Israel make
known the position of the Israeli Government:
it
wanted the terms of the exchange to be determined
beforehand.
195. The Israeli plan, which envisaged the exchange
of the prisoners on neutral ground, was transmitted
by our Ambassador in Kampala to the Ambassador
of Somalia during the morning of 3 July, ‘for subsequent transmission to the hijackers. Somewhat later,
the Ambassador of Somalia transmitted to our Ambassador the counterproposals
of the hijackers; one of
those counterproposals
was that the exchange had to
take place at Entebbe.

201. From the account of the ‘facts I have given, it
is quite clear that we are faced by a complex set of
circumstances
in which events and responsibilities
are inextricably interwoven.
202. That this tragic affair has been marked by
violent and illegal acts cannot be denied. The initial
action-that
is, the hijacking of a civilian aircraft and
the taking of innocent hostages-is
in particular an
intolerable violation of international
morality and of
jars gentium
which could not be justified by any cause
and against which the international community has to
adopt effective measures with the resolve to implement them.

196. On the same day, our Ambassador requested
an extension of the deadline of the ultimatum from the
Ambassador of Somalia. Since Marshal Idi Amin was
not in Uganda, our Ambassador
made the same
request to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.
A few hours later, the Ambassador of Somalia communicated the information that the deadline of the ultimatum--4 July at 11 o’clock-could
not be extended.

203. The French delegation will have occasion, here
and elsewhere, to revert to this distressing aspect of
the present day. A growing risk faces any traveller,
any innocent bystander. Furthermore,
it is perfectly
clear that acts of terrorism jeopardize the stability of
international
relations and undermine the trust that
should exist among States. These actions are a breach
of the fundamental rules that make it possible for men
to live together. For that reason they must claim the
attention of the United Nations.

197. Upon his return from Mauritius, however, the
Ugandan Head of State suggested to our Ambassador
that all the countries concerned should inform him,
within the allotted time, of the numbers of the flights
to Kampala that the prisoners would be on. That
information
was transmitted to the Israeli Embassy
in Paris by our Minister for Foreign Affairs.

204. Finally, the French delegation would like, at
this stage of the discussion, to express not only its
gratification
at the fact that the hostages have been
freed, but also its grief at the death of the’innocent
victims.

198. On 4 July, at 12.30 a.m., our Ambassador in
Kampala informed the Minister for Foreign Affairs in
Paris, by telephone, that fighting had taken place at
Entebbe airport. Half an hour later, the Ambassador
of Israel transmitted, by telephone, to Mr. Sauvagnargues a message from Mr. Yigal Allon. The message
stated that an Israeli operation to free the hostages
had just been completed. During the night, the President of the Republic received a message from the
Prime Minister of Israel confirming those facts.

205. The PRESIDENT
(int~rprftcrtionj~om
French):
I thank the representative of France for his.very kind
words about me. I particularly
appreciated what he
said about ‘the co-operation between our two countries, and above all about the efforts our two countries
are jointly making for the construction of Europe.

199. That was the information
I was asked to bring
to the Council’s attention at this time when it is beginning its work on this question.

207.

206. The next speaker is the representative
of the
United Republic of Cameroon. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.,
Mr. OYONO

Republic of Cameroon)
First, Mr. President,
I should like to carry out the pleasant duty of offering
you our warmest and friendliest congratulations
on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for’
the month of July. We are particularly pleased because
your country, Italy, and Cameroon are co-operating
fruitfully on both the bilateral and the multilateral
level, and because we know you personally and
greatly admire your talents as a man and as a diplomat
with wide experience of the problems of our Organization-talents
that are indispensable for the success
of this series of meetings.

(interprettrtkm

200. I should like to say how much we regret that
the Secretary-General
was unable, because of the
hijackers’ opposition, to intervene in this matter as we
would have wished him to do. It appeared to us that
his great moral authority would have been a valuable
asset in a situation affecting a number of States Members of the Organization.
Moreover, in view of the
general confidence he enjoys, his iritervention
ap
peared to us to be likely to provide all the parties with
22

from

(United

French):

208. I should like also to express condolences, on
behalf of my delegation,
to the representative
of
China on the passing ofthe great pioneer of the Chinese
people, Mr. Chou-teh.,~I.:
.‘
209. My detegdtion.:,is grateful to the Council for
allowing us to participate in this serious debate on the
brutal, underhand act of aggression coldly committed
by the State of Israel against the Republic of Uganda,
a sister country; a member of the Organization
of
African Unity, and a’Member of the United Nations.
..
210. We wish to express our indignation and horror
at this outrageous act of terrorism which has caused
the loss of many lives: more than a hundred persons
were killed, and there were many casualties among
the Ugandan troops. There was also much material
damage, including the destruction
of a number of
military and civilian aircraft of the’ Ugandan Armed
Forces, and the destruction of buildings and other
installations at Entebbe Airport.
211. The Ugandan people, who have been humiliated and whose feelings and pride have been hurt by
this dastardly action, an action which has aroused the
indignation and reprobation of Africa and of all peaceloving forces througout the world, are now experiencing a great tragedy.
212. The fact remains that certain people with onesided views have hastened to accuse the Ugandan
Head of State of collusion with the commandos,
despite the fact that the captain of the hijacked aircraft, an eye-witness if ever there was one, was much
more reserved in his views, as was clear from the
interview he gave to the press in Paris on 7 July,
extracts of which were printed in The New York Times
of 8 July.
213. In this hour of tragedy for the Ugandan people,
Cameroon, through its highest authority our Head of
State, His Excellency
El Hadj Ahmadou Ahidjo,
vigorously condemned Israel’s act of aggression and
has assured the Republic of Uganda of its sympathy,
solidarity and support.
214. There are no words strong enouch to condemn
Israel’s aggression against Uganda. This act of aggression took place at a time when the international
community, once again confronted by an act of aerial
piracy which it deplores and condemns, and at the
same time deeply concerned for the lives of the hostages, which it wanted, as always, to safeguard, was
entitled to expect an outcome without any bloodshed
-particularly
since the Ugandan Head of State was
personally very active in this affair and his efforts had
already resulted in the release, on 30 June, of 47 passengers -women,
children and old persons.
215. The Israeli act of aggression took place while
President Idi Amin, encouraged by that first success
and by the hope which Israel had aroused by agreeing

to negotiations with the members of the commando
group, was continuing his efforts to bring about the
release of the remaining hostages. Israel did not want
to run the risk of a peaceful .settlement that would
have prevented bloodshed. Those are the facts. They
explain why we find the attempts to legitimize Israel’s
action after the event and to create chaos and confusion neither convincing nor well-founded.
216. For Cameroon, the situation is clear: Israel took
the initiative
of attacking the territory of Uganda
-a sovereign State more than 3,000 kilometres away
from Israel-with
commandos from its regular army,
airlifted by three military planes. In so doing, Israel
deliberately
initiated hostilities against Uganda, and
for that reason is the aggressor in this affair, as defined
by international
law.
217. The Security Council, which is responsible for
international
peace and security, must vigorously
condemn this barbaric act which constitutes a flagrant
violation of the rules of international
law and of the
spirit and the letter of the Charter, Article 2 (4) of
which provides that:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations.”
218. In the spirit of the Charter, that prohibition
means that Member States have an obligation to settle
their international disputes by peaceful means in order
to maintain international
peace and security. I need
hardly remind you that our Organization
is not dedicated to anarchy or to the notion that might makes
right, but is an organized community whose mutually
accepted principles and rules must be scrupulously
respected, and their violation adequately punished.
It is the corner-stone of our Organization
that there
can be no justification
for the use of force against the
sovereignty, independence or territorial integrity of a
State, unless we wish to imperil international
cooperation in its present form and indeed the very
existence of States that do not yet possess modem,
sophisticated systems of detection and deterrence.
219. It is precisely in order solemnly to defend and
reaffirm these sacred principles that the Council has
to consider the request of the Ugandan Government
and to condemn Israel’s act of aggression in no uncertain terms.
220.’ Israel pretended to agree to negotiations on the
freeing of the remaining hostages merely to gain time,
to mislead, and to lull international
public opinion in
order to carry out unimpeded its diabolical designs
against Uganda.
221. It is a matter of refret that people seem to be
getting used to seeing Israel, whose alleged peaceful

intentions are hardly matched by its deeds, persist in
its systematic and unbridled use of deceit and the
brute force of war, which have become part and parcel
of its political behaviour. It is high time the Council
put an end to this state of affairs and unreservedly
and unanimously condemned Israel’s flagrant aggression against the Republic of Uganda. Israel .must also
be required to pay compensation for the loss of life
and for the material damage caused as a result of its
barbaric acts.

to justify and whitewash their criminal acts of aggression, they are absolutely untenable and can be of no
avail.
: :.-226. The Chinese delegation’believes
that the Council should adopt a resolutior?‘in
support of the just
demand of the African co&tries
and the Summit
Conference of the Organization
of African Unity,
condemning Israeli Zionism for its aggression and its
atrocities against Uganda and calling upon the Israeli
‘&thorities to compensate Uganda for all its,losses and
tb guarantee that there will be no recurrence of such
‘incidents.
I 1,
227. The PRESIDENT:
I have no other speakers on
my list who wish to speak it today’s debate. Before
calling on speakers who wish to speak in exercise of
their right of reply I shall call on the representative
of Mauritius, who has asked to ‘make a clarification.

222. In conclusion, let me say that the eyes of Africa
and of world public opinion are upon our deliberations, and the sternness of their gaze must be matched
by the serious tone of our deliberations.
But what do
Africa and world public opinion expect? They expect
the Council to act firmly to deter future potential
aggressors intoxicated with a sense of power from
violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States of our Organization and from trampling
underfoot the sacred principles of peace and international security which ,are enshrined in the Charter.

228.

Sir Harold

WALTER
(Mauritius)
(interpretsI simply wish to ask a question of
the representative of France which is of capital importance when we view the facts of which we have been
given two distinct.versions
in the Council. The rep!esentative of France said at one point that:

tion from

223.

Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (trunslution
fiurn
ChiThe Foreign Minister of Kenya and the representatives of Mauritania,
Qatar, France, Cameroon
and others have expressed condolences this afternoon
on the death of Chou-teh, Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress of the
People’s Republic of China. On behalf of the Chinese
delegation, I wish to express deep thanks for their
cordial sentiments.

nese):

French):

“The French authorities, when informed of this
hijacking, alerted some of their embassies, including
that in Kampala, asking them to take steps for the
plane to be given permission to land, since it was
soon going to run out of fuel.” [Prm. 182 crhove.]
Could the representative of France tell us at that time
that message was transmitted to Kampala?

224. In the early morning of 4 July, Israeli armed
personnel on board three military planes wantonly
landed on the Entebbe airport in Uganda for a sneak
attack, killing more than a hundred officers and men
of the Ugandan army, destroying a number of Ugandan
military
and civilian aircraft, and causing serious
damage to the Entebbe airport. This is a premeditated
and naked act of aggression committed
against a
sovereign State by Israeli Zionism. It constitutes a
gross violation of the United Nations Charter and
further reveals Israeli Zionism’s behaviour and its
determination
to make itself an enemy of the Arab
and African peoples. The Chinese Government
and
people express their indignation of the unbridled act of
aggression committed
by the Israeli Zionists and
strongly condemn it.

229.

Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretdon
from
I must hambly confess to the Foreign Minister of Mauritius that I am not in a position here and
now to tell him exactly at what time communication
was established between our Ambassador and the
Ugandan authorities
regarding the landing of the
plane. All I can do is repeat what I said, namely, that
we asked for the plane be allowed to land when it
seemed that it would be able to fly for only another
15 minutes.

French):

230. Having said that, I should like to say, Mr. President, that I shall be at the disposal of the Foreign
Minister of Mauritius
on Monday to give him the
information he has asked for when we have been able
to check our files.

225. As is known to all, we have always disapproved
of such adventurist acts of terrorism as assassination,
kidnapping and the hijacking of aircraft. However,
they can in no way be used as a pretext for Israel to
commit armed aggression against a sovereign State.
Over a long period, the Israeli Zionists have subjected
the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to frenzied
aggression and brutal massacre. Having committed
innumerable
crimes, they are ciinging to their evil
course. This time they have carried out another brazen
act of armed aggression against a sovereign African
State. Whatever excuses the Israeli Zionists may find

231. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of their
right of reply.
232. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): We have
listened to the usual allegations and fabrications of
the ,representative of the Zionist entity. I should like
to reserve the right of my delegation to reply to all
those allegations when it is my turn to speak. But now.,
since the hour is ‘late. I should like to place some
comments on the record.
24

233. Mr. President, first let me congratulate you on
your assumption -of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I express the satisfaction of the Libyan
delegation at seeing you preside over our work during
this very important debate. Your country and mine
are neighbours. We .arr$Mediterraneans.
We have a
long history .of associat! n. There has been bitter and
sweet in our relations:’ 9Lour country has annexed my
country twice-once
as the Roman empire and once
as modern Italy. My country participated in the occu”pation of parts of your: country, as part of the Arab
empire, for centuries. But.1 am happy to say that our
two countries now have relations of friendship and
good-neighbourliness,
and we are happy to see that
hate among peoples is not eternal.
.,
234. Mr. President, on the first day we participated
in the work of the Council you welcomed me and said
it was a sign of changing times that the representatives
of Italy and Libya were together in the Council.‘1 now
support your statement, and express our satisfaction
that your country and mine entered the United Nations on the same day in 1955, and now the former
master and the former ‘colonized
are together as
friends and representatives of free peoples.

240. The history of the establishment
of the Zionist
State is a history of terrorism. Its terrorism is well
known to everyone. 1 will not go into details now.
I will do so in the future. I will not go into detail and
cite a long list, but I shall give a few examples that
will suffice.
241. Who killed in cold blood the United Nations
mediator,
Count
Bernadotte?
Who assassinated
Lord Moyne? Who made the killers of Count Bemadotte public heroes sitting in the Israeli Cabinet? Who
stated the barbaric raid on Beirut airport in 1969?
Who shot down a Libyan civilian aircraft, killing
scores of people, including women and children?
Ironically,
that plane also was piloted by a French
crew. The list is endless.
242. From the very beginning, the Israeli Government has wanted to use .the hijacking incident as an
excuse to attack Uganda. I shall now quote what
Mr. Rabin proudly told the Israeli Knesset on 4 July:
“The Israeli defence forces and the intelligence community lost not a single hour required for thinking,
planning and preparation.”
This after his Foreign
Minister had said in the Knesset on 1 July: “I will
say more. According to information
available to us,
all the hostages are safe”.

235. I should also like to express the gratitude and
satisfaction of my delegation to my friend and brother
Ambassador Jackson of Guyana for his able conduct
of our work during last month.

243. The Israeli representative tries in vain to cast
doubt on the behaviour of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
which is recognized by the United
Nations and by the majority of the world community as
the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people,
at a time when the whole world knows that the Palestine Liberation
Organization
denounced and condemned the hijacking from the outset and dispatched
one of its highest representatives in a special Egyptian
plane so that he could take part in the negotiations
with the French Ambassador in Kampala. The hijackers turned down mediation by that Organization at a
time when the whole world recognizes that the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
the legitimate
representative
of the fighting Palestinian
people, is
serious and honest and moral. Even the protectors of
Israel, even the United States, has thanked it for its
role in helping with the evacuation
of American
citizens.

236. In the name ,of my delegation I also associate
myself with the condolences that have been addressed
to the Chinese people and Government on the death
of Marshall Chou-teh.
237. As I have said, I reserve my right to reply in
more detail to the Zionist representative
at a later
stage, but I should like to make some comments now.
238. Really, one must express one’s admiration for
the effrontery of the Zionist representa‘tive. He is, .as
usual, faithful to his traditions. His motto is lie, lie and
lie. As his master Goebbels once said, perhaps some
day, in the end, we will believe you. This motto is
also, shout, shout and shout-in
order to cover up
the weakners of his arguments. But all this is of no
effect, because whatever arguments he presents, he
could not belittle the intelligence
of the members
here or hide the true face of Israel, which may be
summed up in two words: State terrorism,

244. The Israeli representative
tries to avoid addressink the main issue, which is that his Government
planned and executed an act of aggression against a
sovereign, independent
country, a Member of the
United Nations. Should the Council tolerate such
aggression, it would give the green light, it would give
permission’to
every country in the world to take the
law into its own hands and invade other countries
under any pretext it chooses. We believe the Council
should apply the provisions of the Charter, which
everybody
is interested in applying. The Council
should condemn in the sharpest terms this contemptuous, wanton Israeli aggression. If the Council fails
to do so because of obstruction on the part of this

239. The Israeli representative tries in vain to shed
crocodile tears about the loss of human life. Is it not
the barbaric actions of his Government that have led
to the loss of human lives, be they Ugandan or other
human lives? From the very beginning the Israeli
Government was bent on attacking Uganda because it
has not forgiven the heroic people and Government
of Uganda for unmasking the ugly and ‘true face of
Israel in Africa and its collaboration
with the racist
regimes in South Africa and Rhodesia.
25

country or that, those who obstruct will have to bear
the consequences of their action in the future.
245. The
Zionist
representative
mentioned
Auschwitz,
he mentioned
Dachau, he mentioned
Buchenwald. He said that “Auschwitz, .Dachau and
Buchenwald belonged -to the past and would never
again return” [pcrrcr. 82 &ore].
I say that Dachau,
Auschwitz and Buchenwald are not things of the past;
they are still alive, physically and spiritually,
only
this time the roles are reversed; those who were the
victims-or
pretend to have been the victims-are
now
the torturers. The racist and criminal exercises and
policies are now being executed against the Palestinian people by the Zionist racists and against the
African peoples by the other racist regimes of southern
Africa.

know that we have problems, we know that we have
fighting. We are developing countries; we are fighting
for our progress, for our unity, and for our liberation.
In the history of all nations, big and small, there has
been fighting for liberation $d for unity. As I said
before, we Arabs have not yet, endedlour civil war.
‘The United States had its civiIiwar. Your own country,
‘Mr. President, had its civil war. The ‘native country
.orf.Mr. Herzog, Ireland, is right now experiencing a
kind of mixed colonial and civil war. Every country
‘& the world has its wars, and we Arabs‘must also have
cur problems. We know that ‘we have problems with
&me neighbours, with some brothers,.but,
as we say
j$,Arabic, these are only summer clouds and they will
goon disappear. And, Mr. Herzog, you will find us
united, before
, Israeli aggression.
r..

246. Certainly, Mr. Herzog, you did not learn the
lesson of Dachau, of Auschwitz, of Buchenwald. But
you learn through experience. We admit that you were,
and you are, excellent disciples of the Nazis. You
have done even better than your Nazi masters. You
have improved their techniques, you have pushed to
perfection their style and practice. By your fabrications, Mr. Herzog, and lies, you are merely trying to
cover up the wanton crime committed against Uganda.
What you did was really an act of treachery. You
announced your intention to negotiate all over the
world. Even the representative
of France said that
you communicated
to France your willingness to
negotiate. And people believed you. But you went to
the negotiations with no good faith; you went to the
negotiations
with a dagger under your cloak. You
profited from the good faith of our Ugandan brothers.
And after that, Mr. Herzog, you dare to speak of
morals. Everyone now knows what your morals are
and, above all, what the Zionist criminals and racists
mean by “negotiations”
when they come here to
the Security Council and the United Nations and ask
for negotiations with the Palestinians and with the
Arabs.

249.. Mr. Herzog also said that Libya should not be
seated as a member of the Security Council. For his
info,rmation, we were elected by 126 votes of sovereign
States. We were the candidate of the African Group
of 48 States, and if we are a member of the Council,
after all this time, it is also, for the,first time, a kind
of recognition of our history, of our tight for liberation.
We are a country that fought for its liberation ‘for
40 years, a country that lost 40 per cent of its population, a poor country-the
oil came only in 1964-that
fought forits independence. We suffered and, as I said,
we lost more than 40 per cent of our population. So,
if we are here in the Council, it is recognition by the
international
community.
.We are proud of the 126
votes which brought us here. Perhaps the other votes,
those not in favour of Libya, were cast by Israel and
its friends, protectors and lackeys.
250. I shall not go on tonight, but I reserve my right
to speak again to answer the allegations and cynical
fabrications
and lies of the representative
of the
Zionist entity.
251. The PRESIDENT:
I highly appreciated what
Ambassador
Kikhia just said about the relations
between our two countries. I s,ubscribe fully to his
remarks that reciprocal occupation belongs to ,the
past; the past will not come back; it is a bad habit on
which we turn our backs; and we are looking forward
to better and better relations based on the friendship
which has been restored between our two peoples.

247. I said that I would not be long. But Mr. Herzog
in his speech was indeed very generous to my country.
I admire, I am impressed by how much he hates my
country and my leader. He said that Libya is playing
a “central role” in this; he referred to “the central
role which this country”-he
means Libya--“plays
in the promotion and encouragement of international
terror in the world today” Iprrrtr. 73 trhore]. He said
that “this is the country which has for years acted as
paymaster of international
terror movements,
Arab
and non-Arab,
throughout
the world”
Iporcl. 74
trhor*e]. We are not paymasters to anybody. We are
trying to do our best to help our brothers, to help
liberation movements. We help them, we train them,
people who are fighting against colonialism,
against
imperialism,
against racism, against crpnrtheid,
and
we shall continue to do that. If we do not do that, we
shall lose our rcrison d’btre.
-_

252. Mr. ABDALLA
(Uganda): I shall not now reply
fully to what the representative of Zionist Israel said,
but there is one important point on which I wish to
reply immediately.
I hope to have an opportunity
to
reply in detail later regarding the unfounded allegations against Uganda and some other friendly countries of Africa.
253. The Security Council has been informed of the
Israeli invasion of Uganda on 4 July. We are all aware
of the efforts made by His Excellency Al-Hadj FietdMarshal Dr. Idi Amin Dada, V.C., D.S.C., M.C.,
President of the Republic of Uganda, and the entire

248. Also, Mr Herzog mentioned, as he has done
before, problems among Arabs. As I said before, we
26

people of Uganda to save the lives of all the hostages,
numbering 250.
.
,.-!
254. Up to the time of Israel’s invasion in the early
hours of Sunday, 4 Jut,;, President Amin had succeeded in having more#tan half the hostages released.
At the risk of his own’life, he even cut short his stay
in Mauritius in order to’continue negotiations, thereby
saving the lives of the’ remaining hostages. In his
humanitarian
efforts he, was concerned not only with
the release of all the hostages but also with their weifare. In so doing, the basic needs of life-for instance,
food and medical services-were
provided to all the
hostages without discrimination.
It was in this spi$t
that Mrs. Dora Bloch, who had a piece of food stuck
in her throat, was immediately
rushed to Uganda’s
best hospital for medical treatment.
When she got
better, in the evening of Saturday 3 July, she was
returned by the medical authorities to the old Entebbe
airport to join the other hostages. In accordance with
the understanding given by the Uganda Government
to the hijackers, this was done in order not to jeopardize the lives of the hostages who were at that time
still at Entebbe airport.

the invasion to the Kenya authorities and, presumably, obtain their clearance and assistance in the
operation.
We have irrefutable evidence that that
request was readily granted. Besides our own sources
of information,
I should like to ,&rote from a story on
the incident filed from Nairobi by a Mr. James Machanus and published in the London newspaper The
G~rtrr&n of Monday, 5 July. That story reads, in part
as follows:
“Although
the Kenyan Government
has offered
no statement on the attack, and is unlikely to do so,
officials here have been at pains to minimize the
Government’s
role in the dperation. As seen .from
Nairobi, the sequence of events runs as follows: ,
“At 9 o’clock local time on Saturday night
(7 p.m. British time), a number of eyewitnesses
at Kenya’s busy international
airport reported
seeing the arrival of three troop transport planes,
allegedly Israeli C-13l.military
aircraft.
“Shortly
afterwards, an airport lounge was
turned into a makeshift field hospital complete
with operating table, anaesthetic equipment, and
oxygen canisters. Kenya Regular Army troops
and members of the para-military General Service
Unit had earlier moved in to secure the airport
area.

255. The Israelis committed
a naked act of aggression by invading Entebbe airport where the hostages,
including Mrs. Dora Bloch, were being held by the
hijackers. The Israelis, as the Council has already
been informed, used all kinds of weapons, shooting
indiscriminately.
In the process, many lives, including
those of Ugandan soldiers, hijackers, hostages and
members of the Israeli invading forces, were lost. The
members of the invading force took away all the
hostages-dead,
injured or otherwise. They also took
away all their members of the invading force-again,
dead or injured. Therefore, it is for Israel to answer
regarding the whereabouts of Mrs. Dora Bloch.

“Around midnight the three aircraft carrying
Israeli troops, members of a counter-terrorist
unit, took off for the one-hour flight to Entebbe.”
259. From that story it is clear that Israeli invading
aircraft not only were allowed to overfly Kenya but
were given Kenyan landing and service facilities on
their way to raid Uganda and on their way back to
Israel.

256. The press reports and diplomatic
sources
according to which one diplomat saw Mrs. Dora Bloch
in hospital on Sunday are false. There is no concrete
information
about it. Everyone knows about the
aggression that was launched against the people of
Uganda, which resulted in much loss of life, and my
President tried his best to do everything peacefully,
but the Israeli aggression would not allow this. So it
is Israel that is responsible for answering as to the
whereabouts of Mrs. Dora Bloch.

260. Another version of the raid is given by another
English newspaper, the Finnncid
Times of Monday
5 July. That version states in part:
“According
to reports from Nairobi large numbers of IsraeIi security men arrived in the city during
last week and were much in evidence, along with
Kenyan security forces, at Ambakasi airport as the
Israeli aircraft refuelled and medical attention was
given.”

257. I have done my very best to avoid mentioning
Kenya, as it is a sister State and a neighbouring State
of Uganda.
Unfortunately,
the representative
of
Kenya mentioned Uganda in his statement. I had in
mind the Organization of African Unity, and the fact
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritius is
here, and did not intend to say much about Kenya.

261. Although in this submission we have shown that
a sister member State of the Organization of African
Unity connived in the invasion of our country, we
wish to state here that Uganda still regards the people
of Kenya as their brothers and sisters, and we express
the hope that the authorities in Kenya were somehow
misled into collaborating
in this heinous act. Accordingly, Uganda does not intend to undertake any retaliatory measures against Kenya for this collaboration.

258. So I shouid like the Council to know exactly
what are the facts regarding Kenya on this invasion.
On 1 July a special Israel military mission w&s dispatched to Nairobi to communicate
the decision on
27

but listed no details of her treatment
from the hospital.”

262. I should like to mention here my President’s
statement at the time of the opening of the Organization of African Unity Summit Conference in Mauritius.
He also gave booklets to a!! members of the Organization of African Unity proving that he had no ambitions
for even an inch of Kenyan soil and that he and the
people of Uganda as a whole respect the Charter of
the Organization
of African Unity. Fortunately,
the
current ‘Chairman of that Organization
is here. He
will say more about the statement by my colleague
from Kenya concerning alleged Ugandan claims on
Kenyan soil.

265. Having regard to the veracity of the statement
made on this point by the representative of Uganda,
I think that we can draw conclusions about the veracity of a!! the remaining statements he has seen fit to
make before the Council.
266. Mr. BATTISCOMBE
(United Kingdom):
My
delegation had not intended to speak today. I do so
now only because of the remarks made by the representative of Uganda on the case of Mrs. Bloch. Obviously, this case has aroused very grave concern in my
country.

263. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): The remarks by the representative of Uganda about Mrs. Dora Bloch give
rise to very considerable concern, because what he
has said about her is a blatant untruth; it does not
accord with the facts that have been published and
that are known not only to Israel but also to other
countries.
264. Let me quote from The New
today:

York

Times

267. The High Commissioner
in Uganda-who
has
recently returned to Uganda-has
had an interview
with President Amin, and we have been promised a
further statement on the case by President Amin.
I therefore do not wish to say anything further on the
matter at the present time.

of

268. I would only state that in view of the remarks
made on the case of Mrs. Bloch by the representative
of Uganda, we reserve our right to return to the matter
and reply when we make a statement at a later moment
in this debate.

in the British House of Commons yesterday
a Government minister said Mrs. Bloch had been
visited in the hospital by a member of the High
Commission on the day after the Israeli raid.
6‘

. . .

-that

or discharge

The meeting

is, on 4 July-

rose at 9.50 p.m.
Notes

t United Nations,
2 Ofi&/
Rrcords
Plenary
Meetings.

“The diplomat
reported that she was being
guarded by two men in plain-clothes and that he
was denied access to her when he returned an hour
later.

Trertty
Series,
of the Gene&

vol.

860,
Assembly,

p. 105.
Thirtieth

2370th meeting.
3 New York, Frederick A. Praeger, 1958.
’ Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1%3.
s London. Stevens and Sons. 1970.
6 John Bassett Moore, A Di&
qf Internatbnul
Luw
412. quoted by Hans Kelsen in Principles
of International
(New York, Rinehart and Company Inc., 1952), p. 59.

“Mulago
Hospital
sources said their records
showed that Mrs. Bloch was admitted last Friday,

28

Session,

(1906),

II,
Luw

.
.

i.

..

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UMES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adrersea-vous
a : Nations U&s. S&on
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

HJA~HHR
Oprana3aunn
O~-L.~~HH~HH~~X
HaqwR
MDXHO
zcyn~rb
B KHHXH~IS
Maraaoxax
N arenTcTBa%
no aeex panonas
srwpa. Hasoawre
cnpaaror
06 nanannax
n
samela KW~XAOM xar=nne
HIGH ncmwme
no anpecy:
Opr~annsauna
O~‘~~AWHMW~IX
HaunR,
Ceruaa
no npoaaate
nsaanwit.
HbKs-Plopr
ww Xeneaa.
COMO

v’.
:.
:.
:.

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o didjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

;.
:_
‘.
:,
_-_-,
,‘,
.‘-

.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-60801-February

198.S2,200
