170

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

of the measures taken to establish an African regional institute for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, and requests all those concerned to co-operate
fully so that this project may be put into effect as soon as
possible;
8. Invites Member States to contribute to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Social Defence in order to facilitate appropriate technical co-operation and ~xchange of
information and experience in the field of cnme prevention and control;
9. Requests the Secretary-Ge~eral to_ report to ~he
General Assembly, at its forty-thtrd sesston, on the tmplementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to consider at its forty-second session that
part of the report of the Economic_ and Social Co1;1ncil co~cerning its examination ofthe revtew, under the 1tem entttled "Crime prevention and criminal justice".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/108.

Convention on the Elimination of AH Forms of
Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the Un_ited
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and SS ofthe Charter, ts to
promote universal respect for h~~an _rights and _fun~amental freedoms for all without d1stmct1on of any kmd, mcluding distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should part1c1pate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of AII
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of 3 December
1982, 38/109 of 16 December 1983, 39/130 of 14 December 1984 and 40/39 of 29 November 1985,
Recalling the decision of the third meeting of the States
parties to the Convention on the Elimination of AII Forms
of Discrimination against Wornen to request the Secretary-General to seek the views ofStates parties to the Convention on reservations which could be considered to
come within the scope of article 28, paragraph 2, of the
Convention, to request him to include these views in his
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session
and to place on the agenda of their next meeting the question of reservations to the Convention,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its fifth
session, 55
1. Notes with appreciation the increasing number of
Member States that have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Discrimination against Women;
2. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so as soon as possible;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status ofthe Convention;
55 Ojjicial Record., of the General As,embly, Forly-first Se.ssio11,
Supplemcnr l'iu. 45 (A/41/45 and Corr 1).

4. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention; 56
5. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its fifth
session;
6. Emphasizes the importanc~ of t~e s!rictest compliance by States parties with thetr obhgattons under the
Convention;
7. Urges States parties to make all po~ible ~fforts to
submit their initial reports in accordance wtth arttcle 18 of
the Convention and the guidelines of the Committee;
8. Notes with concern the account by the Committee of
the present constraints within which it operates with regard to the backlog of reports awaiting consideration 57
and encourages a continuing discussion on ways and
means of dealing with this problem, including possible adjustment of the reporting system;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ~ake all ~fforts
to ensure adequate servicing for the effecttve functtonmg
of the Committee;
10. Takes note of the general recommendation and
suggestion adopted by the Committee pursuant to i_ts discussion at its fifth session on ways and means of tmplementing article 21 of the Convention; 58
11. Requests the Secretary-G~n~ral !º trans~it !h~ reports of the Committee on the Eh~m~tton of Dtscnmtnation against Women to the Comm1ss1on on the Status of
Women at its session in 1988, for information.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/109.

Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation

The General Assembly,
Confirming the noble goal enshrined in the C~ar~er of
the United Nations to maintain peace and secunty m the
world and the determination of the States Members of the
United Nations expressed therein to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Reca/ling that the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations_ Decade !ºr
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, m adoptmg
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women5 9 for the period up to the year 2000,
recognized that women should participate fully in ali efforts to strengthen and maintain international peace and
security and to promote international co-operation,
Expressing the need for equal participation of women in
the decision-making process, including that related to
peace, disarmament and security at national, ~egional and
international levels, including the United Nattons system,
Convinced that the International Year of Peace, proclaimed for the year 1986 by the General Assembly in its
resolution 40/3 of 24 October 1985, could give new impulses for safeguarding international peace and security.

56 A/41/608 and Add. l.
57 See Ojjicial Records of 1he General Assembly,

Forly-jir.,r Sessio11.
Supplement No. 45 (A/41/45 and Corr. l), chap. 11.
58/bid., chap. IV, paras. 362 and 363.
.
s• Repon of rhe World Conference ro Review and Appra1S<' rhe
Achievemenrs of rhe Uniled Nalions Decade for Women: Equa_luy.
Development and Peace. Nairobi, 15-26 Ju/y 1985 (United Nations
puhlication. Sales No. E.85.IV. IO), chap. l. sect. A.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 37 /63 of 3 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting International Peace and Cooperation,
Reca/ling its resolution 39/124 of 14 December 1984, in
which it requested the Commission on the Status of
Women to consider what measures might be necessary in
order to implement the Declaration,
Bearing in mind its resolution 40/102 of 13 December
1985, in which it requested the Commission on the Status
of Women to consider measures which may be necessary
to implement the Declaration in the context ofthe Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women for the period up to the year 2000,
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting international peace, security and cooperation,
Convinced that increased efforts are required to eliminate still existing forms of discrimination against women
in every field of human endeavour,
Conscious of the need to implement the provisions of the
Declaration,
1. Pledges its determination to encourage the full participation of women in the economic, social, cultural, civil
and political affairs ofsociety and in the endeavour to promote international peace and co-operation;
2. Appeals to ali Governments to take the necessary
measures for putting into practice the principies and
provisions of the Declaration on the Participation of
Women in Promoting International Peace and Cooperation;
3. Invites all Governments to give wide publicity to the
Declaration and its implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
adequate steps to ensure that publicity is given to the Declaration;
5. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/20 of 23 May 1986, in which the Council called
upon Member States to take practica} institutional, educational and organizational measures to facilitate women's
participation on an equal footing with meo in the decisionmaking process, including that related to peace, disarmament negotiations and the solution of confticts, and to inform the Secretary-General of their activities undertaken
at ali levels to implement the Declaration as a contribution
to the International Year of Peace;
6. Recommends that future medium-term plans of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies should, in accordance with the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for
the Advancement of Women, contain intersectoral presentations of the various programmes dealing with issues
of concern to women, including those relating to the participation of women in promoting international peace and
co-operation;
1. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women at
its session in 1987 to consider, in ter alia, guidelines for the
long-term programme of work of the Commission up to
the year 2000, including activities for the participation of
women in promoting international peace and cooperation;
8. Decides to consider the further implementation of
the Declaration at its forty-second session, as a sub-item of
the ítem entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women to the year 2000".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/110.

171

The role of women in society

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the validity of the objectives of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace,
Noting the importance of the documents adopted by the
world conferences held during the Decade,
Reaffirming its resolution 40/101 of 13 December 1985,
and taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1986/27 of 23 May 1986, which reiterated the expression by the Assembly of its awareness of the necessity to
enlarge the possibilities for both meo and women to combine parental duties and household work with paid employment and social activities, and of its awareness that
the role of women in childbearing should not be the cause
of inequality and discrimination and that child rearing demands shared responsibilities among women, men and society as a whole,
Convinced of the necessity to secure for ali women full
and effective enjoyment of the rights embodied in the
Charter ofthe United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 2 the Convention on the Elimination of
Ali Forms ofDiscrimination against Women, 60 the International Covenants on Human Rights 24 and other pertinent instruments in this field,
Emphasizing that the achievement of equal and full participation of women in all spheres of activity is an integral
part of the political, economic, social and cultural development of ali countries,
Commending the expanding participation of women in
political, economic, social and cultural life and in the promotion of international peace and co-operation,
Convinced that the implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement ofWomen 59
should be among the developmental and policy priorities
of Governments, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Bearing in mind that promotion of the status of women
in all its aspects and complete integration of women in society go beyond the problem of legal equality and that
deeper structural transformations of society and changes
in current economic relations, as well as elimination of traditional prejudices through education and the dissemination of information, are required to create conditions in
which women may develop fully their intellectual and
physical capacities and participate actively in the decisionmaking process related to their political, economic, social
and cultural development,
Bearing in mind a/so that economic inequality, colonialism, racism, racial discrimination in ali its forms, apartheid, aggression and interference in the internal affairs of
other States, and violation ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms are obstacles to the active integration of
women in ali spheres of life,
Bearing in mind the resolution on equal opportunities
and equal treatment for men and women in employment,
adopted on 27 June 1985 by the lnternational Labour Organisation, 61
l. Recommends that ali Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations should
pay due attention in their activities to the role ofwomen in
60 Resolution 34/180, annex.
61 lnternational Labour Office, Officia/ Bu/letin, vol. LXVIII, 1985,
Series A, No. 2, p. 85.
