7’Hff?7’Y-F’lfZST

$1,1A’f ;j ; ); ‘jj ;, ; ;

YEAR
/:
tt1

MEETING:
NEW

10 SEPTEMBER

1976

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 195.5) , , . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . , , , . . . , , . . . .l, . . . . . . .

1

Tribute to the memory of Chairman Mao Tse-tung . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Slatement by the President , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , , ,

7

Adoption of the agenda . . , , . . . . . . . , , , . . . . , . , . , . , . . . . +, . . . . . , . . . , . . . , . . .

7

Admission of new Members:
Application of the Socialist Republic qf Viet Nun for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/12183). . . . . . . . +. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . ,.

7

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplmcnts
of the OJfkirrl R~oI’~s oft/w Sc’cllrity Colrncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ReLsol~~tionLs and
Drci.rion.s of’ IJW Swl/rit)~
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1955th MEETING
Held in New York, on Friday, 10 September 1976, at 12 noon.
l+e.si~I~~~t: Mr. Mansur Rashid KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic).
Pwsent: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l955)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Admission of new Members:
Application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for admission to membership
in the United
Nations (S/12183)

Tribute to the memory of Chairman

4. The secret of Mao Tse-tung’s extraordinary
accomplishments
may well lie in his unshakeable
belief
in the creative capacity of man to reach the most formidable goals if they are pursued with conviction,
courage and determination.
We recall the lines of one
of his marvellous poems:
“Nothing
is hard in this world
If you dare to scale the heights”.
5. As we grieve with the Chinese people in the loss
of Chairman
Mao, we take inspiration
from this
thought. The world must take his advice and scale the
heights, heights which are encompassed in the objectives of this world Organization.
6. On behalf of the members of the Council, I should
like to ask the Ambassador of China to transmit to his
Government,
party and people our deepest condolences.

Mao Tse-tung

1’: The PRESIDENT:
Before we proceed with our
work, I should like to convey to our distinguished
friend and colleague, Ambassador Huang Hua, the
Council’s deep condolences on the occasion of the
passing of Chairman Mao Tse-tung.
2. ,The world shares the grief of the Chinese people
in the loss of their great leader, for he was truly a giant
of our age. We know how deeply the Chinese people
had come to love and revere Chairman Mao as the
leader whose cou’rage and determination,
whose
breadth of vision and unflagging spirit restored the
unity of China and regained for it its rightful status as
a great and honoured member of the family of nations.
3. Mao gave to his people a sense of purpose and
pride based on equity, self-reliance and confidence in
a better world. In the scope of his achievements as a
revolutionary
leader, thinker, statesman, poet and
soldier, he came to embody something of the aspirations of all mankind. In leading China on an unparalleled journey to greatness; he not only shaped the
destiny of his own country but altered the course of
world history. Each of us knows that our own organization is different because of Chairman Mao’s
historic role. Each of us here feels very directly the
impact of his life and of his heritage.

7.

The PRESIDENT!

Ecall on the Secretary-General.

8. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I wish to associate myself with the sentiments which have been
expressed by you, Mr. President, on the death of
Chairman
Mao Tse-tung. I have already conveyed
my sympathy and condolences to the Premier of the
State Council of the’ People’s Republic of China.
9. Chairman Mao Tse-fung was a truly historic figure
of our time who dedicated his whole life to the buiIding
of a new China. He was a beloved leader of his people;
he’ was both a thinker and a man of action, and his
success in making a reality of the vision which is
embodied in his thought and his writings is unique in
history.
IO. Much of Chairman Mao’s effort was directed to
the search for better international
understanding
and
world peace and, under his leadership, China has
joined ,with other nations in the United Nations in the
effort to create a better world” for all. In continuing
to strive towards the objectives to which the Organization is devoted, the wisdom and statesmanship
of
Chairman Mao will be sorely missed. We shall always
remember him as one of the great and outstanding
leaders of the world.

“The Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party, the Council of State and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Romania and the
entire Romanian people learned with deep sorrow
of the passing away of Comrade Mao Tse-tung,
President of the Central Committee of the Chinese
Communist Party, founder and leader of the Chinese
Communist Party and of the People’s Republic of
China, an illustrious militant of the international
workers’ and communists’ movements, an eminent
personality of contemporary life and a great friend
of the Romanian people.

11. I would like, once again, to express to the representative of China and, through him, to his Government, his people and to the bereaved family my deep
sympathy and condolences on their great loss.
12. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): My delegation joins
you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-General
in
offering to the delegation of China, the Government
and people of that great country its deepest condolences on their great loss and bereavement. The people
of Pakistan join them in mourning the passing away
of a great leader of China and of Asia.

“On behalf of the Central Committee
of the
Romanian Communist Party, the Council of State
and the Government of the Socialist Republic of
Romania and the entire Romanian people, as well
as on my own behalf, I extend to you, to all Communists and to the friendly Chinese people the most
sincere condolences on the particularly heavy loss
suffered by the death of Comrade Mao Tse-tung.
The entire life and revolutionary activity of Comrade Mao Tse-tung are closely linked with the
history of the heroic struggle of Communists and
the Chinese people against imperialism and reaction, to overthrow the old order, for the victory of
the revolution and for the building of socialism in
China. Mao Tse-tung was the leader of the great
victory of the revolution of the Chinese people, an
event of historic importance in the life of mankind
which has a profound influence on the revolutionary
struggle of peoples to be free from foreign domination, to attain national independence and a better
life. Under the leadership of the Chinese Cornmu-,
nist Party of Comrade Mao Tse-tung, the Chinese:
people achieved remarkable successes in building
socialism, developing science and culture, raising
the standard of living and building modern China,.
The People’s Republic of China has affirmed itself
as a powerful force in contemporary times in the:
struggle against jmperialism,
colonialism and neocolonialism
by making vital contributions
to the:
process of revolutionary
transformations throughout the world, to the cause of national and social
liberation and, the promotion of peace and socialism,

13. The ideas and philosophy of Chairman Mao
Tse-tung have shaped and changed the history of our
times and influenced hundreds of millions of people
in many parts of the world. Chairman Mao’s life was
a living precept of the principles for which he stood
and struggled. His actions inspired and moved people
all over the world. His words and deeds became a
legend during his own lifetime.
14. His struggle did not end when it triumphed in
the establishment of the People’s Republic of China
in October 1949. The freedom-fighter
became the
nation-builder.
Under Chairman Mao’s leade.rship
and inspiration, China emerged from its long travail
to win recognition as a great and influential Power in
the world. Nor was Chairman Mao’s influence confined within the borders of his own great country. As
Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto said yesterday in
a statement issued on this occasion:
“The name of Chairman Mao Tse-tung shall for
ever remain synonymous with the great and good
causes of the poor and the downtrodden
of the
world. Chairman Mao was the supreme architect
of a brilliant new order shaking the world, a man of
the millennium who made history shrink.”
15. For the people of Pakistan, Chairman Mao was
a great and true friend. We mourn his passing away
with sorrow and anguish, but also with the knowledge
that his thoughts will continue to guide the destinies
of peoples and nations and in confidence that the
frienship between our two peoples, whose foundations he personally laid, will continue to deepen and
to grow in strength to their own mutual benefit and to
the benefit of peace and stability in Asia.

“Comrade Mao Tse-tung was a close friend of
the Romanian people and strove for the development of relations between our parties, our countries
and our peoples for the good of both peoples and
the cause of socialism and peace. In these days of
hard trial, we join with all our compassion in the
sorrow of the Communists and the Chinese people
as a whole. We express our conviction that the
friendship,
co-operation
and solidarity between
our parties and our countries will continue to become stronger and constantly develop in the future.
We extend our most sincere condolences to the
bereaved family.”

16. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation
,fhn~
FwM~): In joining the tribute that you, Mr. President,
and the Secretary-General have paid to the memory
of Chairman Mao Tse-tung, allow me to read the text
of a telegram sent by the Secretary-General
of the
Romanian Communist Party, President of the Socialist
Republic of Romania, Nicolae Ceauaescu, to the
Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party,
to the Permanent Committee of the National Assembly of Popular Representatives of t$e People’s Republic of China, and to the Council of State of the
People’s Republic of China:

17. .On behalf of the Romanian delegation and on my
own behalf, I also wish to express to the representa2

tive of the People’s Republic of China, our colleague
and friend Ambassador Huang Hua, and to the members of his delegation our most’sincere
condolences
and sympathy on the heavy loss suffered by the Chinese people on the death of Comrade Mao Tse-tung.

--his achievements are awesome. In the words of my
Prime Minister in his message of condolence,
“... Chairman Mao Tse-tung throughout his long
life devoted himself whole-heartedly to his country
and his people. The resurgence of China is a lasting
memorial to his outstanding leadership during more
than half a century. His influence extended far
beyond the boundaries of China, and he wi]] undoubtedly be remembered as a great statesman of’
world renown.”

18. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (int~~~.p~~~t~~tio~~
jiwt~l
French): Chairman Mao Tse-tung has just ended his
long march. The Chinese people is in a period of
mourning and sufferi,ng. I should like to say here to
the Ambassador representing the People’s Republic
of China how much we share the mourning of his
mission.

25. My Secretary of State, Mr. Crosland, in his message to the Chinese Foreign Minister, described Chairman Mao as

19. Without ever having left China, Chairman Mao
performed a task whose scope goes beyond the frontiers of his own country. He was the founder, the
supreme organizer of a very great nation, and France
is honoured to be its friend.

6‘ . . . a courageous and far-sighted leader, who dedicated his life to the service of his people, He was
a man of both action and ideas who, through his
qualities of leadership and through his writings,
guided and inspired ‘the Chinese people for over
half a century. He will occupy a unique place in the
history of China and of the world.”

20. In 1964 France, upon the initiative of General de
Gaulle, was among the first to do justice to China and
Chairman Mao. Recognizing the tremendous task he
had performed, we established with him and with the
Chinese leaders relations based upon profound personal esteem and the same sense of history. History
teaches us all. We have to heed history and to transform it after having interpreted it on a world scale.
Those who have mastered the highest thought and the
most effective action enter directly into the pantheon
of the great.

26. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
President Ford yesterday expressed the condolences
of the United States Government and the American
people on the occasion of the death of Chairman Mao
Tse-tung, noting that Chairman Mao was a giant figure
in modern China whose influence on history will
extend far beyond the borders of China. The President
pointed out that it was under Chairman Mao that China
had moved together with the United States to end a
generation of hostility and to launch a new and more
positive era in relations between the two countries.

21. Chairman Mao was one of the great interpreters
of our time. Mr. Giscard d’Estaing, President of the
French Republic, expressed it yesterday when he said:
“Chairman
Mao Tse-tung was a beacon for world
thought”. The history of men is marked by death and
mourning, but it is also their memories. I would request the representative of the People’s Republic of
China to believe that France and the French people
will long preserve the memory of Chairman Mao Tsetung and remain friends of China in its trials and future
enterprises to build a China worthy of its founder

27. Secretary of State Kissinger in a statement
yesterday extended sympathy to the people and the
Government of the People’s Republic of China. He
noted that Chairman Mao had has a tremendous
impact on the present and on the future of his country.
He described him as an historic figure.
28. The United States delegation adds its condolences to Ambassador Huang Hua and the delegation
of the People’s Republic of China here at the United
Nations and to the people and the Government of
China in their great loss. We shall remember Chairman Mao as a world leader of first rank, a man of
vision who took a personal interest in strengthening
ties between China and the United States-a significant development in the interest of world peace and
of long-term benefit to the evolution of a more secure
world.

22. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
On behalf
of all the members of the United Kingdom Mission,
I wish to offer our deepest sympathy to Ambassador
Huang Hua personally and to the Chinese Mission
on the death of their great leader, Chairman Mao Tsetung.
23. Messages of condolence
have already been
sent from Her Majesty the Queen to the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress of the
People’s Republic of China, from the Prime Minister
to the Premier of the State Council of the People’s
Republic of China and from the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Coinmonwealth
Affairs to the Chinese
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

29. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to join you, the Secretary-Genera]
and our colleagues who have spoken before me In
expressing to the Chinese delegation our most sincere
and deepest sympathy and condolences on the occasion of the death of Chairman Mao Tse-tung.

24. Chairman Mao was a giant among men. Statesman, political philosopher,
military strategist, Poet
3

30. On behalf of the Swedish people and Government, the Prime Minister of Sweden, Mr. Olof Palme,
issued the following statement:

grief and sorrow of the Chinese oeople at the demise
of Chairman Mao Tse-tung. The Italian delegation
fully shares those feelings and is deeply conscious of
the sad solemnity of this moment when a histo,ric
leader, a towering political personality of world stoature, has silently left this life, bequeathing to his nation
the new order and unity that he established together
with the message of his doctrine. The deeds and the
life of Chairman Mao belong more than ever to the
history of the world.
u-

“With the death of Chairman Mao Tse-tung, one
of the great leaders in world history has passed
away. His name and his life’s work will for ever be
linked to the liberation
struggle of the Chinese
people. Under his leadership China has risen from
the deep degradation of colonialism
and feudalism.
The impact of Mao Tse-tung’s work is not confined
to China only. His thoughts regarding the power of
the human will to reshape the conditions of our
existence have profoundly
influenced peoples all
over the world.”

_

-

37. The President of the Italian Republic, the President of the Senate and the President of the Council
of Ministers of Italy yesterday sent their messages of
condolence to the Chinese Government.

31. I should like to ask Ambassador
Huang Hua,
through you, Mr. President, to convey to the Government of China and to the bereaved family the expression of the most deeply felt condolences of the Swedish
delegation.

38. I wish now to express to Ambassador Huang
Hua and to the delegation of the People’s Republic
of China the heart-felt condolences of the Italian
delegation, together with all our sympathy in their
sense of loss.

32. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): I wish to associate
myself with the statements made by the President of
the Council, the Secretary-General
and the speakers
who prededed me in expressing condolences on the
untimely passing away of Chairman Mao Tse-tung of
the People’s Republic of China and in paying a tribute
to his unique achievements as the leader of that great
country.

39. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, I wish
to associate myself and the rest of the Guyana delegation with the condolences and tributes which you,
the Secretary-General
and other speakers have
expressed to our colleague and friend, Ambassador Huang Hua of China, and through him to the
Government and people of China.
40. For us in Guyana the passing away of Chairman Mao Tse-tung came as a great shock and has
imposed upon us a sense of deep and grievous loss.
His death is a great loss to all mankind. Chairman Mao
Tse-tung was an inspiring leader, an intrepid fighter,
an outstanding statesman and a great teacher. He was
a true revolutionary. On learning of the news of Chairman Mao’s death, my Prime Minister,
Comrade
Forbes Burnham, immediately
sent the following
message to the Premier of the State Council of the
People’s Republic of China:

33, His successful revolutionary
remodelling
of
China and the consolidation
of its distinguished
position in the world will long be recorded in the annals
of history and admired. His passing away is indeed a
great loss to the world, and to my country as China’s
closest neighbour
geographically,
historically
and
culturally.
34. I wish to take this opportunity to quote from the
statement made yesterday by the Prime Minister of
Japan, Mr. Miki on this occasion. The Prime Minister
said:

“My party and the Government
and people of
Guyana join with you and the people of your great
Republic in mourning the death of Chairman M’ao.
It was under his revolutionary leadership that your
Republic was conceived and built. It was his wisdom and guidance which transformed every parl. of
your land into a socialist society from which hunger
and disease have been banished. His heroic example
and his thoughts are a source of inspiration and will
continue to sustain men wherever they are held; in
bondage, in dismal ghettos of great cities or the
evil camps of crpnrtheid or in besieged enclaves of
imperialism. While we mourn his loss, we can be
confident that his teachings will not die, but will
provide a programme for action in ages to come.

“I had earlier expressed my deep respect for the
guidance shown by Chairman Mao on the occasion
of the normalization
of diplomatic relations between
Japan and China, and I feel it is most regrettable
that we have lost this great leader at this moment
when the conclusion of the Japan-China Peace and
Friendship Treaty is only a step away. We are determined to exert further efforts for the development
of ever-lasting good-neighbourly
and friendly relations between our two countries based on the spirit
of the Japan-China joint communiquC.”
35. I should be most grateful if the representative of
China would convey my delegation’s
sympathy and
condolences to the Government and people of China.
36. Mr. CAVAGLIERI
wishes whole-heartedly

“In the long struggle for liberation, very few men
have been called upon to play a decisive role. Chairman Mao must be numbered among those few,
With his going, otir planetary community
has been

(Italy): The Italian delegation
to associate itself with the
4

sadly impoverished.
With his death the progressive
forces of the world have lost one of their foremost
leaders. ’ ’

for the masses of the people and for all nations has
had the greatest and most inspiring impact on all
the struggles for national liberation throughout
the
world. His teachings extend well beyond the borders of China and have guided and inspired many
of the struggling peoples of the world.“’

41. Chairman Mao is no longer with us, but his record of dedication,
his manifold accomplishments,
his writings remain with us as monuments urging us
to recommit ,a11our energies to the creative building
of a world in which freedom, peace and equity reign
supreme, a world from which exploitation, inhumanity
and unequal relations are completely and irrevocably
banished.

47. On occasions like this it is extremely
difficult
to put into words how one really feels, but, having had
the rare privilege of serving in China and the opportunity and privilege of meeting. Chairman Mao Tsetung in person, I must say that I feel the loss even more
on a personal level.

42. I shoud like through you, Mr. President, to ask
Ambassador Huang Hua to convey to the Government
and people of China the deepest sympathy and sincere
condolences of my delegation.

48. Therefore, on behalf of my colleagues,
I wish
to request the delegation of China, through Ambassador Huang Hua, to convey our heartfelt condolences. I assure them that we, like them, mourn the
passing away of this great leader.

43. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (it?terpretrrtion
f?om Rmsirrn): First of all,
I should like to read out a telegram from the Central
Committee
of the Communist
Party of the Soviet
Union, sent yesterday to Peking, to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China:

Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (IntPpI’C’t(rti(~/l,fj.o/l?
French): Mr. President,
my delegation
associates
itself with the statements
made by you, Sir, the
Secretary-General
and the speakers who preceded
me. We express our profound condolences
to the
Chinese party, Government
and people.
49.

“in connexion with the passing of the Chairman
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party,
Mao Tse-tung, please accept our most profound
condolences. We should also like to express -our
feeling of sympathy to the family and relatives of
the deceased.”

50. Chairman Mao devoted his entire life to the
cause of the oppressed throughout
the world. His
philosophy and his accurate revolutionary
analyses
have left a profound and indelible
impression
on
peoples striving for peace and justice against foreign
imperialism
and its threats in all forms. The party,
Government
and people of Benin feel great sorrow
and share the grief of the Chinese people. Chairman Mao was not only a great leader of the new China
but also, and above all, a major leader in the third
world, because his vision was so accurate.

44, Here I should like to request the representative
of China, Ambassador Huang Hua, and all the members of the Chinese mission to the United Nations,
to accept our deepest condolences on behalf of the
Soviet delegation and on my own behalf personally.
45. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): My
President, Julius Nyerere, has already conveyed in a
message to the Chinese Prime Minister the deep grief
and the sense of loss that the Government and people
of Tanzania feel at the most untimely passing away of
Chairman Mao tse-tung. The world is indeed poorer
as a result of the loss of that great leader, for Chairman Mao was certainly one of the greatest leaders of
our century, indeed of all time,

5 1. My delegation expresses its profound sympathy
to Ambassador Huang Hua and we request him to be
so good as to convey to the Chinese people an expression of the deep sorrow of the entire people of Benin.
52.

Mr.

ILLUECA
(Panama) (i/ltc/.pr.c’trrtio/~
jko/r~
The people and Government
of the Republic
of Panama wish to express here their profound condolences on the occasion of the death of the world
leader Mao Tse-tung, Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Chairman of
the Military Commission of the Central Committee
of
the Communist Party of China and Honorary
Chairman of the National Committee
of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference.

Sprr/lish):

46. The people and Government
of our country
mourn the death of Chairman Mao as their own loss,
for Chairman Mao was a great inspiration to our people. He was a leader who combined many things-a
great revolutionary,
a world statesman, a poet and a
philosopher, He was a leader with a most tremendous impact on all those who were fighting for freedom, dignity and justice, I should like here to repeat
what I said yesterday at the meeting of the Committee
on decolonization’
when we paid a tribute to Chairman Mao:

53. I now have the honour to read out the text of a
telegram sent yesterday by the Chief of State of
Panama, General Omar Torrijos Herrera, to the illustrious Government of China:

“[He] was one of the greatest revolutionaries of
the twentieth century. His dedication to freedom

“I express to the Government
and people of the
People’s Republic of China our feelings of solidarity
c

of Chairman Mao’s, his faith in his people’s will to be
liberated, which flowers in his poems and his achievements, so that we can say that his memory will live
on and will continue to be a source of inspiration for
the popular masses of China, for the statesmen of his
country and for other nations of the world.

in this hour of mourning, not only for the Chinese
people but for all peoples striving for liberation,
on the irreparable loss of that great leader of the
masses Chairman Mao Tse-tung. I had always had
a profound desire to have the honour of meeting
the architect of modern China, who ended famine
for the Chinese people and gave them dignity. In
Mao Tse-tung China gave mankind one of its greatest
men, whose legacy will never perish.”

57.

Mr. HUANG
(Hua (China) (rrrrtdrtio~~ j?onr
Chairman Mao Tse-tung, the esteemed and
beloved great leader and teacher of the Chinese people, the founder and wise leader of the Communist
Party of China, the Chinese People’s Liberation Army
and the People’s Republic of China, died of illness at
10 minutes after midnight on 9 September 1976 in
Peking.
Chimsc):

54. Panama’s condolences,
which at this meeting
we are again conveying to Ambassador H,uang Hua
and to the members of the Chinese delegation, are
based on our profound respect for the great nationalist work of Chairman Mao, which today assumes
mythological
proportions as we perceive his extraordinary achievements in the growing economic, social,
educational and technological
advancement
attained
by the Chinese people under his leadership.

58. Chairman Mao Tse-tung dedicated all his energies throughout his life to the liberation of the Chinese
people and to the emancipation
of the oppressed
nations and oppressed peoples the world over, Chairman Mao led the Chinese people’s revolution to victory, a victory which changed the situation in the east
and the world and blazed a new trail for the cause of
liberation of the oppressed nations and oppressed
peoples. All the victories of the Chinese people were
achieved under the leadership of Chairman Mao; they
are ali great victories for the thought of Mao Tse-tung,
The radiance of Mao Tse-tung’s thought will forever
illuminate the road of advance of the Chinese people.

55. Perhaps the best tribute that can be paid to Chairman Mao now that his person has transcended the
boundaries of earth and entered the realms of immortality is to recall his profound nationalist faith. In the
course of his struggles, Chairman Mao used to tell an
anecdote as an incentive for his people. These were
his words:
“There is an old chinese story called ‘The old
fool who moved mountains’.
There was an old
man who lived in the north of China and was known
as the old fool of the northern mountains! His house
looked south, and in front of it, obstructing the way,
were two huge mountains,
Taijang and Wangwu.
The old fool decided to get his sons to remove the
two mountains. Another old man known as ‘the old
wise man’ saw them and, laughing, told them, ‘What
stupidity. It is absolutely impossible for you, being
so few, to be able to move such enormous mountains.’ The old fool replied, ‘After I die my children
will continue. When they die, my grandchildren
will be there, and then their offspring, and so on,
indefinitely.
Even though the mountains are tall,
they do not grow bigger. They become smaller as
we remove parts of them. Why, then, should we
be unable to remove them’?’ After refuting the
erroneous idea of the old wise man, be continued
digging day after day, unflaggingly. God was moved
by this, and sent two angels down to earth who
carried away the two mountains.

59. The passing away of Chairman Mao Tse-tung is
an unspeakable loss to the Chinese people as well as
to the world proletariat and the revolutionaries of all
countries. His passing away has naturally caused
immense grief in the hearts of the people of our country and the revolutionaries of all countries.
60. At today’s meeting, the Secretary-General, the
President of the Council and the representatives of the;
member States of, the Council have expressed profound condolences on the passing away of Chairman
Mao Tse-tung. I will convey their cordial feelings to
the Chinese Government and, in the name of the:
Chinese delegation, I wish to express our deepes’t
thanks to them. In their statements the representatives
of many friendly countries have paid a resounding
tribute to the contributions
and achievements Of
Chairman Mao Tse-tung, This is a support and encouragement to the just cause followed by the Chinese
people under the leadership of Chairman Mao. We am
deeply moved.

“Now-Mao
said-two
mountains weigh heavily
over the land of China. One is called imperialism,
the other feudalism.
We must persevere in our
determination,
and we must labour unceasingly.
We shall also move God. Our god is the popular
masses of China, none other. If they rise up and dig
with us, why should we not be hble to do away with
those two mountains?”

61. Turning grief into strength, the entire Chinese
people is determined to carry on the cause for which
Chairman Mao fought, continue to implement firmly
his revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs,
adhere to proletarian internationalism,
strengthen the
militant unity between the people of our country and
the peoples of other countries, particularly those of
the-third world, unite with all the forces in the world
that can be united and carry the struggle against imperialism, colonialism
and hegemonism through to
the end. Faithful to the teachings of Chairman Mao,

56. Those present here know that history has proved
Chairman Mao Tse-tung right. It is this mystical faith
6

we will never seek hegemony and will never be a
super-Power., We must strive to build our country
into a powerful socialist State and make a greater
contribution to humanity.
Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

62, The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding further
with the business before the Council, I should like to
take this opportunity to express the appreciation felt
by all members of the Council for the outstanding
services rendered to us by Ambassador Abe of Japan
in his capacity as President of the Council for the
month of August. Ambassador Abe’s diplomatic skill
and wealth of experience were generously placed at
the service of the Council, and he performed his functions in keeping with the highest tradition of the Council and his own great country.
Statement by the President
63, The PRESIDENT:
At the same time, I should
like to seize this opportunity to express the satisfaction felt by all members of the Council at the recent
elevation of our former colleague here, Ambassador Louis de Guiringaud of France, to the important
post of Minister for Foreign Affairs of his country.
We shall miss his wisdom and experience here, and
we wish him success in his new responsibilities.
64. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretrrtion
fram
Fr~m~h): Mr. President I shall certainly convey to
Mr. de Guiringaud the kind words you have said about
him on behalf of the Council on the occasion of his
appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs of my
country. I am sure he will appreciate them immensely.

Admission of new Members:
Application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
, admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/12183)
65. The PRESIDENT:
On 20 August 1976 the Secretary-General,
acting in accordance with rule 59 of
the provisional
rules of procedure,
circulated the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
admission
to membership
in the United Nations
[S/12183].
66. Under the provisions of rule 59, unless the Security Council decides otherwise, such application
shall be referred by the President of the Council to
the Committee on the Admission of New Members.
Accordingly, unless I hear a proposal to the contrary,
I shall refer the application of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members for examination and report.

67. The PRESIDENT:
As the time-limit
provided in
rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure for submission of the Committee’s
report to the Council has
already passed, I assume that the Council wishes to
ressort to the previous practice of waiving that provision of rule 59.

Notes
1 Special Committee
on the Situation
with
mentation
of the Declaration
on the Granting
Colonial
Countries
and Peoples.
2 A/AC. 109/PV. 1053, p. 2.

regard to the Impleof Independence
to

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtainctl
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Salts Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Unies
monde
cnticr.
Inrormoz-vous
aup&
dcs ventcs,
New York OLI Gen6ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATIONS

sent cn ventc dnns Its librairics
de votrc libraire
oa adresscz-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Iss publicacioncs
de las Nacioncs
todas partrs
del mu&o.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o G&bra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estln
en venta en librerias
a XI librero
(1 dirijasc
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Gcncvx

IJNIES

et Its agenccs
g : Nations

dCpositaircs
tiu
Units.
Sccrion

UNIDAS
y CBSBS distribtlidoras
rn
IJnidas.
Seccicin de Ventas.

83-60801-February

198S--2,200
