UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY,
OFFICIAL

C.OUNCIL
REC,BRDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2126’”

MEETING:

NEW

14 MARkH

19 9
bN

YORK

LIBRARRY

*\5tq 1 0 I%3
lJ~/~&+*

G~LbRCTlON

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/Z
of the agenda

126)

....................................

1

. . . . . . . . . . . ..*................................*.

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative
of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/131 15) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2126

1.
1

f,.

.,i,

.:

,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention a’,
of 1such
a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
I
..,
document.
.
::
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally gublished in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflifiar Records ofthe Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
*
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security CoUncil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

...

2126th MEETING
Held. in New York on Wednesday, 14 March 1979, at 11 a.m.
.’ :’
President: Mr. Leslie G. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria)

Present: The representatives of the ‘following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist. Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and .Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2126)
1. Adoption

2.. ,.The PRESIDENTr
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received lettersfrom the representatives of Viet Nam and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic in which they asked to be invited to participate
i; .in thediscussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitatibn of the President, Mr. Martynenko
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) and Mr. Ha Van La
(Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13115)

3. Mr. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): This is not the first time that the Security
Council is considering the question of the situation in the
Arab territories occupied by Israel, and it is not doing so
merely by chance since the situation in those territories
continues to worsen. On the one hand, the Israeli
authorities are intensifying their policy of discrimination
v&a-vis the Palestinian people and, on the other hand-and
this is quite logical-the
resistance of the people of
Palestine in its struggle to exercise its inalienable rights
against the policy of territorial expansion is increasing.
The convening of the Council to hold the present
emergency meetings is therefore quite natural and timely.
A peaceful, just and comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East question is unattainable without resolving
the key issue, namely, the Palestine problem.

The meeting was called to order at Il.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation la the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13115)

4. The experience of recent years and events which have
occurred in that region show that there can be no lasting
peace in the Middle East until the consequences of Israeli
aggression have been eliminated, until the Israeli occupation of Arab territory is ended and until the Arab people
of Palestine secure their legitimate national rights. This
general view was borne out during the debates on the
Palestine question at the thirty-third
session of the
General Assembly.
5. The fact that the Palestine question is the key issue in
the whole Middle East question is clear also from the
separate Israeli-Egyptian talks, notwithstanding all the
manceuvres, the spur-of-the-moment journeys, the speculation and diplomatic stratagems of the participants in
those talks.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Pakistan, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Yemen
and Yugoslavia, as well as the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate in the
debate without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh(Jordan),
Mr. BIum (Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Counciltable andMr. Abde1 Meguid (Egypt), Mr. HoIIai (Hungary), Mr. JaipaI
(India), Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia), Mr. Shemirani (Iran),
Mr. Bafi (Iraq). Mr. TuPni (Lebanon), Mr. Kane (Mauritania), Mr. Naik (Pakistan), Mr. Fall (Senegal). Mr. Hussen (Somalia). Mr. SahIouI(Sudan), Mt. EI-ChoujZ(Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. EraIp (Turkey), Mr. AI-Ha&d(Yemen)
and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. The Conference of heads of Arab States and Govemments which took place at Baghdad in November 1978
condemned the results of tne Camp David talks as an
attempt to legalize the occupation of a large portion of
I

is “unjust’* to demand that the Jewish settlers leave the
occupied Arab territories.

f.le Arab territories and as an attempt to trample
underfoot the right of the Arab people of Palestine to self_ determination and the creation of their own State. The
heads of Arab States who took part in the Baghdad
Conference squarely rejected the attempts by participants in the separate deals to “resolve*’ the Palestinian
question with limited self-government for the Arab
inhabitants of Palestine while maintaining the. military
occupation of the West Bank of Jordan, Gaza and East
Jerusalem. They once more unanimously stressed the
demand that Israeli forces be withdrawn from.all occupied Arab territories, and they emphasized the exercise of
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination as a sine qua non for-lasting peace in the
Middle East.

10. Israeli philanthropy, which is cynicallyproffered to
world public opinion by the representatives of Israel, in
an effort to influence world opinion, is simply propaganda. Information in the possession of the Organization
shows that the Israeli actions bear the true stamp of the
aggressor, which with the connivance and support of
certain Powers, has grown used to occupying and
confiscating other peoples’ lands and expelling the Arab
population from their homes and, finally, blithely using
other peoples’ property. That is the so-called solution of
the Palestine question practised by the Israeli authorities
in the last months, since Camp David.
11. The ideas I have expressed concerning the need for a
comprehensive approach to the settlement of the Middle
East problem also apply fully to the question of Jerusalem, a solution of which my delegation regards as part
and parcel of that settlement. Changing the status and
character of the city, of Jerusalem and proclaiming it the
capital of Israel is just as illegal as all other measures that
would annex Arab territory. Such measures are indeed
mines, as was stated by the representative of the Palestine
Liberation qrganization,
M.r. Terzi [2123rd meeting].
Yes, indeed, they are mines on the path to a just peace in
the Middle East, since they are an attempt openly to
expropriate foreign territory by force, and they run
counter to well-known resolutions of the Council that are
the basis for a political solution to the Middle East
conflict.

7. The nature of the Israeli expansionist policies is fully
reflected in the present situation in the occupied Arab
lands. The actions by the occupation authorities in those
territories cannot be justified by military or strategic
needs, and even less by the anachronistic biblical
arguments that have been adduced. What is happening in
those territories-as is, again, quite clear from the present
Council debate-is an attempt to perpetuate the fruits of
annexation. That end is served by the increasingly
intensive policy of Israel that would change the
demobaphic and geographical nature of the occupied
territories, particularly through the systematic infiltration of Jewish settlers.
8. Official United Nations documents show that since
1967 about 100 settlements have been established in the
occupied territories. The present Government of Israel
not only does not intend to abandon those practices; on
the contrary, it is stepping up its actions in that direction.
The plans that have been published and already adopted
show that throughout the next three years dozens of new
settlements will be created. There is information that
since 1967 the Israeli authorities have confiscated thousands of hectares of the best agriculiural land and
destroyed more than 20,000 Palestinian homes, turning
the inhabitants into refugees and expatriots. Following
the ploys of the Israeli expansionists, that policy should
finally lead to the full colonization of the Arab lands,
threatening the very existence of the Palestinian people in
their own territory.

12. The Czech&lovak delegation supports the just
demands of the Palestinians of which WR were informed
by the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization in the Council. We are ready to support the
demands voiced by the representative of ‘Kuwait,
Mr. Bishara [2J25rh meeting], which, as we see it, will
form a basis for the draft resolution on this question now
being prepared. We consider them to be measures aimed
at easing the plight of the Palestinians and to put a brake
on the continuing wanton acts of the occupation
authorities.
13. We once more associate ourselves with the majority
of the Members of the Organization, who see that the
only way to a genuine solution to the existing situation in
the Middle East, which is dangerous to international
peace; is nothing less than thi cessation of Israeli
occupation of all Arab territories and thus the elimination of this intolerable, unnatural and explosive
situation in which 3 million Palestinians are deprived of
their inalienable right to self-determination and creation
of their own state and have been given the status of an
expatriate people.

9. The United Nations has at its disposal a number of
official statements by the representatives of the Israeli
Government which fully bear out that conclusion. For
example, recently, at the last session of the General
Assembly, the Foreign Minister, Mr. Dayan, stated:
“The Israeli settlements in Judaea, Samaria and the
Gaza district are there as of right. It is inconceivable to
us that Jews should be prohibited from settling and
living in Judaea and Samaria, which are the heart of
our homeland.“’

14. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make a statement.

Surely, in the light of such statements, it is clear to all that
we have here a plan that is aimed at confronting world
public opinion with a fait accompli that would prepare it
for an atmosphere in which it would be convinced that it
’ Oflciaf
Records of the General Assembly.
Plenary Meetings, 26th meeting, para. 94.

Thirty-third-

15. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interprerationfromFrench):
I
wish to thank the members of the Council for allowing
me to participate in this debate on the situation in the
Paiestinran and Arab territories occupied by Israel. 1 am

Session,

2

very pleased to see you presiding over the Council’s work
as it discusses’s problem so crucial to international peace
and security. I am pleased first of all because of the
relations that our two countries enjoy, but also because of
the friendly and co-operative relations that we have had
personally for so long now.

intends to make these settlements permanent. The
statements made in the Council by the delegation of
Israel make this absolutely clear, too. The former Prime
Minister of Israel, Mr. Rabin, himself stated, in January
1977, that the implantation
of settlements by Israel
guaranteed Israel’s security and established a firm base
for its search for peace within defensible frontiers.

16. We participate today in this discussion as representatives of a country that holds the current presidency
of the Islamic Conference, which has observer status in
the United Nations and all 42 members of which are
States Members of the United Nations.

.22. Israel’s intention is very clear:. to make its presence
on the West Bank permanent by putting forward
arguments about so-called security, arguments which it
stubbornly and constantly advances in all the negotiations concerning a just and lasting peace in the region and
the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. To that end, three belts of Jewish settlements
have been constructed in a north-south direction on the
West Bank. They are linked together by a network of
lateral roads in such a way that the entire western area of
the Jordan River is systematically criss-crossed. At the
same time, there is a wide movement towards encircling
the Arab villages and towns in the region, thereby
reducing them to scattered hamlets without any
possibility of direct communication.

17. Speaking at the thirty-second session of the,General
Assembly on item 126 of the agenda on the recent illegal
Israeli measures in the occupied Arab territories, the
delegation of Senegal2 stressed that, at a time when, after
30 years of conflict in the Middle East, there were
favourable prospects for peace and when most of the
parties concerned were showing a desire to reach a
negotiated settlement, one of the parties-and
an
important one, at that: Israel-was stubbornly pursuing
its short-sighted policy of force and faits accomplis. We
said that that policy, an example of which was the
implantation of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab
territories, was contrary to the establishment of a climate
that would promote negotiations and could only disrupt
a process of true peace.

23. Moreover, showing contempt for the lawful rights
of the people of the region, who are basically farmers,
Israel has extended its control and its monopoly over
almost all the water resources of the area. Because of their
geographical position, the Jewish settlements are
competing with the Arab villages for the use of the water
resources of the region. Using very large plots of land
and, therefore, considerable amountsof water, the Israeli
settlers have reached the point where they are depriving
the local population of the minimum amount of water
needed for farming and even household purposes.

18. Since then, Israel, disregarding the unanimous
condemnation
of the international
community,
has
continued its expansionist and annexationist policy.
19. Since I967 we have witnessed a vast movement of
illegal occupation and expropriation of Arab lands on the
West Bank of the Jordan River. Hundreds of hectares of
land that had been cultivated by Palestinian families for
generations have been grabbed from their lawful owners.
Many villages in the same area have been raised and their
inhabitants forced to leave. The land thus taken over has
been distributed to Israeli settlers. Using as a pretext
“security reasons” or “service needs”, the Israeli
authorities requisition the land they want and, after a
certain amount of time, allocate it to groups of civilian
settlers.

24, The aim of all this is to reach a stage in a very short
time when the Palestinians will have no possibility of
working their land. Thus, the Palestinians are in effect
being turned into a kind of proletariat-reduced,
in order
to survive, to constituting a supply of labour for Israeli
farms and businesses. This situation, where the
individual is left with no choice but to work for the
oppressor or starve to death, can only be described as a
form of slavery in disguise.

20. If we consider that, under military laws in force in
that area, Israel can seize any plot of land it wishes, then it
is perfectly clear that the path is open to total annexation
of the West Bank of the Jordan. Ample evidence of this is
available from various trustworthy sources. It leaves no
doubt whatsoever about Israel’s ulterior motives in
taking such action. Israel is engaged, in the occupied
territories, in a mass displacement of Palestinians and
their concentration in isolated areas, areas that can be
easily controlled, since they are cut off from each other
and are consequently vulnerable.

25. All those facts reinforce our apprehensions about
the genuine desire of the Israelis to give back-in
accordance with resolution 242 (1967); unanimously
adopted by the Security Council-the
Arab territories
that have been illegally occupied for more than 12
years now.
26. If these attempts to dismember the Palestinian
people are not quickly stopped and if a brake is not put on
the colonization movement, all the efforts to solve the
Middle East crisis peacefully will inevitably be doomed to
failure.

21. Since 1967,80 settlements have thus been implanted
and, far from slowing down, the movement has been
growing-especially
since the Likud Party came to
power. The documents and maps made available to the
Council prove without any possible doubt that Israel
2 Ibid..

Thirty-second

Session,

Plenary

Meetings,

27. Frantic-not
to say desperate-attempts
have been
made recently to find a negotiated settlement in the
Middle East. We must, however, face the fact that these
efforts do not seem to promise any positive and lasting
solution because they do not take enough direct account

48th meeting.

3

-; ----.
Jewish religious State. The international
community
of the Palestine-question, whtch 1s the very heart of the.
problem- oft the Middle East. The’ full exercise of ,the‘ : cannot accept or condone such a state of affairs. The city
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, under the. 7 of Jerusalem must be open to the three monotheistic
religions, where Christians, Moslems and Jews can 1
leadership of the Palestine Liberation Grganization,‘its
coexist in peace and mutual respect for their beliefs,
legitimate representative, is an absolute precondition for
under United Nations guarantees.
any over-all, final and just settlement of the Middle East
,
;.
*.
crisis.,
,.,!“r 32. At the present series of meetings, the Security
28. While it is true that the question of Jerusalem : Council must adopt appropriate measures to curb the
cannot be dissociated from the Palestine problem as a
Israeli policy of colonization in the occupied territories.
The General Assembly has adopted a number of
whole, the fact remains that the Holy City of
recommendations
relating to the situation in the
Jerusalem-because it contains the places holy to three
revealed religions, Judaism, Christianity and Islam,
occupied territories; unfortunately, they have not been
implemented because of systematic obstruction in the
whose adherents number more than 1.2 billion-has
a
Council. The States members of the Council that
privileged place in the heart of hundreds of millions of
systematically oppose any proposal aimed at ensuring a
believers; and it is, to say the least, nonsensical that the
just and lasting peace that would take into account the
Jews, who make up less than 1.5 per cent of these
legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
believers, should try to arrogate to themselves the right of
are really the ones that are responsible for the present
exclusive control over that sacred city.
plight of the Palestinian people.. If they are really
concerned about the rights of the Palestinian people-as
29. In 1948, the Arab Palestinians possessed about two
they sometimes claim they are-they should pay more
thirds of West Jerusalem-claimed
as it were, to be
attention to the recommendations
of the General
Israeli Jerusalem. Now practically nothing is left for
Assembly, which are at the present time the only valid
them; Israel, since 1967, has been pursuing its policy:of
basis for a just and lasting solution of the problem of the
confiscating land even in the eastern part of the city,
Middle East.
which up to then had been occupied exclusively by Arab
Palestinians. Since then, Israel has been trying to change,
33. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
to its benefit, the demographic, cultural and religious
representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
character of the Holy City. Many historic and religious
sites have been desecrated, and in certain casesdestroyed.
34. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Before replying to some
The Al-Aqsa Mosque itself may collapse because of the
of the allegations made by the representative of Israel
digging going on nearby. Some mosques have been
yesterday [ibid.], I should like to address myself to a
turned into synagogues-in particular the Al-Haram alquestion of immediate importance to the Council,
Ibrahimi mosque at Hebron.
namely, Jordan’s position in regard to the results of the
30. Specifying further its intention of proceeding with
Camp David talks.
the Judaization of Jerusalem, the Israeli Government has
prepared a draft law providing for the transfer of,the
35. The Government of Jordan was obliged to take a
foreign diplomatic missions from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
specific and clear stand on the results of the Camp David
This transfer should be taking placein the relatively near
talks, first, because Jordan was mentioned in the general
future. In this connexion, I must stress the fact that, with
framework of the agreement of a comprehensive
settlement, and secondly, because Jordan is duty bound
regard to the question of the Middle East, the problem of
in shouldering its national and historical responsibility
Jerusalem is the one in regard to which Israel is least
aided and abetted within the international community.
towards the principal
Arab ‘cause, namely, the
Even its most whole-hearted defenders have not so far
Palestinian cause.
dared to question the international legal status of the
Holy City. At the present time, many important
36. The Government of Jordan ,has rejected both the
ministries have been transferred to East Jerusalem, Israel
procedural and the substantive results of the Camp
thereby hoping to confront the international community
David talks. From the procedural point of view, Jordan
with a fait accompli.
was not a party to the discussions, nor was it a participant
in drafting the decisions. Therefore, Jordan regards the
31. What is the outcome of all this? Theanswer is very
Camp David decisions as containing no vital elements
simple. Israel has no intention of withdrawing from the
leading to the establishment of a just and permanent
illegally occupied areas. Hence, considering the occupied
eace in the. area, or meeting the expectations of the
8 alestinian people regarding the exercise of their right
territories of the West Bank of Jordan as liberated Israeli
territories, the Tel Aviv Government has hastened to
to self-determination
on the Palestinian land which,
legalize and authorize the creation of settlements, in.
consequently, would leadto their right to sovereignty.
flagrant violation of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
37. That, however, did not prevent the Government of
August 1949 and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Jordan from studying the contents of the Camp David
Council and the General Assembly. That policy can only
agreements, in an attempt to open another way, on a new
confirm that Israel intends to remain permanently on the
basis,. that would be in line with the principles which
usurped Arab territories and to make of Jerusalem, as the
Jordan has been committed to uphold since 1967. These
representative of Israel stated here, the Jewish capital of a
principles are in keeping with the relevant United Nations

4

resolutions and they guarantee the achievement of a just.
peace.
38. In his press conference on 23 September 1978, His
Majesty King Hussein asserted in the Government’s
communiquC that Jordan did not and would not close the
door to a comprehensive, peaceful, just and permanent
settlement of the crisis. This correct view-and Jordan is
in the best position to know it is correct because of the
rich experience it has acquired, particularly in its struggle
with Israel-provides
the guidelines for Jordan’s
-position, which is based on the following principles.
39. First, self-determination
and sovereignty; assurance that the Palestinian people will exercise their right to
self-determination and, eventually, their sovereignty over
their land. What is important is not only the Israeli
withdrawal but also the restoration of Arab sovereignty
over Arab land and Arab Jerusalem.
40. Secondly, comprehensive settlement. “Comprehensive” does not mean the inclusive quantity of the parties
to the conflict, that is, for Egypt, Syria, Jordan and the
Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
negotiations but, rather,, it means the comprehensive
solutions of the problems, i.e., no solution to the problem
of occupation without the solution of the problem of
sovereignty, no solution to the problem of selfdetermination without the solution of the problem of
Palestine. Therefore, for a settlement to be comprehensive, all the problems should be covered and all the
parties should participate.
41. Thirdly, a balanced solution. Any solution to any
conflict must be balanced, otherwise it will not be termed
a permanent solution. This applies to the results of Camp
David. The agreement between Egypt and Israel settles
various problems between them, but the agreeement on
the comprehensive solution does not answer the rest of
the problems relating to the other Arab parties. The
agreement on Sinai and the settlements is clear, while no
mention of this was made in the comprehensive
settlement, nor is there any mention of sovereignty over
the West Bank, Jerusalem and the.Gaza Strip. Even when
sovereignty is mentioned in the wording of the
communiqut,
it centres on the sovereignty of States
which might allow Israel to back out on the basis that it
does not apply to the West Bank, since its status is still
hanging in the air.
1
42. The imbalance in the solution applies to the United
States role in the negotiations. It is therole of partner-inexecution and not of partner in the negotiations. This
means that the United States will execute what is required
of it, that is, execute whatever the parties have agreed
upon. Furthermore, the imbalance is clearly shown by
the fact that Israel has the choice of war or peace, while.
we only have the choice of peace. Besides, the imbalance
already exists in the fact that Israel is in a better
bargaining position beg&use it has the land.
43. The basic difference between the position of the
Jordanian Government and that of the 1Jnited States
Government rests on the fact that the United States ‘is

asl@ig us to join the negotiations first on the basis that
thii~ill
lead to results; But Jordan bases its position on
wanting to know the results to which the negotiationswill
lead in order not to walk into a dark tunnel, knowing not
where it will end.
.
44. Fourthly, ‘fragmentation of the problem. Jordan’s
wide experience in the Arab-Israeli conflict leaves us
unconvinced by the United States position calling for our
joining the negotiations on the basis of the results of the
Camp David conference, particularly when we remember
Israel’s part in complicating the conflict and fragmenting
the principal problem into small problems, each as
important as the greater one.
. .
45. In 1967 the Knesset ruled to annex Jerusalem under
Israeli sovereigntg;;and
then created the problem of
settlements. When Begin’s Government came to power it
changed the name of the occupied.West Bank to Judaea
and Samaria on the .basis that the land of British
Mandated Palestine was the Land of Israel. This, instead
of dealing with the implementation
of resolution
242 (1967), which centres on bartering land for peace, the
suggested negotiations now deal with the problemsof
Jerusalem, sovereignty, withdrawal and the right to self-.
determination.
46. The present Jordanian position on all this is.
outlined in the following Jordan did not close the door
leading to a comprehensive, peaceful and just settlement;
what Camp David offers does not represent the right path
leading in that direction. Therefore, the Government will
continue the dialogue, hoping to find a new basis other
than those offered by Camp David. This will enable
Jordan to take an active role in the success of peace
efforts leading to a comprehensive and just settlement.
47. Now, this is in reply to the Israeli representative’s
allegation yesterday that Jordan was not concerned with
the achievement of a permanent and lastingcomprehcnsive peace.
48. The wise representative of India described, at
yesterday’s meeting of the Council [ibid.], the statement
of the Israeli representative, long as it was, as barren
except for its length. I need hardly state that I totally
concur with that seasoned assessment, save on one point:
here and -there the Israeli representative, though
deliberately avoiding a factual discussion or rebuttal of
the basic and substantive components of our complaint-namely,
the ruthless, heedless and ongoing
cannibalisation of the remnants of thePalestinianpeople
on the remnants of their ancestral homeland, whose heart
and soul is Holy Jerusalem, endeavoured to question the
authenticity of the facts which I and my colleagues had
presented to this Council-facts
fully substantiated by
maps showing numbers of settlements and alien
colonizers. This, I thought, was a net gain, for I take it
that, though unwittingly, the Israeli representative has
endorsed our request that it is more imperative than ever
that the Security Council should send a commission from
amongst its members to investigate and ascertain the
authenticity-or
otherwise-of our facts; for how else
can the Security Council exercise the authority vested in it

by the Charter on an issue which affects a whole people
its holy places, its environs, in captivity-and
that is
that is seeking redemption from the highest executive
already one fifth of the occupied West Bank-and apart
organ of the United Nations? I am confident that the ; from our equally firm conviction that when the price is
Council has already discerned the brazen falsehoods and
dumping the Palestinian people and their just cause into
the diversionary and deceptive tactics of the Israeli
the wilderness of nowhere, and apart from our conviction
representative, but it is imperative that the proposed
that the so-called peace is an Israeli diktat peace-apart
commission should see the situation on the spot and
from all this, we had deferred presenting the complaint,
reach its own conclusions.
as many members of the Council know fully well, from
early January to March, in deference to the just causes of
49. I was not in the least surprised when the Israeli
our brethren in Namibia and Zimbabwe and to the tragic
representative castigated the Council for seizing itself “at
conflict in South-East Asia.
the whim”, as he called it, of Jordan and its allies, of an
“artificial issue, a matter that does not constitute any
55. The Israeli representative has reverted to the womthreat to world peace and security”.
out allegation that the Arabs have been refusing peace.
What peace? When Palestine was partitioned
the
50. Yes, the alien usurpers and their Government
Palestinians did no more than express their dismay at the
regard the existence and survival of the Palestinian
dismemberment
of their country by a few public
people as artificial-not
worth discussing. After all, do
gatherings, a few demonstrations and pronouncements.
not the Israelis take a callous attitude towards the fate of
After all, they were totally unarmed. The Israelis, having
a whole people, the legitimate owners of the land, treating
paid lip service to the acceptance of the partition plan,
it as irrelevant, unimportant and an impediment to be
responded by launching their 80,000-strong military
removed by all possible means and with the utmost
machine against a totally unarmed people under the
expedition? Since, like their Fascist teachers, they regard
British Mandate.
the Palestinians not as human beings whose inalienable
56. Their first organized attack was against the quarter
rights, dignity and freedom must be safeguarded under
where I lived and they managed, after heavy
all laws, human and divine, how could the Israelis, who
bombardment, to blow up 25 houses in the Sheikh Jarah
established their State by endless bloodshed and
quarter. None of the civilian inhabitants had a single
terrorism, understand, let alone appreciate, the norms of
bullet, let alone a rifle. We were totally unarmed and
decent ’ behaviour and the accumulated precepts of
defenceless. The Israelis pursued their organized military
international law?
attacks throughout Palestine and managed, by the end of
51. As for the Israeli representative’s contention that
the British Mandate on 14 May 1948, unlawfully to
the cannibalization of the Palestinian people does not
conquer four fifths of Palestine, including two thirds of
pose a threat to world peace and security, I would only
western Palestinian Arab Jerusalem, an area far greater
remind him that Hitler’s arrogant claim that his new
than was allocated to them under the partition plan of 29
order would last for 1,000 years was crushed in a mere few
November 1947 [General Assembly resolution 181 (I.].
years, even though he boasted of its invincibility.
They also managed, by systematic and barbarous
terrorism, to uproot a civilian population and reduce it to
52. Let me repeat once more to the representative of the
the status of refugees, and they have remained refugees
illegal Israeli entity-I say “illegal” because it has flouted
for almost three decades, up to this day.
the very premises and resolutions which would have
57. That is the sordid and despicable background of an’
given it formal legality-that
in God’s measured time,
Israel
seeking respectability and acceptability. It is a
which the short-sighted are prone to misapprehend and
background soaked in infamy, terror and illegality. The
miscalculate, the Palestinian people, supported by all
silly observation about the distance between Bethlehem
patriotic Arabs throughout the Arab world and by all the
and
Ramallah is the outcome of this outrageous
truly faithful thr,oughout the Islamic world, and by all
onslaught, because the distance between Jerusalem and
peace-loving peoples who put their ideals above fleeting
Ramallah is, according to my recollection, close to 18 to
and unethical expediency, will combine in a common
20
kilometres, but since the Israelis unlawfully seized our
struggle to restore justice and legality in all their aspects
western Jerusalem we-1 am talking about the Jordanian
and to undo the real artificiality of Israeli usurpation.
Government-were
forced to construct a tortuous road
between Jerusalem and Bethlehem across winding, hilly
53. Let the Israelis deflate their egos and not be
terrain which added another 15 to 16 kilometres--I have
deceived by the gadgets showered upon them that have
not calculated it exactly-to the direct road, a mere five
brought about their destabilization and caused them to
to six kilometres, over which I have driven a thousand
lose their sense of proportion.
These are fleeting
times. My figure, therefore, of close to 40 kilometres
advantages which are intrinsically of brief duration. Yes,
between Bethlehem and Jerusalem is as close to the truth
the- struggle will go on until real peace, based on justice
as a layman’s calculation could reconstruct. It is not
and. legality, is achieved. World peace and security are
intended to inflate, as the Israeli representative alleges.
contingent on these elementary truths, as the Israelis will
Besides, the Israelis have built settlements and extended
one day discover.
the boundaries of Bethlehem to the pools of Solomon just
beyond Bethlehem and also to the refugee camp of
54. I had not &plied earlier to the Israeli allegation that
Halazon, beyond Ramallah. Plus or minus, it is as close
our complaint was designed to undermine the so-called
to realiity as Z could recollect. Besides, who needs to
peace effort. Apart from our firm conviction that no
inflate when anybody can -verify that Jerusalem’s
peace is worth its name if its price is keeping Jerusalem,
6

other key departments were in collusion and were in this
dirty deal up to their necks. Indeed, a number of those
personnel came to Jordan especially, I remember, and
fervently urged the Jordanian politicians to advise King
Hussein, during the two weeks which preceded the war,
to patch up his quarrel with Egypt, forgetful of the fact
that for one and a half decades those very same people
were doing all they could to foment estrangement
between the two countries. But to ensure Israel’s seizure
of Jerusalem and the West Bank they turned overnight
into ardent pan-Arab nationalists.

colonized boundaries encompass the wholearea between
Bethlehem, Jerusalem and Ramallah, with sizeable
bulges to the east and west adding more to the colonized
area?
58. Silly as it seems, it is the only argument used by the
Israeli entity’s expansionist colonization to defend the
indefensible crime and to try to refute the fundamental
premise of my presentation. I hope that the Security
Council’s commission will be able to unravel all this when
it goes to the area.
59. While talking about peace, the mere idea of which is
anathema to some because it runs counter to the Zionist
ideology openly declared by the Zionist leaders, let me
remind the Israeli representative that in 1950 the
representatives of the Arab States involved, including the
Palestinians, met at Lausanne under the aegis of the
United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine
and initialled the Lausanne Protocol,’ which implemented General Assembly resolution 181 (II) on the
territorial question, and resolution 194 (III) on the return
of the Palestinian refugees, which could have permanent1y
resolved the conflict almost three decades ago. But when
the Protocoi was sent to Tel Aviv for ratification it was
repudiated. A member of the Israeli delegation told his
then Palestinian friend who was with one of the Arab
delegations that it was hopeless because every time the
subject of a return of Palestinian territory and people was
mentioned, “the old man’s eyes’*-meaning the late Ben
Gurion--” turn red”. That put an end to any possibility
of a real, meaningful settlement.

62. The renresentative of Israel has reiterated in
theatrical, f&vent tones the unique and continuous
association of the Jewish people and Israel with
Jerusalem. I should remind him that Jerusalem-otherwise known as Uru Salem or the City of God and
Peace-was built and inhabited by the Jebusite Semitic
Arabs 2,000 years before marauding Israeli nomads
infiltrated the city in small groups. All one has to do is to
read Catherine Kenyon’s archaeological book entitled
The Digging of Jerusalem.

63. For thousands of years it had been the city of the
Jebusites and Canaanites except for a brief interlude of a
few hundred years some 3,000 years ago. Even during
that period of Israeli control the indigenous Palestinian
inhabitants remained the most substantial part of the
inhabitants. When the Caliph Omar entered Jerusalem in
the seventh century it was a family reunion with his fel1ow
Christian Arabs, who not only welcomed him but also
aided him against the then decadent Byzantine rule. It
was the Moslem Arabs who permitted Jews to reside in
Jet-usalem,
if they so wished, against the advice of
Archbishop Sophronius. The same thing happened when
Saladin recovered Jerusalem from the European feudal
invaders who had masqueraded in the name of religious
zeal. The Moslems never expelled or persecuted the Jews
but treated them as believers in God’s message. It was the
Romans, the Babylonians and the Europeans who
expelled the Jews.

60. The next Israeli penchant for peace was given
concrete expression by Israel’s unwarranted invasion of
Egypt in 1956. A further concrete expression was its
treacherous attack on Egypt in 1967, the real goal of
which was not Sinai but Holy Jerusalem and the rest of
Paiestine. We knew that fact al1 along. The Israelis and
the Americans, as .long ago as 1968, offered such a
restoration through Mr. Dean Rusk, then the United
States Secretary of State, in exchange for nonbelligerency. The then Egyptian Government flatly
refused such a deal as unethical and a betrayal of their
Jordanian, Palestinian and Syrian brethren. The claim by
the representative of Israel that his Government had
given notice to Jdrdan not to join the war has since been
proved by researchers to have been a theatrical ploy, as
such notice was given after hostilities had already been
triggered by Israel.

64. Jerusalem to the Islamicworld is the first Qibla to
which people turn their faces in prayer. The spiritual
journey of the Prophet Mohammed and’his ascension to
heaven from the Al-Aqsa Mosaue at God’s behest to
witness ha creation, consecrated Islam’s eternal
attachment to the Holy City, but. without the slightest
prejudice to the other two great faiths with which Islam
associates itself. The claim to Jewish exclusivity. in
Jerusalem does a great disservice to original Judaism,
inspired like the other monotheistic faiths by the message
of Abraham, the forefather of the Semitic Arabs and the
Semitic Jews-I repeat, the Semitic Jews and certainly
not the Khazars. Islam and Christianity are universalist
and are addressed unto all mankind, regardless of race,
colour or creed. All one has to do is to profess one’s belief
in God, the creator of all the universe, his prophets and
observe a few rituals such as prayer. Modern Judaism is
addressed to the Jews and to the Jews alone-and not
only that, to the Jews who were born of a Jewish mother.
Many cases have been brought before Israeli courts
protesting against that narrow exclusiveness.

61. As one Israeli newspaper which I read shortly after
the war and the euphoria that accompanied it, conceded:
“We had laid a premeditated trap for Jordan and it fell
right into it.” Indeed, judging from al1 the available
sources, including the highly revealing book Conspiracy
of Silence, Israel was bent on forcing the war on Jordan
whether it liked it or not because the real aim of that dirty
war, drenched in infamy and conspiracy, was to seize
Holy Jerusalem and the rest of the Palestinian lands.
Certain sections of the Central Intelligence Agency and
‘Ibid., Fourth Session, Ad Hoc Political
document A/927, annexes A and B.

Committee,

Annex.

vol. Ii,

7

65. It is not my intention here to get the Council.
involved in theological interpretations and disputations
or in matters of comparative religion. We respect every
faith as its adherents see it, whether it be Christianity,
Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism,
communism,
socialism, laissez-faire, Shintoism, and any and all
religions and ideologies. They have all made great
contributions to the advancement of mankind. But
religious or ideological expressions, no matter how lofty,
cannot and should not impinge upon the rights of others
in a multifarious and variegated world. We did not
introduce the religious element, as the Israeli representative stated yesterday. What we are saying is that while
we are averse to discriminating
against others, of
whatever faith, we shall never tolerate being discriminated against. The 800 million adherents of the Islamic
faith and the scores of millions of Christian Arabs who
regard Jerusalem as an integral and focal point of their
religious faith, their history and legacy, have been
deprived of access to the holy places as a consequence of
Israeli occupation, holy places which they passionately
revere. That has now gone on for 11 years and it is a
situation which is totally insufferable for all the faithful.
Any Jew is given the “redcarpet” treatment ifhe goes to
Jerusalem, no matter which country he. may have
heralded from, simply because he happens to be a Jew,
while a Palestinian-Christian
or Moslem-whose
heritage goes back millennia, is brutally denied his right
to return to his city. If that is not exclusive racism, then
what is?

guarantee freedom of access to the holy places, to
religious buildings and sites situated in the territory
placed under their authority by the final settlement of
the Palestine problem, or pending that settlement, in
the territory at present occupied by them under
Armistice Agreements, and pursuant to this undertaking will guarantee rights of entry and of transit to
ministers of religion, pilgrims and visitors, without
distinction as to nationality or faith, subject only to
considerations of national security, all the above in
conformity with the status quo prior to 14 May 1948.”
67. Another blatant distortion which we have refuted
on many occasions, but which regretfully I have to refute
again, is the Israeli allegation that the Jordan army had
shelled the holy places. Everybody knows that it was the
Israeli military machine which, one hour after the British
High Commissioner departed from Jerusalem, unleashed
its relentless attacks against the Mascovia compound and
all the other Arab quarters which had not been seized
earlier. Having accomplished most of that aggressive
mission, it assembled its most formidable units, including
the Palmach, in an attempt to storm the Ancient walled,
city. They shelled it ruthlessly. They employed tanks,
which I think were German, damaging the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, churches and other holy places, in addition to
inflicting numerous casualties upon the civilian population. There was no Jordanian army in the city then,
since it had withdrawn totally from Palestine in deference
to United Nations resolutions.
68. On 14 May 1948 the Palestinian civilians took to the
walls and beat back all the Israeli onslaughts day and
night for three days, until.the dawn of 17 May, when they
had absolutely no ammunition
left. The Jerusalem
National Committee decided to send a delegation to
Amman to ask for help. At the dawn of 18 May a
contingent of no more than 600 Jordanian troops came to
the rescue, engaged in street-to-street fighting. and
overwhelmed the close to. 1,000 Israeli Haganah and
Irgun planted in the Jewish quarter, in the Old City,
against the urgent pleadings of the civilian Jewish
community of that quarter. The Israeli soldiers were
taken prisoner, treated according to international
convention and law and later repatriated through the Red
Cross. They included the daughter of Moshe Sharrett, the
then Foreign Minister.

66. I wish here to refute categorically-and
probably
for the tenth time-the
statement that during the time
when the East Bank and the West Bank of the Jordan
were united the Jews were not permitted to visit the
Wailing Wall. The truth is that the Israelis denied
themselves that right by opting for the material over the
spiritual. In the aftermath of the Armistice Agreement in
1949 and 1950, a specialcommittee was established-an
offshoot of the Armistice Commission-to
resolve that
problem. Jordan’s position was that Israelis could go to
the Wailing Wall and also restore the Hebrew University
and the Hadassah Hospital on Mount Scopus in
exchange for allowing the Palestinian Jemsalemites to
return to their homes, which they had built with their own
sweat, effort and savings, in two thirds of Western
Jerusalem, which was wholly Palestinian. Jordan also
requested the restoration of Jerusalem’s natural water
supply in Ras el-Ein in the plains of Palestine, which the
Israelis had cut off, as well as the electric power and the
reopening of the short Jerusalem-Bethlehem road. The
Israelis decided that plundering the homes, furniture and
other family belongings was apparently a far more
lucrative deal than saying their prayers. Cutting off
Jerusalem’s water supply, electricity and the Bethlehem
road, which is only a few kilometres long, would bring
serious discomfort of what remained of Arab Jerusalem.
The talks naturally ended in failure. That applies not only
to Jordan, but also to all other Arab countries. I refer to a
statement that was made by those Arab Governments on
15 November 1949, which reads as follows:
“The Governments
of Egypt, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Lebanon and Syria undertake to

69. It was only natural that in ferocious house-t-house
fighting serious damage would be inflicted on premises in
the area. This included the two synagogues, the big one
and the small one. These were the two known
synagogues. If my credulity rating in estimating everchanging distances as a result of changing roads is 9 per
rent, as the Israeli representative alleges, then his
credulity rating on the number of synagogues in the
Jewish quarter is close to nil, unless he regards every
house in the Jewish quarter as a synagogue. How did he
come up with 59 synagogues? I have been intrigued by this
question, because it has been raised before; but not atthe
same rate of inflation as that to which the representative
of Israel has resorted. I was told by the inhabitants ofthe
quarter, more than 50 per cent of which is Arab property,
that they would amount to a mere handful. The previous
8

Israeli representative
synagogues.

here :mentioned,

I: think,

48

75. .Allow me to express my gratitude to you and to the
othermembers
of the Council for allowing me-to make a
statement on the situation in Jerusalem and the occupied
Arab territories.

70. When the representative of Israel talked about what
he called the desecration of the Jewish cemetery, he made
himself vulnerable on two scores: first, a minimal
relocation of stones was carried out in the same way as
some graves in Bab al-Sahina, Herod’s Gate, were
relocated to widen the road somewhat, and that included
the tomb of my grandfather in that cemetery, which
shows there was no discrimination
in this relocation;
secondly, he has opened the floodgates to the hundreds of
desecrations carried out by Israel since 1948 throughout
Palestine, the most infamous being the Mamillah historic
l,OOO-year-old
cemetery, where all the people of
distinction have been laid to rest-men
of learning,
leaders, heroes, theologians, philosophers
and others.
The Israelis bulldozed that historic Islamic cemetery and
turned it into a public park for people and animals to
trample upon. The United States Consulate in West
Jerusalem overlooks that historic site and will no doubt
endorse my statement.

76. The fact that the Council has decided to takeup this
issue at this juncture is a measure of the concern felt by
the international community at the persistent policy of
Israel to continue and intensify its repressive measures
against the Palestinian people in the occupied territories,
with the purpose of securing permanent domination over
those territories.
We share the concern
of the
international community in this regard on two grounds:
first, as members of the Islamic Conference, deeply
concerned over the fate of Jerusalem and the shrine of AlAqsa Mosque, which is the third holiest shrine in Islam;
and, secondly, as members of the Arab family of
countries, who feel disturbed over the uncertainty that
characterizes the future of the Palestinian people and
their right to return to their own country and establish
their own State on their territory.
77. We are witnessing now the unfolding of a serious
situation in the occupied Arab territories. The Israeli
authorities are systematically and relentlessly pursuing a
policy of establishing new settlements in these territories.
The number of settlements already established has
reached a total of 80. This policy is, in effect, eroding the
status of Jerusalem and the rest of the Arab territories by
changing their legal status, geographical nature and
demographic composition. The situation in the occupied
territories has changed drastically since ,1967, owing to
the policies of the respective Israeli Governments, which
have been pursued relentlessly and without interruption,
with the objective of the ultimate assimilation of these
territories. The settlements and the colonies are being
positioned in such a manner as to form ultimately barriers
between the remaining population of the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip and the rest of the Arab world, both east
and west. Arab Jerusalem has already been surrounded
by high-rise residential colonies, which have been
constructed to form an effective barrier between the
105,000 Palestinians still inhabiting that sector of the city
and the rest of the territories of the West Bank. Thus, in
effect, Arab Jerusalem has been turned into a ghetto and
its links with the West Bank and Jordan have been
severed:

71. The Jordanian army was not an army of invasion
because it had already been present at all the most
strategic spots in Palestine until the end of the Mandate.
In Jerusalem they were in El-Alamein Camp; they were in
: Qatamon; they were in Haifa; they were all over the place,
including Sarafand. They m-entered to save 80,000
Jerusalemites who were huddled in the Old City of
Jerusalem for fear of Israeli massacres that would have
dwarfed the massacre of Deir Yassin.
72. I regret that the representative of Israel should have
seen fit to try and defame the name of one of our great
Arab leaders, the Sherif of Mecca. Apparently he does
not know his integrity and’the esteem in which we hold
him. The Sherif of Mecca decided to forgo his sovereignty
over a large Arab domain’in the Arab East rather than
alienate one inch of Palestinian territory, and in 1925, in
the days of colonialism, he was put on a ship and exiled to
Cyprus, where he died a lonely and brokenhearted man.
The people of Palestine acknowledged his integrity and
his fidelity to their cause and insisted that he be buried in
the Al-Haram al-Sherif area, where today his soul rests in
peace.
73. The PRESIDENT:
-The next speaker is the
representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make a statement.

78. As for the rest of the West Bank, a string of
agricultural colonies has been set up in the Jordan Rift
which forms the north-south length of the eastern border
of the West Bank. Another belt of industrial and
agricultural
colonies has .been established in the
highlands to link the belt of settlements on the West
Bank’s northern border with Israel. These settlements
have already achieved two Israeli objectives: first, the
control of most of the cultivable land of the Jordan
valley, and secondly, the effective control of the water
resources of the territory, which in future could link the
West Bank to the territory of Israel inextricably and
render any plans for the autonomy of the West Bank
ineffectual. Meanwhile the Israeli authorities carry on
with their policy of confiscating the land and thickening
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories. Large sums

74. Mr. SAHLOUL
(Supan): Mr. President, permit me
at the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of March. I
am confident that, with your ability and experience,
which are known to us ali, you will perform the duties
expected of your august office in the best possible
manner. I wish also to extend our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Abdalla Bishara of Kuwait,
for his performance
as President for the month of
February, when the Council was faced with some of the
most intractable
issues, issues which Ambassador
Bishara tackled with the utmost tact and skill.
9

of money have been approved for this purpose and the
Israeli authorities that they cannot continue their policy
necessary legislation has been adopted by the respective
of eroding the character of the occupied territories,
Israeli authorities.
‘. including Arab Jerusalem, with impunity, as they seem to
have done so far, and expect at the same time to live in
79. All these actions have been taken by Israel, in spite
peace with their neighbours and reap the benefits of a
of all the resolutions adopted by both the General
peaceful coexistence.
Assembly and the Security Council and in spite of calls by
the international community on the Israeli authorities to
84. The United Nations should also impress on the
desist from taking such steps, as they frustrate all efforts
Israeli
authorities that they cannot continue to bully the
to achieve a comprehensive, lasting and just peace in the
hapless
population which has found itself under the heel
Middle East.
of military occupation since the war of 1967, or feet
80. The international
community
has reached a
consensus that a.peacefut settlement of the conflict in the
Middle East can, be achieved with tasting effect only if
such a settlement is comprehensive and just. The
Palestinian problem continues to be the core of the
conflict in the region; no just and lasting peace can be
achieved unless the Palestinian problem is solved
effectively and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people are restored, including
the right to selfdetermination and the establishment of their own State
on their own territories. The continued erosion of the
demographic composition of what remained of Palestine
wilt make it impossible for the Palestinian people, in any
settlement of the Middle East problem, to have their own
homeland. There are 2.5 million Palestinian Arabs
residing in refugee camps or in other countries outside the
territory of Palestine proper. Surety no settlement of the
Palestine question can-be envisaged without giving due
and utmost consideration to the importance of the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people-to return to a
land they can call their own.
81. The picture we are seeing in the West Bank and
Gaza Strip demonstrates an entirety different situation.
In effect, what is happening is the creation of conditions
in these occupied lands which are designed to encourage
the remaining 800,000 Arabs to emigrate- or to be
gradually squeezedout oftheir homes, bydepriving them
of any meaningful means of livelihood, the opportunity
to develop a reasonably viable economy to maintain even
the present population of the territories at subsistence
level.
82. The continued establishment and thickening of
settlements adds ominously to an increasingly complex
situation, thus increasing the chances of a conflagration
in the Middle East which wilt seriously affect the stability
of the region and pose a serious threat to international
peace and security.
83. If we reflect seriously and i.eatistically on -the recent
developments in the occupied territories and adjoining
regions, we can foresee the development of an ominous
situation, one to which we feel it is our duty to draw the
attention of the international community before-matters
get out of hand. New forces are rising in the-region, new
equations of power are developing, andnew expectations
are being formulated. The fate of Arab Jerusalem is
becoming as important as the fate of the: whole of the
occupied territories, and the problem is no.longer directly
confined to the Arab countries. If the United Nations is to
heed the new developments, it has to impress on the

ambitious enough to cast themselves in the role of a
stabitizing Power in the region. The Israeli authorities
should acquire a more realistic sense of proportion,
which includes among its elements the ability to come to
terms with the realities of the situation and should
contribute to the establishment of an edifice of a
comprehensive settlement, based on justice and human
right and with the capacity to cast off any ambition of
hegemony over the region of the Middle East. The Israeli
authorities should bear in mind that time is not on their
side and that new forces and alliances are rising in the
region which wilt eventually overshadow the present
military preponderance that they seem to have acquired
by claiming that their own survival is in jeopardy and
drawing on the sympathy which this claim seems to have
generated. Their military might may not prove to be of a
lasting nature in the tight of changing circumstances
which characterize the course of events in the Middle
East at an accelerating pace.
85. However, it is our conviction that the Israeli
authorities are incapable of assessing the situation
realistically and will persist in going along their present
dangerous path. Consequently, the situation of the
Palestinian Arabs in the occupied West Bank and the
Gaza Strip wilt continue to worsen, thus giving rise to
explosive pressures in the region which may eventually
engulf us all. We are therefore convinced that the time has
come for the international community to become more
assertive in dealing with the Israeli authorities.
86. The Security Council is therefore requested to
discuss the problem and make its decisions in the tight of
the abundant information at its disposal from many
reliable sources-information
exposing the Israeli
practices against the Palestinian population-and
in a
manner’ designed to arrest the deteriorating situation in
the occupied territories. In this respect we fully support
the proposal of the representative of Jordan to dispatch a
commission of the Council to the Holy Land.
87. The Arab people have confirmed, time and time
again, that they want to live in peace, but it can only be
peace with dignity and justice. The Security Council
should uphold the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, and once more call upon the Israeli authorities to
desist from acts which infringe these rights.
88. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to takea place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

89. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interp~~tarionfiom
French): First of all, 1 should like to congratulate you, Sir,
on your accession to the responsiblepost ofpresident of
the Security Council for the,month ofMarch. I hail you as
the eminent representative of Nigeria, a country with
which my own enjoys excellent relations, both bilaterally
and within the non-aligned movement. Your diplomatic
talents, your competence in international problems and
your untiring devotion to the cause of the struggle for the
elimination of apartheid are well known to everyone and
will doubtless assist you in discharging your arduous
task.
90. I take this occasion, too, to pay a tribute to
Ambassador Bishara of Kuwait for the competence and
devotion he evidenced in leading the Council’s work last
month.
91. The problem before the Security Council is not new.
It is one which has been a matter of concern throughout
the world for the past three decades and which has many
times been considered by the Council, the General
Assembly and other international forums with a view to
arriving at a comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
Important
resolutions have been adopted, but the
problem is far from being settled and -is becoming ever
more serious, so much so that the survival of an entire
nation is threatened.

reaffirm tts position on the probiem of the Middle East
and Palestine in strict conformity with its relevant
resolutions and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, in particular Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) and Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX)
and 32/5, and to take an appropriate decision.
97. In our opinion, the solution of the specific problems
enumerated above is inseparable from a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution of the entire problem of the
Middle East; the crux of which is the Palestinian issue,.
one which must reflect the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian and Arab peoples that are the victims of the
policy of aggression and expansionism of Israel. They
are: first, withdrawal by Israel from all Arab territories
illegally occupied since June 1967, including the city of
Jerusalem; secondly, restoration of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including its right to return to
their homes, its right to self-determination and its right to
create an independent State; and, thirdly, the right of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, to participate on an
equal footing in any settlement of the Palestinian
problem.
98. Those principles have many times been reaffirmed
by the non-aligned countries and, most recently, by the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries held at Belgrade. At that Conference,
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs stressed that a just peace
in the Middle East could only be established on the basis
of the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from
ail the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, the
restoration of the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people and the exercise of those rights.
particularly the right to repatriation, self-determination
and the establishment of an independent State in
Palestine and the right of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people, to participate independently and
equally in all international conferences, activities and
forums concerned with the question of Palestine.

92. My delegation has followed very attentively the
major statements made by the representatives of Jordan,
the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and other speakers who preceded me.
93. In our opinion, the fact that Israel continues to
pursue its policy of expropriation, to resort to terrorism
and torture against Arab nationals, to multiply new
settlements aimed at altering the legal status, geographic
character and demographic composition of the Arab
territories occupied since the war of 1967, including the
city of Jerusalem, clearly shows that Israel is striving to
eliminate the Palestinian nation and to perpetuate its
illegal occupation of Arab territories.

99. Faithful to its abiding policy of active support for
the struggle of peoples for their independence and
freedom, the Government of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam has always supported and will continue
unreservedly to support the just and legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian and Arab peoples in their
struggle for their fundamental national rights and their
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the just position
of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned Countries.

94. These Israeli Zionist actions are flagrant violations
of the relevant resolutions ofthe Security Council and the
General Assembly, in particular General Assembly
resolution 32/5 of 28 October 1977 and the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War. That also constitutes defiance by Israel in
the face of the condemnations of the whole of mankind.
In spite of everything, they continue to pursue their
policy of aggression and expansionism, with the political
and material support of the United States of America.

100. In this spirit, we hope that the Council will take
due account of the legitimate
aspirations of the
Palestinian and Arab peoples, in particular those
expressed before the Council by the representatives of
Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization, and
also the position of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
non-aligned countries and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, in its
decision on a problem
of such importance
to
international peace and security.

95. We think that this is a very grave situation, which
poses a serious threat to the survival of the Palestinian
people, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Arab countries as well as to international peace and
security.
96. In view of the explosive situation prevailing in the
Middle East, the Security Council is m duty -bound to
11

101. It is in the same spirit that, while reaffirming’our
support for the struggle of the Palestinian and, ,Aiab
peoples for the complete recovery of the territories
illegally occupied by Israel, we welcome any effort aimed
at restoring peace and halting war in the Middle East. A
lasting peace in that region must completely remove the
causes of aggression; such a peace must involve the restoration of the fundamental national rights of the
Palestinian.people
and the complete sovereignty of the
Arab peoples over their territories. Thus we consider that
any attempt to resolve the problem of the Middle East
without the participation of all the Arab-countries and
the Palestine Liberation Organixation can only encourage aggression and run counter to peace in the region.
102. In conclusion, we are convinced that a just and
lasting solution to the problem of the Middle East is
possible only if the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly are respected by all
the parties concerned and if the decisions taken by the
Council fully reflect the legitimate aspirations of the
Arab peoples, including the Palestinian people.

106. Le Monde ‘recently, g&e some insight into the
problem when it accused the Vietnamese Government of
the crimes of repression;.corruption and the destruction
of its society and economy. The paper states:
“The Government of Viet Nam has instituted a
system of political repression and economic mismanagement more severe than anything known under
the previous Governments of South Viet Nam. As
many as 800,000 persons are still in the camps, living in
primitive
conditions, short of food, often doing
dangerous work, and allowed only rare visits. The
death-rate in some camps is high.”
And the representative “of this Government. then
sanctimoniously preaches to the Security Council about
Israel and the Palestinian Arabs.
107. Last night, Somalia too leaped into this debate.
Somalia is’ a country which for years has had a rather
turbulent relationship with its neighbours. It is gratifying
to note that amidst all its foreign preoccupations. and
excursions it has found time to come here and participate
in this debate, apparently +s amember in good standing.
The DaiZy News of Kenya, on 17 September 19.77,accused
Somalia of using Islam for its expansionist aims in Africa.
A week or so later, on 23 September, an editorial in the
same Kenyan newspaper condemned the hypocrisy of the
policies advocated by Somalia which call for “African
brotherhood and fraternity” and. at the same time
publicly display in Somali embassies abroad a map of the
“greater-Somali
nation*‘, ‘which incorporates parts of
two other African nations.

103. The PRESIDENT:
I call now on the representative
of Israel, who has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply.

.

104. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It is a paradox that Sudan
should have joined the ranks of those attacking&rael in
this debate: Sudan’s record, when it comes i,o &man
rights, is shocking and would best not be repeated here.
None of us has forgotten the agonies of the millions of
southern Sudanese who were slaughtered or were turned
into refugees by their Moslem brothers to the north. No
doubt the Sudanese representative will claim that those
atrocities are a thing of the past. Unfortunately, they are
not: the world press continues to comment on them, and I
refer Council members to Le Monde, which on 5 August
1976 wrote that President Nimeiri now presides over the
bloodiest regime in modern Sudanese- history.

108. I should like to come now to the statement of the
Jordanian mresentative. The first part of his statement,
while ooenlv conveyinn an unwelcome message of
warmongering, and while rejecting any participation in
the ongoing peace process in the Middle East, was still
structurally coherent. It seems it was composed .at
Amman. Coherence, however, did not characterize, the
second part of that statement\ The more I listened to the
Jordanian representative, the more I thought that I had
-been-overgenerous yesterday iti giving him .a credibility
rating of 9 per cent. He surpassed himself today when he
suggested that there were only two synagogues in the Old
City of Jerusalem before 1948. Such an assertionis rather
like claiming that there are only two churches in Rome.
He surely does not ,expect <the Council to take him
seriously. If he so wishes, I should be happy to supply him
with a full list and with details,of the 58 synagogues in the
Old City of Jerusalem which his Government destroyed
‘. :
in 1948.

105. Another participant in this debate today was the
-representative of Viet Nam. His inordinate interest in the
Middle East is most puzzling: either he wishes to convince
the Council that his own country has no problems of its
own which constitute a threat to international peace and
security, or else he is attempting to divert attention from
the continued activities .of his country in Cambodia.
Indeed, for the Vietnamese representative to speak,of
“occupied territories” in any form at the present ti,me is
the height of hypocrisy. Of course, it has never been easy
to obtain information from: closed societies. But one
brutal human fact cannot conceal that something is
rotten in the State of Viet Nam. I speak, of course, of the
countless Vietnamese refugees desperately seeking
sanctuary, crowded aboard freighters and fishing boats
in the South China Sea, fleeing in a mass exodus from
repression. The spectacle of unwanted refugees wandering from port to port in search of refuge is too recent
in Jewish memory for us to ignore this human misery
Hence my Government readily rescued and accommodated a group of Vietnamese refugees aboard a
stranded ship in June 1977 and this year again opened its
gates to more hapless refugees from Viet Nam.

109. The representative of Jordan claimed once again
that the distance between Bethlehem and the twin towns
of Ramallah and Bireh is a stretch of 40 kilometres, even
though the distance is actually 22 kilometres, as any map
will show. He puts the discrepancy down to “new roads”.
It needs a very tortuous mind,‘as well as a very tortuous
road, to stretch the distance between these two towns to
twice what it has been for centuries.
110. Let me point out some further assertions made%y
the Jordanian representative here today which, I submit,
” zc
12

signify a further and total erosion ofhis credibility rating.
The Jordanian representative described what he called
the “few peaceful demonstrations’* which Arabs staged
in 1947’ to express their dismay with the General
Assembly resolution of 29 November. Now, what is the
truth? I can do no better than quote from the first special
report to the Security Council, dated 16 February 1948,
submitted by the United Nations Commission
on
Palestine set up under that resolution of 29 November
1947. In that special report the Commission informed the
Council that:
“Powerful Arab interests, both inside and outside
Palestine, are defying the resolution of the General
Assembly and are engaged in a deliberate effort to alter
by force the settlement envisaged therein.“’
Some seven weeks later, in its report dated 16 April 1948
and addressed to the second special session of the
General Assembly, the Commission had the following to
say on the peaceful demonstrations alluded to by the
Jordanian representative. I quote:
“Opposition [by the Arab Higher Committee] to the
resolution of 29 November 1947 has taken the form of
armed resistance. . . . ”It is not only the Arab State,
envisaged in the resolution. which cannot now be
constituted . . . the establishment of the Jewish State
and of the international
regime for the city of
Jerusalem are also obstructed by the Arab resistance.

lie:
Incidentally,~General
Odd Bull; Chief of Staff of
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization until
1970, on his return to his native Norway in August 1970,
gave an interview to the Oslo daily, Aftenposten which
was published on 22 August 1970 and he had the
following to say on the issue here before us:
“I was summoned to the Israeli Foreign Ministry and
on arrival at about 9 a.m.“-that
is on 5 June--“I was
asked to convey a message to King Hussein and the
Jordanian Government. It amounted to the following:
if Jordan remained passive during the war Israel would
do nothing. On the other hand, if Jordan joined Egypt,
Israel would use all means in its power to tight Jordan.
The message was conveyed through our cease-fire
apparatus. As far as I can understand it reached King
Hussein at 10.30 a.m. and the exchange of fire in
Jerusalem started about an hour later.”
113. The representative of Jordan has gone through
extraordinary strictures in an attempt to suggest that
Israel has extended out of all proportion the municipal
boundaries of Jerusalem. I should like to remind him that
in May 1967, that is a month before the six-day war, the
Government of Jordan considered a proposal to extend
the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem and include
within them an area much greater than Jerusalem with its
present boundaries under Israel. For reasons of
municipal planning and municipal services, the Jordanians proposed to include in Jerusalem a series of Arab
villages-Kafr
Akab, Ar-Ram, Hizma, Anata, Isawiya,
El-Eizariya and Abu Dis-all of which are not included
in Jerusalem’s present boundaries. That Jordanian
proposal came one month before the six-day war in 1967
and less than two’ months before Israel’s much more
modest demarcation of the municipal boundaries.

“Arab opposition to the plan of the Assembly has
taken the form of organized efforts by strong Arab
elements, both inside and outside of Palestine, to
prevent its implementation and to thwart its objectives
by threats and acts of violence, including repeated
armed incursions into Palestinian territory.“S
Some peaceful demonstrations!
Ill.
The Jordanian representative also treated the
Council to a rather tortuous and original description of
the circumstances surrounding Jordan’s aggression
against Israel in 1967. I regret I have to inform the
Council that in so doing the representative of Jordan
openly repudiated his King because this is what King
Hussein had to say about the circumstances surrounding
Jordan’s entry into the 1967 war. In an interview
published in the Hamburg weekly magazine Der Spiegel
of 4September 1967, King Hussein acknowledged the
receipt of an Israel message to the effect that

114. I find it hard, therefore, to understand the force of
the arguments adduced by the representative of Jordan
when his own Government had had far greater designs on
the city than Israel has ever entertained. Let me remind
members also that, contrary to the claims of the
representative of Jordan, Jerusalem, within its present
boundaries, does not represent one fifth of the territory of
Judaea and Samaria. As I said in my statement yesterday,
the area of Jerusalem is 108 square kilometres, which
makes it less than 2 per cent-to be precise, i.8 per
cent-of the total area of Judaea and Samaria, which is
6,000 square kilometres.

“. . .if we do not attack we shall be spared the
otherwise unavoidable consequences. However, at that
time we had no longer any other choice. We had to do
everything possible to aid our allies in Egypt and
hia.”

115. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the representative
of Jordan, who has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
116. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I shall not impose on
the precious time of the Council by elaborating on some
of the statements that have just been made by the
representative of Israel, except to bring to your attention
that he has deliberately tried to quote out of context what
I said in my statement earlier. When I said that the
Palestinian Arabs were dismayed at the dismemberment
of their country, that was during the first three to four
days after the partition plan had been approved by the
General Assembly and the Palestinian people did nothing

I should also like to refer the Jordanian representative to
pages 64 and 65 of King Hussein’s book My *‘War” with
Israel6 as told to and with additional material by Vick
Vance and Pierre Lauer.

--

%tc Oflciaf Records of the Security Council, Third Year, Special
Supplemenf No. 2. document S/676, sect. I, para. 3 (c).
sOflieilrr Records of the General Assembly, Second SpeciaI Session,
Suppfenient No. 1. pp. 9 and 10.
%%liim Mormw and Company, Inc., New York, 1‘169.

13

more, and I repeat, did nothing more than hold a few :
meetings and demonstrations to protest the dismemberment of their country.
117. What the Israeli representative has tried to beguiie
you with is with talk about February. Of course, havingbeen subjected to relentless attack from November to‘
February, obviously the Palestinians, like any otht5r‘
people, went out of their way to sell theirjewellery an3tB
use their savings to buy a rifle with which to defend
themselves, at a cost then, in 1947, off 120 sterling. The
price of a bullet was a shilling. The report that he quoted
to the Council refers to what happened two or two and a
half months after the initial response of the Palestinians.
All I said was that the Palestinians had done nothing
more-in
fact they could not have done anything
more-than
simply to protest the dismemberment of
their country, which they had every right to do. But, in
the face of the barbarous Israeli action everybody, of
course, tried to buy a weapon and most people went to
the western desert to buy old rifles left after the Second
World War in the western desert. Many of them were
rusty. But we had no alternative. We did not have the
supplies that the Israelis were getting from every part of
the globe. Therefore, I stand completely by my statement
that the Palestinians did no more during the first few days
that followed the partition plan than protest and
demonstrate against the dismemberment oftheir country
against their will.
118. With respect to another point, which I shall
mention also in passing, namely, the war of 1967. I do not
think that any Jordanian or Palestinian had ever seen the
Straits of Tiran and we did not have the slightest
intention of getting into that war. But we did have an
obligation to sister countries to come to their aid in case
they were attacked. It was the Israeli air force which
triggered the war by destroying the Egyptian air force on
the ground. I might add here that around 10 o’clock on
that fateful day of aggression, the “Pearl Harbor” of
Israel, the inner circle of the Israeli Cabinet held a secret
meeting to decide whether or not to divulge the
information about the destruction of the Egyptian air
force, for fear that perhaps Jordan might change its mind

Litbo in United Nations, New York

ana renege on its obligation towards its sister Arab
countries. They decided that they would not divulge the
information until they had made certain that Jordan was
in the war. It was definitely a deliberate ploy to get
Jordan into the war, because. the main aim of the Israeli
aggression of 1967 was, as I said earlier, to take over the
Holy City of Jerusalem and,the.rest of the Palestinian
territories.
119. The third point mentioned by the representative of
Israel related to the expansion of Jerusalem. There is a
basic and fundamental difference between expanding
one’s own city for one’s own citizens and its
expropriation by alien colonizers who are not entitled to
it under either international
law or the Geneva
Convention. Therefore, the fact that we were thinking in
terms of extending services to. some of the villages
surrounding Jerusalem was our own business, because it
was our own little part of the city which hadbeen dwarfed
after Israel had occupied and usurped two thirds of
western Jerusalem, which is totally Palestinian Arab. We
had to find a way of accommodating the-people who
wanted to live there. There is a basic difference between
our awn people living on their ‘own land in their own
territory and Israeli colonizers who deny those
Palestinians the right to expand or live on their own soil.
120. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, who has asked to
speak in exercise of the right of reply.
121. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Judge Lauterpacht of the International Court of Justice
states:
“The administration of the occupant is in no w&to
be compared with ordinary .administration for it is
distinctly and precisely a military administration.‘*
Thus, we see no grounds for the analogy between the
plans of the Jordanian Government with respect to
Jerusalem and the designs of : the illegaI forces of
occupation that are in that country now.
The meeting rose at,.I.55 p.m.

00300

7WOOO2-October

19824,250

,
