S/2007/700

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 December 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 28 November 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report of 28 September 2007 (S/2007/576) on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), in which I indicated
my intention to submit proposals on how best we can continue to provide effective
assistance for national efforts in order to contribute to the sustainable stabilization
of Guinea-Bissau.
During 2007, UNOGBIS continued to contribute to the stabilization and
reconciliation efforts of Guinea-Bissau. While encouraging progress has been
achieved, especially in strengthening cooperative relations between the various
branches of the Government and among the three main political parties, much more
remains to be done to consolidate and sustain the momentum for democratic
governance in order to prevent a relapse into conflict. Moreover, new challenges, in
particular the threat of drug and human trafficking and organized crime, need to be
addressed in order to prevent the unravelling of the important gains made so far.
Since the Government of Prime Minister N’Dafa Cabi assumed office in April
2007, it has taken significant steps to contribute to stabilization through government
reform. Of particular importance is the determination of the Government to
implement its Minimum Public Finance Stability Programme and the plan of action
to advance the crucial objective of security sector reform. Externally, the
Government of Prime Minister Cabi has actively re-engaged with the international
community, especially the international financial institutions and regional
neighbours.
Notwithstanding those constructive efforts, Guinea-Bissau remains fragile.
Internal political tensions intensify, in advance of legislative elections in 2008,
socio-economic conditions worsen and the multiple threats posed by drug trafficking
and organized crime spread.
I have therefore responded favourably to the request from Prime Minister Cabi
for United Nations assistance in the organization of legislative elections in 2008,
and I have welcomed the generous support provided recently by the Government of
Nigeria and the Economic Community of West African States to help the
Government of Guinea-Bissau initiate a concrete security sector reform
implementation process to prepare future demobilized military personnel to
reintegrate constructively into civilian life. In light of the above, I would like to
recommend that the mandate of UNOGBIS be extended for an additional year, until
07-62410 (E) 061207

*0762410*

S/2007/700

31 December 2008, to allow the Office to continue to assist Guinea-Bissau as it
confronts the challenges of peacebuilding and strives to bring about political
stabilization. The mandate would also be slightly revised, to allow UNOGBIS to
contribute to mobilizing international support for national efforts to eradicate drug
trafficking.
Accordingly, the activities of UNOGBIS for 2008 would focus on:
(a) supporting national reconciliation and dialogue; (b) assisting with the
implementation of security sector reform; (c) facilitating efforts to combat drug and
human trafficking and organized crime; (d) assisting with the holding of credible
and transparent legislative elections in 2008, in close cooperation with the United
Nations country team and other international partners; (e) promoting respect for the
rule of law and human rights; (f) mainstreaming a gender perspective into
peacebuilding, in line with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000); (g) facilitating
efforts to curb proliferation of small arms and light weapons and contributing to the
collection of weapons illicitly held; (h) helping in the mobilization of international
assistance; and (i) enhancing cooperation with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the European Union and other international partners.
I should also like to refer to the presidential statement on Guinea-Bissau
(S/PRST/2007/38), adopted on 19 October 2007, in which the Security Council
requested me “to present proposals on how best the United Nations could provide
effective assistance in an integrated and holistic manner to national efforts” for
stabilization. It is my intention, following the holding of credible and transparent
legislative elections in 2008, to explore the possibility of transforming the current
United Nations Peacebuilding Office, UNOGBIS, into an integrated mission in
Guinea-Bissau, and to make recommendations thereon to the Council. Such a
mission, if deemed appropriate, would provide a holistic approach to addressing the
complex and multidimensional situation facing Guinea-Bissau. I would submit
concrete recommendations to that end following the successful organization of the
elections.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

07-62410
