th
MEETING: 3 MAY 19’78
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2076)

..............................

&y

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ........................
Adoption of the agenda ......................................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 1 May 1978 from the Secretary-General to the President of the
Security Council (S/12675) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . _ . . . . . . . . . . .

1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicatesthe supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2076th MEETING
Weld in New York on Wednesday, 3 May 1978, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Ruben CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela),
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2076)

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Statesof America, Venezuela.
Against: NOW.
Abstaining: Czechoslovakia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
Re druft resolution wus adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions.1
One member(China) did not participate in the voting.

I. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 1 May 1978 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council (S/12675)
The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

1, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first formal meeting of the Security Council for the
month of May, it gives me the greatest pleasure in my
capacity as President to express to Ambassador Andrew
Young of the United States of America, on behalf of the
members of the Council and on my own behalf, deep
appreciation for his services as President of the Council
during the month of April. Ambassador Young fulfilled his
responsibilities with great patience, wisdom and skill, and
we all acknowledge this. I am happy to be in a position to
pay him a well-deserved tribute.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now
call on the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a
statement.
4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I wish to expressmy
appreciation to the Council for the positive decisionwhich
it hasjust taken on my proposal to increasethe strengthof
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon(UNIFIL). I
explained in my letter of 1 May [S/12675/ the reasonswhy
I felt obliged to put this proposal to the Council. It is based
on the strong recommendation both of the Force Commander, Major-General Erskine, and of the Chief Coordinator of the United Nations Peace-keepingMissionsin
the Middle East, Lieutenant-GeneralEnsio Siilasvuo.
5. The Council has given the Force in Lebanon an
extremely difficult and responsibletask to perform. I am
glad, therefore, that it has agreed to provide the necessary
strength to carry out that task in the complex circumstancesand very difficult terrain in which the Force hasto
operate.

Adoption of the agenda
Theagenda was adopted.
Thesituation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 1 May 1978 from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Security Council (S/12675)
2, The PRESIDENT (interpretation ji-om Spanish): Members of the Council have before them the text of a draft
resolution sponsored by Bolivia and India and contained in
document S/12679. I should like to inform members that
Mauritius has become an additional sponsor of the draft. If
1hearno objection, I shall put it to the vote.
A vote was tuken bJ1show of hands.
In favour.’ Bolivia, Canada, France, Gabon, Germany,
FederalRepublic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria,

6. Members of the Council are aware of the tragic
incidents which took place yesterday in the Tyre area. In
those incidents, two membersof the French contingent and
one member of the Senegalesecontingent were killed and
10 members of the French contingent were wounded,
including the Commanding Officer, Colonel Salvan. In
addition, a PalestineLiberation Organization escort officer,
who was with the Commander of the French contingent
during his efforts to pacify the situation, wasalsokilled.
7. Upon learning of developments in the Tyre area, I
contacted Chairman Arafat, who assuredme of his cooperation in attempts to resolve the situation and to
prevent any recurrence of the tragic developments of
yesterday. I shall be reporting to the Council separatelyon
theseand other developmentsrelating to UNIFIL.
1 Seeresolution427(1978)

8. I wish

to pay homage to the gallant officers and men of
to the
families of the dead and to the Governments of France and
Senegal.

The Chinese delegation maintains that the Security Council
should uphold justice, sternly condemn the Israeli Zionists’
crimes of aggression, firmly support the Lebanese Government and people in their just struggle against aggression and
for the defence of their national independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and enjoin Israel to withdraw from
Lebanese territory immediately, completely and unconditionally,

T-JNIFIL and- tb express my deep condolences

9. As members of the Council are aware, the Israeli forces
completed another phase of their withdrawal on 3O April,
which removed them from G5 per cent of the area originally
occupied. I am pursuing my efforts to secure a timetable
and pIan for the totnl withdrawal of Israeli forces called for
in resolution
425 (1978) and shall keep the Council
informed.

1.5. With regard to the increase of the strength of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, in view of the
fact that we have always held a different position in
principle on the question 0f the dispatch of a United
Nations force, the Chinese delegation did not participate in
the vote on the draft resolution just adopted.

10. Mr. President, before concluding I wish to express my
sincere appreciation to you personally and to the members
of the Cuuncil for the prompt and constructive
action
which the Council has taken in this important matter, I
Shall
act without
delay upon the decision which the Council
has just taken with a view to bringing in the three
additional contingents from Fiji, Iran and Ireland at the
earliest possible time. I hope that 1 can count on the full
support of the members of the Council in connexion with
the difficult
tasks which the Council has assigned to
UNIFIL.

16. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): First I should like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the office
of President of the Council and also to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Young of the United States, on
his conduct of the Council’s work last month.
17. I do not intend to take much of the Council’s time in
explanation of my delegation’s positive vote for the
resolution we have just adopted. We fully accept the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that in order to operate effectively the force commander needs 6,000 troops at
his disposal, Indeed, I should like to take this opportunity
of expressing my Government’s admiration for the way in
which the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon is
carrying out the mandate given to it under COI.UK~
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). In this connexion,
a tribute is also due to the Secretary-General and his staff
for the prodigious efforts they have put into establishing
and administering the Force,

11. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
frow Spanish): I
wish to express my solidarity with the words of the
Secretary-General
concerning
the attacks
perpetrated
against the United Nations Force in Southern Lebanon and,
in particular, concerning the casualties suffered by the
French and Senegalese contingents. 1 also wish to express
my sympathy to the Governments of France and Senegal
on those losses, which we all deplore.
12. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interprc~u~iorz jbm Chinese).
Mr. President, first of all, allow me, in the name of the
Chinese delegation, to express warm congratulations to you
on your assumption of the office of President of the
Council for the current man th.

18. The Force has already, sadly, suffered casualties. Early
on in the operation a Swedish soldier lost his life, and in the
tragic events of the last few days members of the French
and Senegalese contingents have been killed in exchanges
with armed bands. In expressing my Government’s deepest
sympathy to the Governments whose citizens have been
lost, I cannot deplore too strongly incidents in which
soldiers wearing the blue berets of the United Nations
peace-keeping-peace-keeping-Force
have come under fire.
Such attacks seem to me to strike a blow at the very fabric
of the international peace-keeping effort and can only make
the already enormous task of the Secretary-General and his
staff even more complicated.

13. Since Israel’s large-scale wanton armed invasion of
Southern Lebanon last March, the entire Arab people and
world opinion have indignantly condemned with one voice
this fresh grave crime of aggression committed by the Israeli
Zionists. They have demanded Israel’s immediate, complete
and unconditional withdrawal from the Lebanese territory
it has occupied. But to date, the Israeli Zionists, impenitent
as ever, have obstinately clung to their policies of aggression
and expansion and are resorting to dilatory tactics by using
a variety of absurd pretexts to justify their continued stay
in Southern Lebanon, in an attempt to realize their
ambitious design of perpetuating their forcible occupation
of large tracts of Southern Lebanese territory.
Israel’s
criminal acts of wilfully
infringing upon the national
sovereignty of Lebanon and trampling upon the Charter of
the United Nations arc, of course, absolutely intolerable to
ail countries that uphold justice.

19. In short, these incidents must stop and it is right that
the Security Council should say so in clear and unambiguous terms, as we have in paragraph 4 of the resolution.
Whatever the politics of the dispute may be, once the
Council has set up a force such as the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, that Force is representative of
the international community as a whole and we are
entitled, indeed obliged, to demand that it should be
treated as such. An attack on the Force is an attack on US,
and the United Kingdom cannot regard the recent incidents
as other than shocking and deplorable.

14. The Chinese Government and people resolutely condemn the Israeli Zionists for their aggressive atrocities
against L.ebanon and other Arab States, and firmly suPPort
the Palestinian people and the people of Lebanon and other
Arab countries in their just StrUggk
to resist
aggression,
recover tlxir lost territories and regain their national rights.

20. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): The delegation of Kuwait
would like to express its sincere congratulations to you, Sir,
2

on assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
We wish you good luck and pledge our co-operation.

to set a time table for Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon. In
the event of Israel’s failure to comply with that timetable,
the Council must impose sanctions on Israel. We regrets
however, the absence of a timetable from the resolution
just adopted, but its absence should not be interpreted as
an abandonment of responsibility by the Council. Lebanon
needs our support; it deserves our action and it must get it.

21. We should like also to express our thanks and
appreciation to Ambassador Young and Ambassador
Leonard for the manner in which they both handled the
informal meetings of the Council last month. I should be
remiss if I did not take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Richard of the United Kingdom on the
admirable way in which he presided over the deliberations
of the Council in the very difficult month of March.

26. The delegation of Kuwait would like to convey to the
French and Senegalese Governments its sincere sympathy
on the death of the two French soldiers and one Senegalese
soldier. They fell for a sacred mission and in a noble cause.

22. Kuwait appreciates the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his dedication to the cause of peace and to the
implementation of resolution 425 (1978). This meeting of
the Council is convened to accede to his request that the
United’ Nations Interim Force in Lebanon should be
increased to 6,000 men. We understand the difficulty which
the troops face and the inhospitable environment in which
they operate. Because of this, my delegation had no
difficulty in supporting the resolution just adopted. Kuwait
believes, however, that the problem we are now facing is a
result of Israel’s aggression against Lebanon and its refusal
to comply fully and totally with resolution 425 (1978).
After more than 45 days, Israel still occupies 35 per cent of
the area it occupied when it launched its aggression against
Lebanon in March. The area under occupation now is the
original territory designed to be occupied in accordance
with the plan prepared by the Israeli Army. Therefore the
withdrawal which has so far taken place is from territory
invaded after the adoption by the Council of its resolution
425 (1978), in defiance of the Council’s will and the efforts
of the United States.

27. Shooting at United Nations troops weakens, rather
than strengthens, the effectiveness of the United Nations
presence in Lebanon. It adds to the confusion
that
Israel-and only Israel-benefits from. It gives Israel additional ammunition for its unlimited reservoir of trickery.
But we also believe that such incidents will continue so long
as Israel’s aggression and occupation continue. Those
incidents are a result of Israeli occupation and procrastination; they will come to an end once Israeli forces pull out
from all Lebanese territory.
28. In that connexion, I should like to underscore the
positive co-operation and constructive spirit displayed by
the Palestine Liberation Organization and especially by its
leader Chairman Arafat. The Secretary-General’s
reports
bear out that fact. We should not overlook the ambiguous
circumstances surrounding yesterday’s events. Yesterday’s
attack was not only against the French and Senegalese but
also against the PLO. One prominent liaison officer of the
PLO who went to negotiate and cool off tempers was killed
in that tragic episode. So, it was an attack directed jointly
against the PLO and United Nations troops. Members of the
Security Council deplore that event, but so does the PLO.

23. Israel’s procrastination and manoeuvres to prolong its
occupation of Lebanon will continue unless the Council
takes a firm stand on this issue. Kuwait believes that Israel
should not only be condemned but also be subjected to
punitive measures in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter. Those who use military might to occupy the
territory of others do not understand anything except the
language of action. Kid-glove treatment encourages Israel
rather than discourages it in its course of destruction.

29. The delegation of Kuwait requests the SecretaryGeneral to expedite the dispatch of the additional troops so
as to assert an effective United Nations presence in
Lebanon, We find two or three weeks too long in a
situation that takes a turn for the worse every day, if not
every minute.
30. Mr. HULINSK’;’ (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russian): Permit me to join with previous speakers whb

24. The delegation of Kuwait believes that it is the
responsibiIity of the Council to see that its resolution
425 (1978) is complied with fully and without further
delay. My delegation is gratified to note that paragraph 3 of
the resolution just adopted reaffirms the Council’s undertaking to implement its resolution.

have said how much they respected the representative of
the United States, Ambassador Young, for the way in
which he presided over the Council during the month of
April. At the same time, I shouId like sincerely to welcome
and congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. In this connexion, it is pleasant
to note the developing relations between our two countries
as reflected in the results of the successful visit paid by the
Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia
to Venezuela in
October 1977.

25. The delegation of Kuwait voted for the increase in the
numbers of the United Nations troops in Lebanon on the
understanding that this increase would be final and that no
further requests were envisaged. The other reason for the
positive vote of Kuwait is the concern that any further
delay in obtaining total withdrawal
from Lebanon will
complicate the situation in the area. The increase is one of
the best ways of ensuring Israel’s withdrawal from Lebanon. We hope that excuses and pretexts for procrastination
will be removed by the acceptance of this increase. Our aim
is to prevent or forestall Israel’s tricks and filibustering
designed to prolong its occupation of Southern Lebanon.
We believe that the Security Council should meet very soon

31. One and a half months have elapsed since the previous
chapter in Israeli aggression, and the Security Council is
once again discussing the same matter. Heretofore Israel has
not implemented the decisions and resolutions
of the
Council, nor has it fulfilled the provisions of resolution
425 (1978) regarding the immediate withdrawal
of its
troops from the entire territory of Lebanon. The Secre3

Southern Lebanon and called for the unconditionalwithdrawal of Israeli forces from the positions they occupied
after their penetration into that territory. While it is true
that that measurecontributed to reducing tensionin the
region and to obtaining the withdrawal of someIsraeli
forces, we are, nevertheless,far from attaining the purpose
of the resolution, natnely, the restoration of peace,and
yesterday’sevents bearme out.

tary-General has requested the Council to authorize increasing the strength of UNIFIL by 2,000, bringing it up to
6,000.
32. The complicated situation in Southern Lebanon and

throughout Lebaneseterritory resulting from Israel’saggressiveactions must, perforce, give us causefor concern about
the situation, We are concerned too about the tactical
actions of Israel with regard to implementing resolutions
425 (1978) and 426 (1978); they remind us all too well of
the continuance of the policy which the Government of
lsrael has been pursuing with regard to all the occupied
Arab territories. In the letter Israel’s Foreign Minister,
Mr. Moshe Dayan, addressedto the Secretary-Generalon 14
April, we can see, for example, that the Israeli Government
is making the withdrawal of its troops from the occupied
territory of Lebanon conditional on the %uc~ssful results”
of UNIFlL activities.

38. This situation is due primarily to the insufficient troop
strength of UNIFIL andto the continued presenceof lsraeli
troops. My delegationtherefore supportedthe draft resolution aimed at increasingUNIFIL’s strength from 4,000 to
6,000 men. My delegationhopesthat with the adoptionof
that resolution the voice of reasonwill in the end prevail
and that Israel will cometo understandthat it isin its own
interest to comply strictly with the various provisionsof
resolution 425 (1978), particularly the one relating to the
complete, unconditional withdrawal of its forces from
Southern Lebanon. In so doing, Israel would be sparing
many lives in that region.

33. My delegationsupportsthe position of those countries
which, in referring to Israel’s aggressiveactions, warn
againstfurther attempts by the aggressorto itnpose on the
victims of the aggressionand on the Security Council itself
its own interpretation of Council resolutions and its
conditionswith regard to their implementation.

39. In conclusion,I wishto convey to the Governmentsof
France and Senegalmy sytnpathy and condolenceson the
lossesthey sustainedin the serviceof the United Nations.

34. The Czechoslovak delegation condemned Israel’s
aggressiveacts in Lebanon, both in Security Council
meetingson this issuelast March and at the recent eight.11
special sessionof the General Assembly. In addition, WC
emphasizethe full material responsibility of Israel. Bccausc
of its actions it should bear the cost of financing the Force
established in accordance with Council resolutions
425 (1978) and 426 (1978). This time again, we express
regret that those resolutions did not directly condemn
Israel’s aggressiveactions. Further, in expressingdoubts
with regard to the resolution just adopted concerning
increasingUNIFIL strength, we should like once again to
expressalsoour concern about the fact that the troops have
assumedroles extraneous la their task. They have become
enmeshedin questions that have more to do with Lebanon’sinternal affairs than with restoring international peace
andsecurity,
35. In the voting on resolutions 42.5(1978) and
426 (1978), and this time again,we were forced to abstain.
36. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
Sir, allow me to congratulate you, on behalf of my
delegation, on your accessionto the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. I take this
occasion,in view 01”the specialrelations that exist between
our two countries, to reassureyou of my delegation’sactive
co-operation. May I also join in the congratulations you
addressedto our United States colleague, Ambassador
Young, on the tnanncr in which he led the work of the
Council during the month of April. Lastly, I wish to pay a
special tribute to the Secretary-General, to his assistants
and to the members of the United Nations force for the
seriousness
with which all o,f them at their respectivelevels
are fulfilling the tasksentrusted to them by the Council.
37. The Security Council, in its resolution 425 (197X),
took the decision to dispatch an emergency force to
4

40. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, I
should like cordially to welcome you, Sir, the representative of Venezuela, a country with which the Soviet
Union is developing broad-basedco-operation,to the post
of President of the Security Council, and to expressthe
conviction that your abilitiesand experiencewill assistus in
solving the problems before the Council this month. I
should also like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to
the great work achieved by AmbassadorYoung and
Ambassador Leonard of the United States during that
country’s presidencyof the Council in April.
41. The complicated and tense situation persisting in
Lebanon as a result of the continuing Israeli aggression
againstthat country givesrise to tlte mostseriousconcern.
One and a half months have elapsedsince the Council’s
adoption of the resolution calling for the immediate
withdrawal of Israelitroops from all Lebaneseterritory, but
to date that resolutionremainsunimplemented.The Soviet
delegation notes that Israel,on various pretexts, is defaulting with regard to the complete withdrawal of its troops
from Lebaneseterritory, and attempts to prolong its illegal
occupation of Southern Lebanon. This behaviour on the
part of Israel is a direct and inadmissibledcfiancc of the
Security Council andthe United Nationsasa whole.
42. The overwhelmingmajority of delegationsthat spoke
at the eighth specialsessionof the GeneralAssemblyvoiced
their profound concern that lsracl had not complied with
the Council resolution calling for the full withdrawal of its
troops from Lebanon,thus exacerbatinga situation in the
Middle East that was already dangerousfor the cause of
peace, and that it was blocking attempts at a just and
comprehensivesettletncnt in that region There is no doubt
that Israel’s aggressiveactions in Lebanon are part and
parcel of its expansionistpolicy aitned at expropriating
Arab lands and depriving the Arab people of Palestine of
the possibility of enjoying their inalienablerights.

43. It is obvious that members of the Security Council
cannot and should not accept a situation in which Israel is
openly sabotaging Council resolutions calling for an immediate cessation of Israeli aggression against Lebanon.
These Israeli actions undermine the international authority
of the United Nations and the competence of the Council
to institute effective measures for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Hence we consider that
the Council should take energetic and effective steps to
ensure Israel’s immediate implementation of its resolution
on the immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanese territory without any conditions or reservations. We
should emphasize that ensuring that withdrawal is, in fact,
the main task of the United Nations troops that have been
sent to Lebanon.
44. As already stated by the Soviet delegation at the time
of the establishment of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, certain important principles of the Charter having
to do with
this kind of United Nations action were not
observed. We note in particular that United Nations troops
should not assume functions that do not belong to them
with regard to the transfer of effective power to the
Government of Lebanon. We wish to reiterate the import”
ante of the fact that United Nations troops should not be
used for purposes which are alien to the task of eliminating
Israeli aggression in Lebanon, The establishment of effective control by the Lebanese authorities in Southern
Lebanon is fully within the competence of the Lebanese
Government itself. We should not lose sight of the fact that
attempts to embroil the United Nations troops in the
internal affairs of Lebanon could lead to the most
undesirable and dangerous complications. The development
of events justifies the concern voiced by the Soviet Union
in this respect.

Israel againstLebanonshouldbe defrayed by the aggressor.
The Soviet delegation considersit necessary to express
regret that the Councilresolutiondid not contain a resolute
condemnation of the continuing Israeli aggressionagainst
Lebanon and did not envisagemore effective measuresto
ensurethe immediatewithdrawal of Israeli troops from the
entire Lebaneseterritory.
48. Mr. YOUNG (United Statesof America): I should like
to take this opportunity to express the thanks of my
colleague, AmbassadorLeonard, and myself for the very
kind words expressedto us, and more especially to express
our thanks to the membersof the Council for the spIendid
co-operation that we enjoyed last month, I am sure that
that co-operationwill be extended to the presidency of the
representativeof Venezuela,and I, more than anyone else,
welcome you to the Chair during these difficult days
Mr. Resident.
49. My remarkswill be brief sincemy Government stated
its views fully on the subjectsof the deployment of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the implementation of resolution 425 (1978) at the recent General
Assembly sessionon UNIFIL financing.2 Indeed, as members of the Council are aware, my Government did not
believe that this formal meeting was necessary, but considered that the issuebefore us should appropriately have
been dealt with in informal consultations. In the end, we
acquiescedbecausethe magnitudeof the force enlargement
requestedby the Secretary-Generalis somewhat out of the
ordinary. Now that the Council has acted, it is to be
expected that all memberswill support the Force in every
way possiblein orderthat it may carry out its difficult task.
50. The Secretary-General’srequest that the Council
should consent to his intention to enlarge UNKFIL by
approximately 2,000 men hasmy Government’s c0mplet.e
agreement.The numberof troops that are required to carry
out the objectivesdecidedupon by the Security Council is
clearly a matter that the Secretary-Generaland his commandersin the field are in the bestposition to judge, Since
it is the Secretary-Generalwho has full responsibility for
the direction and control of peace-keepingoperations, my
Government defersentirely to his judgement in matters of
this kind.

45. The incidents that have taken place in recent days
with regard to the United Nations troops in Lebanon must
arouse our concern. The Soviet delegation expresses its
regret that human lives were lost as a result of those
incidents. At the same time, it is obvious that, in order to
avoid such incidents in the future, it is necessary to ensure
as soon as possible the complete withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the entire Lebanese territory, in particular
from the region that is contiguous with the Lebanese-Israeli
border, so that United Nations troops can be stationed in
that region, as was envisioned when UNIFIL was created,
and not in the part of Southern Lebanon, which has not
been the victim of Israeli occupation.

51. The men of UNIFIL have been carrying out their
peace-keepingmissionwith skill, dedication and courage. A
number of them have been killed, wounded or injured in
various incidents.In the last few days, the United Nations
forces have been challenged more sharply by hostile
elements in Southern Lebanon, and more men of the
United Nationshavedied or beenwounded.

46. In this respect, the Soviet delegation has serious
misgivings about the advisability of increasing the troop
strength of LJNIFIL. We are far from convinced that, in
order to fulfil the task facing the troops, extra contingents
are required to the tune of 2,000 men. Taking account,
however, of the position of the Arab parties directly
concerned, the Soviet delegation did not stand in the way
of the adoption by the Council of the relevant resolution.

52. The United States condemnsthese attacks on the
United Nations Force, which is in Southern Lebanon to
restore stability and keep the peace.Everyone in a position
to bring the irresponsibleelementsto account should do SO
without delay. Our deepestsympathiesare extended to the
Governments of France, Senegal and Sweden, whose
contingents have had men die in the performance of their
important mission,and to the families of those who were
killed and injured.

47. Nevertheless, the reservations that were expressed by
my delegation with regard to UNIFIL in the Council on 19
March [2074tk
and 2075th meetings] are still valid. The
Soviet delegation reaffirms in this respect the position of
principle of the Soviet Union with regard to the fact that all
the costs of eliminating the results of armed aggression
of

2 official Records of the General Assembly,
Session, Plenary MeetinKs, 2nd meeting.

5

Eighth SpeCiQl

53. My Government has repeatedly stressed the essentiality of complete Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon at an
early date. We are gratified that Israel’s withdrawal is
continuing on schedule, and that Prime Minister Begin has
rnade it clear that Israel will comply fully with resolution
425 (1978).
54. In conclusion, I should like to express and stress mY
Government’s profound admiration for the courage and
dedication with wJG& UNIFIL is carrying out the difficult
assignment entrusted to it. The United Nations has not
shirked its responsibility to identify undesirable armed
elements and strictly control movement into its area of
operation. It has the duty to disarm such elements and send
them back, and it has done so with vigour and effectiveness.
The responsibility now lies with all Member Stat.es-indeed,
with all who are eager for stability to return to Lebanon
and for a just peace to be reached in the Middle East-to
ensure that full respect should be accorded the United
Nations Force and that attacks by irresponsible elements
should cease entirely.
5.5. Mr. RAMJ?HUL (Mauritius): I should like to extend to
you, Sir, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May. J
am sure that a young but mature diplomat of your calibre
and experience will be able to guide the deliberations of the
Council to a successful end during a month that promises to
be very busy. I pledge to you my full co-operation. My
congratulations go also to your predecessor, my good friend
and colleague, an Afro-American brother, Ambassador
Andrew Young of the United States, who, aided and
abetted by his collaborator, Mr. Leonard, conducted the
work of the Council with great patience and tact during the
month of April.
56. My delegation voted without hesitation in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/12679, of
which it was indeed a sponsor. The resolution just adopted
was the result of intensive and extensive informal consultations held under your presidency, Mr, President, this
morning. Were it not for the timely initiative of my
colleague and friend, Ambassador .Jaipal of India, who
proposed paragraphs 2 and 3, we might still have been
entangled here in a lengthy debate. J supported the
provisions of paragraph 1 so as not to hamper the execution
of the mandate we have given to the Secretary-General,
who
has already explained to us the reasons why an extra
2,000 troops have become necessary. Regarding pal’agraph 4, one can only pray that such sad incidents, or
accidents, as those that occurred yesterday, resulting in the
death of two French soldiers and one SenegaJesesoldier and
the wounding of a commander, all wearing the United
Nations berets as soldiers of peace serving in UNIFIL, will
not occur again.
57. UNIFIL has a most delicate and difficult task to
perform in very abnormal and complex circumstances and
on an almost impossible terrain, My delegation therefore
strongly appeals to all concerned to be extremely careful
and to be less trigger-happy, especially when the entire
situation is SO confused, with so many factions involved.
Should this reckless and emotional trend continue, they
might well end up by shooting at their own people, On the

other hand, if the mandate of UNJFIF, as contained ia
resolutions 425 (1978) and 436 (1978) IS very clear, so are
the obligations of Israel. J may therefore conclude with the
Ldtill

words

“R~Y~~~~z

CO~~ZOSCCW

causas”,

A loose

English

translation, in this context, would be “Let us understan,
the causes of events”. We hope that Israel will not unduly
delay the withdrawal of its troops completely, totally and
without conditions. Resolution 425 (1978) makes Jt cle.r
that JsraeJ should withdraw forthwith.
58, Finally, I offer my deepest condolences to the
delegations of Sweden, France and Senegal on the loss ,,f
fives sustained by their respective forces serving under our
banner. 1 praise all those countries which have come to the
help of Lebanon so speedily in order to maintain peaceand
security in the area. My admiration goes to all those serving
UNJFJL, for their gallantry.
59. I cannot but salute our esteemed Secretary-Genera],
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who risked his 0~11 life during his
recent tour of the area in question, which is milling with
anonymous, heavily armed people of all ages.
60. Mr. BARTON (Canada): First, like other repre.
sentatives, I should like on behalf of my delegation to
extend congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of
the high office of President of the Security Council for the
month of May, and also to express appreciation to
Ambassadors Young and Leonard for their signal service
last month.
61. Canada voted in favour of the draft resolution the
Council has just adopted, because WC consider that it is
important, incleed vital, that the United Nations peacekeeping forces should be given the rcsourccs necessary to
fulfil their mandate. That the mandate for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon is a most difficult one
1~s been tragically Jlroved by the number of deaths and
injuries which have already occurred during the short
period of the deployment of the Force. Only today we
learned of the tragic death of two members of the French
contingent and one member of the Senegalese contingent*
My Government expresses its sympathy to the Govern.
merits of France, Senegal and Sweden and to the familiesof
all those killed or wounded in this and previous incidents.
62. Peace-keeping is a dangerous business. That this is sois
accepted by troop-contributing countries. But this iliiposes
on us, the Members of the United Nations, a twofold
obligation. First, we must provide adequate forces to meet
the operational role called for by the mandate directed by
the Security Council. Secondly, we must do our best to
provide the moral and political support which is essentialif
the United Nations Force is to do its job. My delegation
believes that the resolution the Council has just adopted
contributes to fulfilling these two objectives. The resolu.
tion, in addition, quite correctly deplores the attacks on the
Force which have taken J&KC and demands that they
should cease.
63. Jt is our hope that the prompt action taken by the
Council will assist the Secretary-General in carrying out llis
important :md difficult duties. I should like at this moment
to pay a tribute to him and to the members of his staff for

the exemplary
difficult tasks.

Way

tile)’

have

bee11

carrying

out their

even this function is of a limited character and should be
discharged with great restraint and pa t.ience, particularly in
attempts to disarm groups that have been obliged to arm
themselves for their own protection.

64. To fire on United Nations peace-keeping troops is to
fire on the Member States. There would be no future for
peace-keeping if such incidents were condoned or allowed
to pass. We sincerely hope that we have seen the last of
such attacks on the personnel of UNIFIL.

69. There are no viable military solutions to human
problems of injustice, deprivation and degradation. We do
not regard the question of Israeli withdrawal as simply a
matter to be left to be arranged between military men.
Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon is a political decision to be
implemented by the Council. The Council should therefore
supplement the erforts of the Secretary-General by calling
upon Israel to complete its withdrawal without any further
delay. It is only after Israel has finally withdrawn that the
Lebanese Government can hope to tackle its internal
problems, free of the intimidation that is inherent in the
presence of Israeli forces in Lebanon.

65. Mr. JAIPAL (India): I should like to congratulate you,
Sir, OII your assumption of the difficult role of President of
the Council for the month of May, and also to extend to
you assurances of my delegation’s fullest co-operation. I
would also place on record my delegation’s appreciation to
Ambassadors Young and Leonard of the United States for
the skilful manner in which
they discharged their functions
last month.

70. My delegation is deeply distressed by the recent
incidents in Lebanon resulting in the deaths of two French,
one Swedish and one SenegaIese soldiers and one liaison
officer of the PLO and the wounding of several others. We
extend our condolences to the deIegations of France,
Sweden and Senegal and to the representative of the PLO.
Such incidents are to be deplored, whatever their causes or
origins. The Council must demand that all parties in
Lebanon should fully respect the United Nations Force and
refrain from firing at United Nations personnel, if United
Nations operations are to continue there. We hope that
there will be no repetition of such unfortunate incidents
and that appropriate steps to that end will be taken by all
concerned.

66. My delegation had no difficulty
in approving the
Secretary-General’s request for an increase of 2,000 in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, as the earlier
figure of 4,000 was at best a tentative and preliminary
estimate, based on factors which could not then be
correctly assessed.
67. This increase in the Force is not unrelated to the
withdrawal of Israel from Lebanese territory. The primary
objective of resolution 425 (1978) is to confirm the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon and to restore
international peace and security. We should not be diverted
from this main road into the secondary path of trying to
establish internal law and order in Southern Lebanon; that,
after all, is the primary responsibility
of the Lebanese
Government. With the additiun of 2,000 men to the troops,
it should be plain to lsrael that the Force is more than
adequate and ready to move forward and occupy positions
on the Lebanese boundary
with Israel. There is no
justification, therefore, for any further delay in completing
the Israeli withdrawal,
which is unconditional in terms of
resolution 42.5 (1978). The boundary between Lebanon
and lsrael has been quiet in the past, and it should be
relatively easy to restore the former quiet on this border
with the help of the expanded United Nations Force.

71. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, 1 should like to join preceding speakers in
expressing to you sincere congratulations for having taken
upon yourself the burden of the presidency of the Council
for this month 1 am convinced that with your skill and
your experience as a diplomat you will efficiently handle
our business and bring all the questions before the Council
this month to a good conclusion.
72. I should also like to thank Ambassadors Young and
Leonard for the imaginative and relaxed way in which they
conducted the business of the presidency last month. Their
efficiency was a great help in finding reasonable solutions
to serious matters pending before the Council.

68. The United Nations Force has another role envisaged
for it in resolution 425 (1978): to assist the Lebanese
Govcrnnient in ensuring the return of its effective authority
in Southern Lebanon. This unprecedented role for the
complex and
United Nations comprises an extremely
delicate task, and we are most anxious to ensure that the
Force will not get drawn into local confrontations
which
might well have unpredictable and disastrous consequences.
ln the interest of maintaining the integrity md high
purpose of the Force and the constitutional authority of
the Secretary-General, we should like to sound a note of
caution. It is really for the Lebanese Government in the
first instance to re-establish its own effective authority in
Southern Lebanon, and it is in fact endeavouring to do so
through negotiations and by creating mutual understanding
between a variety of rival Factions that are all armed for
their own protection. These rival factions will disarm onIY
to the extent that they all agree to do so. The role of the
United Nations Force in the restoration of governmental
authority in Southern Lebanon is a secondary one, and

73. My delegation appreciated the latest excellent report
of the Secretary-General contained in document
S/12675.
He gave us a full picture of the situation and drew
conclusions which we cannot but support.
74. It was also with satisfaction that we saw Major-General
Erskine during the Council’s consultations yesterday and
had the privilege of his expert advice. But I think that hc
took a wise decision in going back inunediately to look
personally into the developments which have, unfortunately, occurred during the last few days.
75. My Government is deeply concerned about these and
earlier incidents. We deplore the loss of human lives, and WC
should especially like to offer our sincere condolences to
the Governments of France, Senegal and Sweden for the
loss ofmcn in tllcir contingents in UNIFIL.
7

he was kind enough to give us on severaloccasions,have
convincingly demonstratedthe needto take such a decision
in order to enable UNIFIL to carry out the task which we
have assignedto it.

76. It is indeed extremely sad that soldiers who were
doing their duty of keeping the peace on behalf of the
Organization should have been killed. My Government
earnestly appeals to ail parties to honour the truce and
respect those soldiers of peace. There is not only the
question of protecting the personnel which we ourselves
have sent to the area; the authority and the credibility of
the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole are
also involved. We sincerely hope that there will be no
further incidents of this kind and that all parties will
co-operate in good faith with UNIFIL.

84. The eventsof the last few days have, in the view of the
authorities of my country, strengthenedthat argument. On
this occasion, 1 wish to note that the French Government
has already indicated severaI times that, in placing a
contingent at the disposalof the United Nations aspart of
the Interim Force in Lebanon, its sole concern was to
contribute towards the implementation of resolution
425 (1978). Therefore, the French soldierstaking part in
UNIFIL could not and cannot have any other missionthan
that assignedto the Force by the United Nations itself. The
Secretary-General recalled in detail the nature of this
missionand the mannerin which it is being carried out. The
information which he transmitted to LIS on the confrontations that we are deploring today clearly showedthat they
were directed by apparently uncontrolled military elements
againstmembersof the international Force that were under
the clear orders of the United Nations Command,pursuant
to the mandate defined by the Security Council. My
Government once again appeals to all the parties LO
co-operate with the Force’s mission in accordance with
their publicly expressedcommitments. It expressesthe
hope also that the maintenanceof closecontacts amongall
the parties involved will make it possibleto avoid in the
future other incidentswhich may result in further casualties,
As stressedin the resolutionthat we have just adopted, it is
not admissiblefor the United Nations Force to be under
attack by any party. It is time for all the partiesin Lebanon
fully to respectthe Force.

77. We believe that the proposed increase in UNIFIL of
another 2,000 men will enable the peace-keeping forces to
fulfil their mandate in a much better and more efficient
way. It is our hope that they will then be in a position to
pacify the area and to control it efficiently. Such effective
control would also, in our belief, convince Israel that it can
and must withdraw totally from Lebanese territory.
78. That is why my delegation has voted for the resolution
we just adopted. It is my sincere hope that, with the
enlargement of UNlFIL, all further fighting in the area can
be prevented and that this will be a reasonable contribution
towards restoring the authority or the Government of
Lebanon in this part of the country.
(France)
(interpretation
from
79. Mr. LEPRETTE
French): Mr. President, my delegation is pleased at seeing
you assume the functions of President of the Security
Council. You represent at the United Nations a country
with which France has always had ties of co-operation and
close and friendly relations. Although you are a relative
newcomer among IIS, we how that your experience and
your eminent qualities guarantee full successin the tasks
which lie ahead, for the accomplishment of which my
delegationwishesto assureyou of its full co-operation.

85. In conclusion, I shouldlike to state once again to the
Secretary-Generalthat he has the complete confidence of
my Government and to tell him how much the eminent
qualities he displays in the exercise of his difficult and
delicate missionareappreciated.

80. I should like to congratulate AmbassadorYoung and
AmbassadorLeonard of the United States, for the skill and
leadershipwith which they presidedover the deliberations
of the Council last month, during a difficult period. We
thank them both.

86. Mr. ROLON ANAYA @Olivia) (interpretation .@I71
Spanish): I am sure that you, Mr. President,a distinguished
Venezuelan and a great Latin American, have noticed that
Bolivia is not inclined to excesses,not even in the useof
words, but we cannot but express our great pleasure at
seeingyou presideover our work during the month of May.
For Bolivia and for all Latin America the pleasureis that
much greater. It is our wishthat the Success
with which YOU
have already started your delicate task shall continue, and
we pledgeour co-operationin your work.

81. Now J wish to join my voice to those of the
delegationswhich preceded me to expressthe condolences
of the French authorities to the Governments of Senegal
and Sweden concerning the military personnel of those
countries participating in the operations of UNIFIL who
were killed in action.
82. 1 also wish on this occasion publicly to thank the
delegationswhich expressedtheir sympathy to me on the
death of two French membersof UNIFIL yesterday during
the sameincidents. They may be sure that we have been
deeply moved by their expressionsof condolences.

87. It is also a great pleasurefor us to agree with the
President and our other colleaguesin expressingappreciation and thanks for the work done during the month of
April by the representativesof the United States.

83. It seemshardly necessaryto me to explain the reasons
why the French delegationvoted in favour of the resolution
which we have just adopted, whereby the Council decided
significantly to increase the troop strength of the United
Nations Force in Southern Lebanon. The SecretaryGeneral’sletter addressedto the President of the Council
on the subject, as well as the additional information which

88. The Secretary-Generalhas painted a clear picture of
the tragic situation which prevails in Lebanon. Bolivia has
made a careful analysis of that situation, and has COsponsored,with its colleaguesfrom India and Mauritius, the
draft resolution which has just been adopted by the
Council.

8

89. I need not go into detail with respect to our concern
over the situation in Lebanon and our duty to exercise
restraint and moderation in the efforts to solve this
problem as soon as possible, without the addition of further
burdens such as the tragic incidents which befell the United
Nations Force yesterday. We strongly condemn those
actions and express the sincere sympathy of the Government and people of Bolivia to the Governments of France
and Senegal, which suffered the losses, and our solidarity
with them.
90. We also join our colleagues in expressing our tribute of
appreciation to the Secretary-General and to his staff for
their efforts in this new historic test for the United Nations
in the fulfilment of its enormous and difficult international
task.
91. Mr, GEORGE (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation adds
its voice to those of other delegations that have congratulated you, Mr. Piesident, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
We also pledge our co-operation to you and your delegation
in the conduct of the business of the Council. My
delegation also wishes to record its appreciation and
admiration for the able and skilful manner in which your
predecessors, Ambassadors Young and Leonard of the
United States, conducted the business of the Council last
man th.
92. My delegation has fully supported and voted for the
resolution just adopted in the same spirit in which we
supported and voted for resolutions 425 (1978) and
426 (1978), which established the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and gave it its mandate to operate in
Southern Lebanon. My delegation hopes that the increase
of UNIFIL’s Forces now approved will enhance its capacity
to fulfil its mandate as set out in resolution 425 (1978) and
leave no room for excuses for Israel to hesitate or delay in

respecting the express demand of the Council tor its
complete withdrawal from Southern Lebanon forthwith.
ii3. The Nigerian delegation deplores the attacks on
UNIFIL
troops that have taken place in the area of
operation. We express our condoIences to the Governments
contributing the contingents in which the casualties have
occurred, and we call upon all parties to respect the
UNIFIL
troops as representing the authority of the
Organization, which has the responsibility for and genuine
interest in the maintenance of international peace and
security.
94. My delegation wishes to record its appreciation to the
Secretary-General and the field commanders of UNIFIL for
the admirable manner in which they are tackling the most
difficult operations in Lebanon, and we wish to assure them
of our co-operation in promoting the desirable success of
the operations within the terms of their mandate.
95. The PRESlDENT (interpretation from Spanish): At
this stage of our discussions, and in my capacity representative of VENEZUELA,
I should like to express to the
members of the Council our agreement with the resolution
for which we voted. We feel that it was formulated in the
spirit of contributing to the implementation of resolution
425 (1978), which set up the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon for the purpose of ensuring the maintenance of
peace in that region.
96. We hope that all the parties involved will carry out the
mandate of the Council and that there will be an immediate
withdrawal of the troops which penetrated the territory of
Lebanon. We hope also that there will be a definitive
cease-fire and that the parties involved in this situation will
refrain from all acts of violence. In our view, acts of
violence are contrary to peace and security in the region.
The meeting rose at 5,20 pm.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
IJnies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositsires
clu mondc entier. Informez-vous
auprbs de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies. Section ties ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

IIOJIS’~IM[Tb

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

M3&4HlUri

OPTAIIM

PUBLICACIONES

3AuRH

DE LAS

OlS%E&UHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAURH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ias Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes
cl01 mundo.
ConsuIte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su Iibrero
o dirijasc
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

ZU.S. 1.00

(or equivalent

currencies)

78-70005-February

1980-2.200
