S/2021/763

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 August 2021
Original: English

Strengthening the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office
to the African Union
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of
the Security Council dated 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27), provides an update
on the implementation of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, including in the context of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the current status of the partnership and
efforts to enhance it. It also provides a description of the main activities carried out
by the United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU) and the United Nations
system since the issuance of my previous report (S/2020/860) on 31 August 2020,
including those pertaining to resolutions 2320 (2016), 2378 (2017) and 2457 (2019).

II. The United Nations and African Union strategic partnership
United Nations Security Council and African Union Peace and
Security Council
2.
The United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council continued to prioritize the strengthening of their strategic partnership to
enhance peace and security in Africa. The implications of the COVID -19 pandemic
on peace, security and stability further heightened the urgency of mitigating its impact
on people’s lives and livelihoods. Using virtual platforms, the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council held regular formal and informal interactions,
providing opportunities for greater clarity on the peace and security challenges on the
continent.
3.
On 30 September 2020, members of both Councils held their fourteenth annual
joint consultative meeting virtually. During the meeting, they noted the negative
global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including throughout Africa. They
discussed the situations in Mali, the broader Sahel subregion and Somalia. They also
reflected on progress made under the African Union Master Road Map of Practical
Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020 and Security Council resolution

21-11423 (E)

020921

*2111423*

S/2021/763

2457 (2019), including the activities undertaken by the African Union as part of the
2020 theme of the year “Silencing the guns: creating conducive conditio ns for
Africa’s development”. They further reiterated the commitment to continue to
implement the women and peace and security agenda, pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). The joint consultative meeting was preceded by the fifth joint informal
seminar, on 29 September 2020. The members of the two Councils exchanged views
on strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union and
called for all stakeholders to intensify their efforts towards the realization of the
objectives outlined in the African Union Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
4.
On 23 October 2020, the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission conducted a virtual informal consultative meeting to
identify ways of further enhancing cooperation in support of peacebuilding in Africa.
They recognized the unprecedented challenges posed by COVID -19, and the crucial
roles of women and youth in addressing them. They acknowledged the African
common position on the 2020 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture endorsed by the Peace and Security Council and called for
complementarities between the African Union and the United Nations financial
mechanisms, and stronger support for African Union-led post-conflict reconstruction
and development efforts.
5.
My Special Representatives and Envoys continued to brief the African Union
Peace and Security Council, on country and regional situations, as w ell as on thematic
issues, sometimes jointly with their African Union counterparts. UNOAU, with the
Peace and Security Council secretariat, facilitated monthly coordination meetings
between the Chair of the Peace and Security Council and the President of t he Security
Council to discuss their respective programmes of work with a view to strengthening
coordination and synergies. At the joint Peace and Security Council virtual retreat
with the three African non-permanent members of the Security Council and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, known as the African Members of the Security Council
plus one (“A3+1”), held in March 2021, measures were adopted to promote greater
consultation and consensus on African positions on peace and security matters. With
the facilitation of the Permanent Observer Mission of the African Union to the United
Nations, the Secretariat continued to regularly brief the group on issues pertaining to
peace and security in Africa.
6.
The African Union Peace and Security Council undertook f ield visits to South
Sudan and the Sudan in March 2021, as a reaffirmation of support for the ongoing
political processes, and to the Central African Republic in June and July 2021 to give
impetus to the implementation of the February 2019 peace agreement. On the
anniversary of its 1000th session, on 25 May 2021, the Peace and Security Council
underscored the need to act early and engage strategically in order to prevent conflict.
My Special Representative to the African Union and Head of UNOAU encouraged
the African Union and its members to adopt and apply the African Union Continental
Structural Conflict Prevention Framework.

United Nations Secretariat and African Union Commission
7.
Given the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the trauma of
recurrent conflicts, as well as emerging threats in Africa, coordination and
cooperation between the United Nations and African Union is of paramount
importance. Guided by the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for

2/16

21-11423

S/2021/763

Sustainable Development, the two organizations are working together more
strategically, constructively and systematically.
8.
On 9 December 2020, I met with the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for the fourth United Nations-African Union annual conference,
convened virtually. We discussed cooperation on peace and security, development and
human rights, and reviewed progress and challenges in the implementation of our
joint commitments. We noted the vital importance of achieving strategic convergence
between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council on
the continent’s peace and security agenda and ensuring that the continent’s positions
and voice are adequately considered. We agreed to foster complementarity in electoral
support for Member States and undertake joint conflict prevention initiatives aimed
at mitigating election-related crises. We reiterated the importance of promoting
women’s rights and equal participation, achieving gender equality and upholding the
rights of women and youth in all spheres. We discussed issues relating to development
and the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and emphasized the need to
build back better with a focus on a green and sustainable recovery, placing women
and youth at the centre of these efforts. We also discussed the roll-out of vaccines and
reaffirmed our commitment to support a coordinated approac h on debt relief.
9.
On 16 October 2020, the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security held its nineteenth consultative meeting, via a virtual platform.
Senior officials reviewed the status of the partnership between the United Na tions and
the African Union and discussed peace and security challenges in Africa and
cooperation in support of electoral processes.
10. From 10 to 12 March 2021, the two Organizations convened virtually the
fourteenth United Nations-African Union-regional economic communities/
mechanisms consultative meeting on the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts (desk-to-desk). Over 140 desk officers and external experts participated.
Taking into consideration the impact of COVID-19 on the continent, the participants
at the meeting reviewed progress made on the partnership and examined ongoing
political transitions, support for Member States on elections, the prevention of violent
extremism and counter-terrorism efforts and support for African Union peace support
operations and ad hoc security arrangements. The participants underscored the need
to continue working towards sustainable and predictable financing of African Union
peace support operations. They also agreed to establish joint technical groups to
continue the dialogue on these topics.
11. With UNOAU facilitation, the Secretariat and the African Union Commission
fielded joint high-level missions, including a visit to the Sudan from 24 to 26 October
2020 by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations and the then African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security. The focus of the joint visit was the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and its
drawdown. The Under-Secretary-General also travelled on two occasions to the
Central African Republic, from 27 to 30 October 2020, with the then Commissioner
for Peace and Security, and from 3 to 5 June 2021, with the Commissioner of the now
restructured African Union Department of Political Affairs, Peace and Security. On
26 and 27 July, my Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
visited Addis Ababa and exchanged views on peace and security challenges and
prevention efforts on the continent with the Deputy Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security.
12. In accordance with the African Union Master Road Map of Practical Steps to
Silence the Guns, extended to 2030, I remain determined to advance, in collaboration
with the African Members of the Security Council plus one, the call for predictable
financing of African Union peace and security activities. More broadly, the Silencing
21-11423

3/16

S/2021/763

the Guns initiative also provides for investment to promote a culture of peace. The
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs contin ued to act as coordinator,
through the United Nations Task Force on Silencing the Guns in Africa, and provided
technical assistance to the African Union Mediation Support Unit and the Network of
African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation (FemWise-Africa). The
Department also provided online capacity-building to over 80 young people from
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, developing skills on unarmed approaches to
civilian protection. In September 2020, as part of the Africa Amnesty Month for the
surrender and collection of illegally owned weapons, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, with the African Union Commission and the Regional Centre on Small Arms,
rolled out national campaigns in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia and Kenya.
13. In October 2020, pursuant to resolution 2320 (2016), I communicated to the
Security Council and to the African Union the main findings of the assessment of
United Nations-African Union cooperation and of the structure and capacity of
UNOAU (S/2020/1020). The assessment was conducted from November 2019 to
February 2020 and led by an independent expert. The assessment highlighted
widespread recognition that the partnership remains critical, particularly in the
domain of peace and security. I have entrusted joint implementation of the
recommendations and observations to a United Nations inter-agency task force, which
will work in close collaboration with the African Union.

III. The United Nations and African Union
operational partnership
Challenges and opportunities to peace and security in Africa
14. The primary underlying structural challenges to achieving lasting peace and
security in Africa continue to be: political and socioeconomic exclusion and
discrimination, including gender inequalities; weak governance institutions,
including with regard to upholding the rule of law, human rights, the delivery of basic
public services and the equitable management of natural resources; and the effects of
climate change and food insecurity. Those weaknesses are compounded in some
instances by external interference and proxy conflicts, violent extremism and
terrorism, organized crime, corruption and the absence of effective State authority in
parts of some countries of the continent. The impact of climate change on peace and
security in Africa continues to increase stress on already vul nerable institutions and
communities, including the Lake Chad Basin and the Sahel.
15. With over 7.5 million cases and more than 189,000 registered deaths, the
COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the conflict drivers in Africa. The pandemic
has undercut the provision of public services and economic activity and hampered
implementation of peace agreements and good offices interventions. A comprehensive
and coordinated response to these challenges involving international, regional and
national stakeholders is required to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on peace and
security.
16. The challenges to peace and security faced in some parts of the continent remain
complex and volatile. While some progress was made in resolving conflict, a number
of these contexts have remained fragile and require continued engagement and
support by the international community.
17. In Northern Africa, the interim executive authority in Libya was inaugurated in
March 2021, and progress was achieved in the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement with the opening of the coastal road on 30 July. Nonetheless, the peace
4/16

21-11423

S/2021/763

remains fragile, and the preparations for and the holding of the elections on
24 December 2021 require significant efforts.
18. In the Sahel and throughout the Lake Chad Basin region, the persistent threats
of terrorism and violent extremism posed by terrorist groups affiliated to al -Qaida,
Da’esh and Boko Haram, as well as the proliferation of militias, continued to pose
major challenges to collective efforts to achieve lasting peace and sustainable
development. The West Africa subregion continued to experience terrorist expansion
and attacks as witnessed in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. In addition,
unconstitutional changes of government, violent extremism and a growing narcotics
trade, as well as intercommunal and farmer-herder conflicts, remained real threats to
the subregion and the Sahel. Nonetheless, largely peaceful and inclusive elections in
Burkina Faso, the peaceful transfer of power in the Niger follow ing the presidential
elections and the appointment of a civilian Prime Minister in Mali were significant
developments and were accompanied by joint efforts by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union and the United Nations, in close
coordination with other partners.
19. In the Central Africa region, several countries continued to experience
protracted armed conflict, including: activities by non-State armed groups; tensions
in relation to elections; humanitarian crises, ofte n with significant transborder
dimensions; and maritime insecurity and terrorism, including in Cameroon and Chad.
The cross-border tensions between Chad and the Central African Republic further
threaten regional stability. The incursion of the Libya-based Chadian rebels, Front
pour l’alternance et la concorde au Tchad (FACT), into Chad on 11 April also
underlined risks pertaining to cross-border movement of armed groups or fighters.
20. In Chad, the recent security, political and socioeconomic developments
highlighted the need for a comprehensive regional approach to fighting terrorism and
cross-border movements of armed groups, addressing the root causes of conflicts,
promoting national dialogue and inclusive governance. In Cameroon, violence
persisted in the North-West and South-West regions, including widespread sexual
violence, leading to further abuses against civilians, forced displacements and the
hampering of humanitarian access and access to basic services. The situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remained fragile, in particular in the eastern part
of the country, notwithstanding the increased military operations against the armed
groups. The eruption of the Nyiragongo volcano near Goma further aggravated the
already dire humanitarian situation.
21. In the Horn of Africa, political transitions continued to pose challenges. The
situation in Somalia remained delicate despite the agreement by political stakeholders
on holding indirect elections. The ongoing armed confrontation in the Tigray, Amhara
and Afar regions of Ethiopia, the developments regarding the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam and differences between Ethiopia and the Sudan over their common
border, represent important peace and security challenges in the region. I continue to
follow closely developments related to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam and the
African Union’s ongoing facilitation of negotiations in search of a consensual
solution. I am also working with the African Union, together with other regional and
international partners to help find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Tigray. In the
Sudan, the transitional Government continued efforts to move the transition forward,
including through broadening democratic governance, furthering peacemaking and
undertaking difficult economic reforms. A key achievement was the signing on
3 October 2020 of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan between the transitional
Government and a number of rebel movements. Despite the progress, there are
continued delays in the transitional process, including on the establishment of the
Transitional Legislative Council. Challenges remained elsewhere in the region,
including slow implementation of the Revitalized Peace Agreement on the Resolution
21-11423

5/16

S/2021/763

of the Conflict in South Sudan, and the persistent tense relations between the Federal
Government of Somalia and some of the federal member states.
22. The Southern Africa region remained generally stable. However, the
deterioration in the security situation in the northern Cabo Delgado province o f
Mozambique has left an estimated 1.3 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance and over 732,000 people internally displaced. The crisis poses serious risks
of spillover to neighbouring provinces and of expansion of the threat of violent
extremism to the subregion.
23. The United Nations continued to work with the African Union, the regions and
Governments of the affected countries to address those challenges through conflict
prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts through com mon
regional approaches.
24. The institutional reform of the African Union continues. In February 2021, the
African Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government considered the progress
report presented by the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame. The Assemb ly re-elected
the Chairperson of the Commission and elected the Deputy Chairperson, as well as
four of the six new Commissioners for the restructured six Departments, including a
merged Department of Political Affairs, Peace and Security. Some other key
decisions, including the division of responsibilities between the Union and regional
economic communities, were however deferred to the next Summit, in 2022.

Partnership in conflict prevention and peacemaking
25. Within the peace and security landscape described above, the United Nations
collaboration with the African Union and regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, as well as other partners, intensified in support of preventive
diplomacy and mediation throughout the continent.
26. In Libya, significant progress has been achieved in the Libyan -led and Libyanowned dialogue facilitated by the United Nations in the context of the Berlin process
and the working groups of its International Follow-up Committee on Libya. The
security working group of the Committee, which is co-chaired by the African Union,
contributed significantly to developments on the security track and enhanced its
cooperation with the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. The United Nations and the
African Union also continued their collaboration in support of human rights-based
national reconciliation efforts. In a welcome development on 5 April 2021, the
President of the Libyan Presidency Council, Mohamed al-Menfi, announced the
establishment of the High National Reconciliation Commission.
27. In the Sahel, the United Nations continued to work with the African Union to
support the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in degrading terrorist
elements. During my address to the seventh Summit of the Heads of State of t he
Group of Five for the Sahel, held in N’Djamena on 15 and 16 February, I expressed
concern over the deteriorating security situation in the region. I also noted that
security-focused approaches to combat terrorism needed to be part of a broader,
multidimensional response based on good governance, respect for the rule of law and
development. During the Arria-formula meeting of the Security Council on 2 June, I
also welcomed the launch in June of the United Nations Group of Friends of Women
of the Sahel by the Niger, the African Union and the European Union.
28. In Mali, coordination between the United Nations, the African Union and
ECOWAS continued to support the transition agenda of Mali to restore constitutional
order as set by the African Union and ECOWAS. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), in
6/16

21-11423

S/2021/763

consultation with the African Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel and other
partners, continued its efforts to facilitate the implementation of the peace agreeme nt
and stabilize the country. In our unified messaging of 24 May, we condemned the
second coup in Mali, which denoted the continued fragility of Malian State
institutions and the Sahel region.
29. In the Central Africa region, the United Nations maintained regular
consultations with the President of the Central African Republic and the African
Union. Additionally, my Under-Secretary General for Peace Operations and the then
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security undertook regular joint good
offices missions in support of the 2019 peace agreement and towards conduct of the
December 2020 elections.
30. Since the death of the President of Chad, Idriss Déby Into, in April, and the
takeover of power by the transitional military council, led by his so n Mahamat Idriss
Déby, my Special Representative for Central Africa has engaged the Chadian
transitional authorities and non-State actors. He has called for an inclusive national
dialogue to facilitate a peaceful political transition and help lay foundatio ns for
sustainable peace in the country, in close coordination with the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS). In Cameroon, the United
Nations, the Commonwealth, the International Organization of la Francophonie and
the African Union continued to hold consultations and coordinated messaging on the
crisis in the North-West and South-West regions.
31. In Ethiopia, the messaging of both the United Nations and the African Union
emphasized the imperative of the protection of civilians, including from sexual
violence, accountability and unhindered humanitarian access in the Tigray region
consistent with international human rights and humanitarian laws, as well as a
cessation of hostilities and an inclusive political solution to the conflict. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) has been
conducting a joint investigation with the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission in
Tigray since 16 May, which is expected to conclude by the end of August with a public
report. Further, the United Nations continues to support efforts of the African Union
to help the parties reach a solution to the issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam, and thus promote broader regional stability.
32. In the Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union worked closely together
to accompany the successful transition from UNAMID to the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). Since the
establishment of UNITAMS in June 2020, the transitional Government has continued
to make notable advancements in the political transition, but significant challenges
remain. Further progress, including the improvement of the socioeconomic situation,
an inclusive democratization process reflecting the country’s diverse society and the
establishment of the remaining transitional institutions, remains essential for its
success.
33. In Somalia, the two organizations continued their collaboration, in partnership
with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the European Union
and others, to encourage the Federal Government and federal member states to
overcome the impasse regarding implementation of the electoral agreement of
17 September 2020.
34. In South Sudan, joint efforts have continued to address key drivers of conflict
at the local and national levels and strengthening of local administrations to
coordinate local reconciliation and sustain momentum throughout the implementation
of the Revitalized Peace Agreement. Delays in implementing key o utstanding
provisions of the Revitalized Agreement need to be addressed urgently, and increased
humanitarian funding is required to respond to the high levels of food insecurity.
21-11423

7/16

S/2021/763

35. In Mozambique, the United Nations engaged with the national authorities, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) – which approved the deployment
of its Standby Force – the African Union and international partners to address the
grave humanitarian crisis and the threat of terrorism.
36. In March, the climate security mechanism at the United Nations and the African
Union climate security cluster initiated joint goals on information sharing and mutual
support to address the linkages between climate change, peace and security.
37. The national chapters of the African Women Leaders Network continued to
actively promote women’s leadership. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, they
supported women leaders and peacebuilders to advocate with armed groups to heed
the Secretary General’s call for a global ceasefire. In Mali, they contributed to their
country’s peace and transition process, including by advocating for full
implementation of the gender quota law. On 21 March 2021, the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the African
Union Commission, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as Chair of the African
Union, and the Government of Germany co-hosted an event to discuss key
achievements of the national chapters and called for increased representation of
women in the COVID-19 response.
38. The United Nations intensified its support for Member States and regional and
subregional organizations in the operationalization of regional counter-terrorism
strategies and the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism also continued to engage
with SADC to address the regional dimension of the terrorist threat and deepened its
collaboration with the African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism.

Partnership in peacekeeping and peace support operations
39. Notwithstanding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the United Nations and
the African Union continued to work closely to enable an effective international
response to conflict throughout Africa. The two organizations found innovative ways
of dealing with some aspects virtually, while having staff travel to provide the
necessary assistance when needed. This included: support for the development of
policies and other guiding documents; sharing of information, knowledge and
expertise; force generation; and joint reporting.
40. In Somalia, the United Nations remained engaged with the African Union to
support the ongoing operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
through the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and UNOAU. The Department of
Operational Support, in coordination with UNSOS, continued to work closely with
the African Union Commission and AMISOM to harmonize pra ctices and implement
COVID-19 prevention and containment measures, including inoculation of AMISOM
troops.
41. In November and December 2020, an independent assessment was conducted
on the international support to the whole security environment in Somalia post 2021
as requested in resolution 2540 (2020) and submitted to the Security Council in
January 2021. In addition, in line with the communiqué of the 949th meeting of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, held on 24 September 2020, the African
Union completed an independent assessment in June 2021 on its engagement in and
with Somalia. Consultations are under way to forge a common understanding between
the key stakeholders on the way forward in handing over further security
responsibilities to Somali security forces and presenting a joint proposal in line with
the request in Security Council resolution 2568 (2021).
8/16

21-11423

S/2021/763

42. In the Central African Republic, the two organizations continued to coordinate
and work closely to operationalize and support the African Union Military Observers
Mission to the Central African Republic. Facilitated by UNOAU, MINUSCA and the
African Union Military Observers Mission signed a memorandum of understanding,
specifying the support provided by the United Nations in deployment, safety and
security and logistics, which has been reviewed for renewal. Regular consultations
were held between the two Organizations to ensure coordinated efforts to revitalize
the peace process in a context of heightened political tension, ongoing military
operations and a deepening humanitarian crisis.
43. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
provided technical, logistical and security support to the Africa Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention and the African Union Commission under the framework of
the African Union Mission Support to the Ebola Outbreak in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This collaboration was instrumental in ending the tenth Ebola outbreak
in the eastern part of the country, declared over on 25 June 2020.
44. The threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army in the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan persisted. Regional partners,
including the African Union and ECCAS, with the support of international partners,
should bolster efforts and synergies to address this threat.
45. In the Lake Chad Basin region, various United Nations entities and offices
continued to collaborate with the African Union in its support for the Multinational
Joint Task Force against Boko Haram, as well as on the implementation of the
Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko Haram affected Areas of the Lake Chad Basin Region. The United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) are both members of the steering committee for the Strategy.
United Nations technical advice and expertise, provided through UNOAU, remained
invaluable to the operations of the Multinational Joint Task Force, including on the
implementation of African Union additional logistics support provided to enhance the
operational capabilities of the Multinational Joint Task Force.
46. In the Sahel, efforts in aligning operational activities between MINUSMA and
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel continued. The Force made progress
in implementing its human rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework, with the support of OHCHR. Human rights compliance is crucial to the
Force’s success and continued efforts must be made in this regard. The United Nations
will continue to engage and support the African Union interdepartmental task force
on the Sahel. The international community is urged to actively remain seized of the
matter and provide support to African Union endeavours.
47. The United Nations, through UNOAU, supported the African Union and
regional economic communities and regional mechanisms to strengthen the African
Standby Force in the context of the Maputo Strategic Workplan (2016 –2020) and the
road map for the African Peace and Security Architecture. I welcome the adoption of
the African Union Doctrine on Peace Support Operations at the third extraordinary
meeting of the Specialized Technical Committee on Defence, Safety and Security,
convened virtually on 29 and 30 January 2021, providing strategic guidance for the
planning, conduct, management and liquidation of these operations. UNOAU will
continue to provide extensive support to the African Union in the review of its peace
support operation training policies and directives, and in the design, development and
implementation of training and capacity development initiatives within the context of
the Doctrine. The ongoing discussions between the African Union and regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms to finalize the memorandum of
21-11423

9/16

S/2021/763

understanding for the employment of the Force remains of the essence for the full
operationalization of the Force.
48. UNOAU actively engaged and collaborated with the African Union Civilian
Strategic Support Group to ascertain progress and challenges encountered in the
implementation of the African Standby Force civilian dimension policy framework
for the past decade, identifying the key elements and additional steps required to
further enhance the civilian dimension to achieve increased multidimensionality and
integration in African Union peace support operations.
49. UNOAU continued to provide expert advice in the ongoing efforts to develop
the African Union Continental Logistics Base and regional logistics depots, and the
Continental Movement Control Centre and regional movements control centres.
Arrangements are under way for United Nations support in hosting African Union
vehicles and equipment at the United Nations Entebbe Support Base.
50. The Department of Operational Support and UNOAU continued to explore
means of enabling African Union access to United Nations services and equipment,
including strategic deployment stocks and other services, on a user-pays basis. The
arrangement will build on the support model concept, whereby the United Nations
serves as a strategic and operational partner and service provider to the African Union
to strengthen joint planning, deployment, management and transition of African
Union peace support operations. Engagement continued with the African Unio n to
build operational support expertise through the knowledge and expertise exchange
programme, including by deepening collaboration in the areas of supply chain and
knowledge management and by enhancing mutual understanding through remote
sharing of expertise and joint learning opportunities.
51. Support was further provided to the African Union and the African regional
training centres of excellence and other training institutions in the development of
curricula and implementation of training programmes in the context of African Union
peace support operations, including on child protection; mainstreaming gender;
monitoring, evaluation and learning; mental health and psychosocial support; and the
humanitarian, development, peace and security nexus. The tra ining was aimed at
building the capacity of the personnel deployed to current African Union -mandated
and authorized peace support operations, as well as African Standby Force standby
capabilities, targeting civilian specialists, military and police officer s at various
management and operational levels. In addition, training -of-trainer programmes were
organized to ensure the relevant training capacity at the African Union, regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms and Member State levels.
52. Support in strengthening policing in African Union peace support operations
was provided through UNOAU technical assistance and active participation in the
African Union Police Strategic Support Group. Guidance documents were reviewed
and developed, including: four African Union standard operating procedures on
assessment and deployment of formed police units and individual police officers;
guidelines for police professional staff; and administrative guidelines for the
accreditation, tasking and coordination of the Police Strategic Support Group.
UNOAU supported the assessment and selection processes of formed police units and
individual police officers for deployment to AMISOM in Djibouti, Nigeria and
Ghana. The African Union generic police pre-deployment training curriculum,
developed with UNOAU support, was officially approved and adopted, followed by
active support in providing training-of-trainers generic police pre-deployment police
training in ECOWAS to build regional and Member State capacity for traini ng of
African Standby Force police capabilities and police officers to be deployed as
individual police officers to peace support operations.

10/16

21-11423

S/2021/763

Partnership in peacebuilding and rule of law
53. The United Nations continued to support the implementation o f the African
Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform and the implementation, jointly
with the World Bank, of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities
in Africa for the period 2020–2022.
54. Following the establishment of the first African Union steering committee on
security sector reform in 2019, the United Nations supported the work of the steering
committee to assist dialogue, coordination and exchange between actors engaged in
this area. The operationalization of the African Union Centre for Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development in Cairo was a priority workstream, especially as it
related to the centre’s security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration portfolios. In line with the recommendations of the tenth high-level
retreat on the promotion of peace, security and stability, held by the African Union in
Djibouti in 2019, the two organizations intensified efforts to develop dedicated tools
for African Union high-level officials to better address the technical and political
aspects of security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
in field deployments and political processes.
55. Under the framework of the joint support of UNOAU and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research to the African Union Commission titled: “Building
and maintaining capacity to implement disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in Africa”, owing to COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, the focus was
given to the strengthening the capacities of the training institutions and centres of
excellence to deliver disarmament, demobilization and reintegration training in line
with the African Union operational guidance notes on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.
56. The United Nations supported the development of African Union strategies on
countering improvised explosive devices and mine action, now awaiting adoption and
ratification by African Union Member States. The United Nations provided support
to the African Union as part of the United Nations-North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) initiative on improvised explosive device threat mitigation focused on
cooperation in the areas of training, security, defence sector capacity -building, inter
alia. Through UNOAU, the United Nations collaborated closely with the African
Union on its Mine Action Day virtual event “Perseverance, partnership, progress”, to
strengthen partnership in support of the African Union Silencing the Guns aspirations.

IV. Sustainable funding for African Union peace
support operations
57. Building on the significant progress made in 2020, the African Union continued
to build the management structures and practices of its Peace Fund. The Fund has
secured more than $200 million, the highest level of contribut ions since it was set up
in 1993. My Special Representative to the African Union continued to participate as
an ex-officio member on the Board of Trustees of the Peace Fund. The recruitment
process, including developing job descriptions for the Peace Fund secretariat, will
continue in 2021. Despite the progress made in operationalizing the Peace Fund, the
African Union remains beholden to partners to provide funding for peace operations
on the continent. It is therefore important to reinvigorate discussions between the two
Councils on financing African Union peace support operations through United
Nations assessed contributions. The issue of a common African position on the
funding of peace support operations is being considered by the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the outcome of those discussions is awaited.
21-11423

11/16

S/2021/763

58. The United Nations continued to support the African Union in the development
and implementation of the African Union Workplan on Compliance for peace support
operations. In follow-up of the adoption of the African Union policies on conduct and
discipline, and sexual exploitation and abuse, respectively, the United Nations
continued to support the African Union in developing a case management system,
vetting mechanisms and victim assistance and support. In the area of compliance, the
United Nations supported the development of training programmes. Further support
continued in developing and strengthening relevant mechanisms, processes and
procedures for the implementation of the policies.
59. While the African Union made progress in mainstreaming international
humanitarian law and human rights in terms of the policy development and planning
processes for peace support operations, as well as strengthening training, monitoring
and accountability capacities at the African Union Commission and African Union
mission levels, this area remains work in progress. Discussions are currently under
way about possible modalities for a project to further support the capacity and
capability of the African Union in this area.

V. Partnership with other regional organizations
and arrangements
Regional economic communities and regional mechanisms
60. The need for strengthening and leveraging collaboration between the African
Union, the United Nations and regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms across the conflict cycle, from conflict prevention to responding to
conflict to sustaining peace/peacebuilding, remained a strategic imperative.
61. In West Africa, ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations continued
to work together on electoral matters and on peace processes throughout the
subregion. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations continued to support
the African Union and the efforts of ECCAS, in their capacity as guarantors of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Political Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, signed in February 2019. My Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, working with ECCAS, the European Union and the African Union
Department of Political Affairs, Peace and Security undertook joint missions to the
Central African Republic in October 2020 and in June 2021, engaging the signatories
on the need to embrace the full implementation of the Political Agreement and
facilitate the peace process.
62. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and ECCAS
held a joint retreat on 29 March 2021, their first since the establishment of the new
ECCAS Commission in 2020. The two offices endorsed their joint strategic plan fo r
the period 2021–2025, focused on: efforts to advance national and regional
governance; an integrated approach to transnational security challenges; management
of armed groups and rule of law deficits; partnerships with women, young people and
other civil society actors for conflict prevention; and strategic planning, resource
mobilization and communication.
63. In the Horn of Africa, despite the impact of COVID -19 and other regional
challenges, the United Nations worked closely with IGAD, as well as other regional
organizations, in promoting peace and security throughout the region. This included
supporting mediation processes and enhancing subregional capacities to address
cross-border and cross-cutting issues.

12/16

21-11423

S/2021/763

64. The United Nations, the African Union, the European Union and the League of
Arab States continued to closely collaborate within the context of the Libya Quartet,
as well as the International Follow-up Committee on Libya.
65. In view of the constraints imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the United
Nations system, including UNOAU, engaged virtually with regional organizations,
including the African Union, the European Union, NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, to exchange lessons learned related to
COVID-19 in field operations.
66. UNOAU participated in the African Union Police Strategic Support Group and
provided training to the police of the Africa Standby Force regional planning
elements, in support of the African Union and in collaboration with the Institute for
Security Studies and the British Peace Support Team. In addition, the Eastern African
Standby Force was supported in its regional senior mission leadership training
through the provision of facilitators and trainers.

VI. Other activities of the United Nations Office to the
African Union
67. UNOAU played a leading and facilitating role in strengthening the strategic and
operational partnership between the United Nations and the African Union. This
ranged from political to operational and technical engagement to assist in the
alignment of decision-making and implementation.
68. From 31 May to 4 June, my Special Representative to the African Union,
accompanied by the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Zambia and other United
Nations officials, embarked on a high-level mission to Lusaka, prior to the general
election on 12 August with a view to: engaging political stakeholders and civil
society; assessing the situation; and identifying ways in which the United Nations
could engage in efforts to prevent an escalation of violence and political tensions and
support the peaceful conduct of elections.
69. UNOAU continued to engage regularly with the African Union Peace and
Security Council, providing briefings on the United Nations perspectives on peace
and security challenges and engaging members of the Permanent Representatives
Committee, the African Union Commission, including the Bureau of the Chairperson
and Commissioners, the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms
and representatives of partners based in Addis Ababa. Specifically, from September
2020 to August 2021, UNOAU and other United Nations entities remotely provided
33 thematic and country-specific briefings to the Peace and Security Council. The
Office also actively participated in the African Union Partners Group, which promotes
the United Nations-African Union partnership, as well as the Group of Friends of the
United Nations-African Union Partnership, with both groups serving as platforms to
informally discuss peace and security-related challenges. UNOAU also participated
actively in events hosted remotely by think tanks and civil society organizations. In
those interactions, the Office strove to promote a joint understanding of and common
approaches to peace and security issues on the continent.
70. UNOAU also hosted multiple, joint, technical-level, horizon-scanning meetings
between the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission and
subregional organizations, focused on country-specific situations in Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guinea, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, Sudan-Ethiopia border issues, Mali
and Sahel and Mozambique, while identifying conflict trends and proposing
prevention-related actions.
21-11423

13/16

S/2021/763

71. Regarding support in peace support operations and strengthening of the African
Standby Force, UNOAU, with its civilian, military and police capabilities, continued
to build on its strong relationship with the African Union and played a leading role in
providing support in the development of policy and guidance documents such as the
guidelines and standard operating procedures for the selection, deployment and
rostering of police officers in different categories. The United Nations and the African
Union further collaborated in joint planning, review and assessment processes, as well
as the development and delivery of 30 training programmes, joint planning, review
and assessment processes. UNOAU further facilitated interaction between relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes with African Union counterparts,
including participation in the United Nations opportunity/issue -based coalition 6 on
human rights, peace and security.
72. UNOAU implemented a communications strategy to amplify the collaboration
between the two organizations by way of a strengthened online presence, including
the introduction of weekly e-information circulars on the work of the United Nations
Security Council. UNOAU also launched a podcast series “She stands for peace”, to
further enhance the impact of the joint African Union-UNOAU publication. The
podcast series commenced in early 2021 and explores the state of implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda, thus amplifying the voices of African
women involved in these efforts.
73. The United Nations-African Union collaboration on the women and peace and
security agenda continued to focus on enhancing the participation of women in
mediation and conflict prevention. In this regard, UNOAU continued to provide
support to the African Union Mediation Support Unit and FemWise-Africa with
planning for the deployment of mediators to capacitate the African Union Liaison
Offices in Côte d’Ivoire, Libya and Mali and facilitated coordination between
UNOCA and FemWise-Africa and the Office of the Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security in support of
African Union mission planning for Chad.
74. The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security marked
its twentieth anniversary in 2020. Africa has made progress in providing legal and
policy frameworks, establishing institutional mechanisms and developing regional
and national action plans for implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Nevertheless, financing and implementation of laws, policies, strategies and
plans needs to be strengthened. UNOAU and the African Union embarked on the
hosting of joint high-level events to promote accountability, and to make an urgent
call to action for all stakeholders to enhance partnerships in support of these efforts,
and advocate for further commitment to increase women’s participation in mediation,
peacebuilding and decision-making. Some of the related activities included: (a) a twoday high level virtual dialogue and media campaign on resolution 1325 (2000);
(b) two virtual intergenerational dialogues; (c) the launch of the African Union youth
campaign to “Silence the Guns”; (d) participation at the second ECOWAS annual
gender policy dialogue on women participation in peace and political processes and
publication of knowledge products; (e) participation in the African Young Women
Leaders Fellowship programme. UNOAU and the African Union Youth Envoy
pioneered the establishment of the “Youth silencing the guns” campaign with a view
to building young women’s capacity in accordance with the parameters enshrined in
the African Youth Charter and to meaningfully engage them to contribute to the
Silencing the Guns agenda and jointly implemented the “Africa Young Women
Fellowship on Silencing the Guns” project.
75. With support from the Governments of Norway and Sweden, two virtual training
courses and two virtual intergenerational dialogues were convened with mentors,
experts and women leaders who have played a pioneering role in advocating for
14/16

21-11423

S/2021/763

women’s rights and implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in
Africa. The events provided a platform for young women to draw lessons from
experiences shared by senior women leaders in the field of peace and security and
women’s rights, but also to create the opportunity for younger women to be
recognized as partners in peacebuilding efforts.
76. UNOAU provided support to the African Union Commission in the development
of a harmonized curriculum and a manual on gender mainstreaming for African Union
peace support operations. This has provided an opportunity to respond to current and
emerging issues regarding the women and peace and security agenda in the region.
UNOAU also supported UN-Women, the United Nations Population Fund, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
in concluding negotiations with the African Union on the establishment of the
Spotlight Initiative Africa Regional Programme.

VII. Observations and recommendations
77. The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security continues to serve both organiza tions in addressing complex
and evolving peace and security challenges in Africa, on the basis of a more
systematic and predictable partnership rooted in shared values and a strong
commitment to multilateralism. Following the institutional reform of the Af rican
Union Commission, I look forward to further strengthening the partnership and
working closely with its new leadership, which assumed its mandate in February
2021.
78. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to present major challenges to our joint
efforts to address peace and security issues in Africa. I reiterate my call for global
coordinated approaches to vaccination in order to ensure that everyone on the
continent has access to the vaccine, as the only effective response to combating this
pandemic. I am concerned by the heightened political tensions, human rights
challenges and restricted civic space observed in some situations in the context of
countering the spread of COVID-19. Given the hardships and inequalities resulting
from the pandemic, I call upon all stakeholders to come together in solidarity to
ensure a rapid distribution of vaccines and further invest in strong, just and
accountable institutions in order to build the resilience that is needed to better respond
to this and future shocks.
79. I remain committed to a surge in diplomacy for peace, including in Africa and
in close partnership with the African Union. I believe that our collective action in
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts remains a
strategic priority. Women and youth must be at the core of all these efforts.
80. Focus should remain on areas where collaboration can deliver a positive impact
in conflict prevention. Recognizing the weak rule of law and judicial institutions as
one of the primary underlying structural challenges to achieving lasting peace and
security in Africa, I encourage greater collaboration and coordinated action between
the Secretariat and the African Union Commission in efforts to build capacity for
accountability for serious violations and strengthening justice systems throughout the
continent.
81. I encourage and welcome continued collaboration, consultation and coordinated
action between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The close collaboration between the two organizations has contributed to
positive developments in peace processes in the Central African Republic, Libya,
South Sudan and the Sudan.

21-11423

15/16

S/2021/763

82. The United Nations-facilitated Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process
has resulted in progress towards peace in Libya. The African Union contributed
significantly to these efforts. It is crucial that the United Nations, the African Union
and other partners continue to work together to encourage consensus towards the
return to constitutional rule and inclusive reconciliation, including the holding of
presidential and parliamentary elections on 24 December.
83. In Somalia, the continued collaboration of the United Nations, the African
Union and other partners will be critical as the country undergoes indirect elections
and a gradual transfer of security responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali
Security Forces. It is essential that the key stakeholders forge a common
understanding on the best way forward in supporting the Somali people and
authorities in achieving peace and stability in Somalia.
84. In the Sudan, I welcome continued efforts to engage with the non -signatories to
the Juba Peace Agreement, including the signing of the Declaration of Principles on
28 March by the transitional Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North al-Hilu faction, and encourage all parties not yet engaged in peace
negotiations to join immediately and without preconditions. It is imperative to ensure
that the country’s transition is not threatened by the instability in the wider region,
and in this regard a consensual way forward to resolve the challenges around the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam and the Ethiopia-Sudan border dispute, as well as
the regional threats posed by ongoing conflict in Tigray require urgent resolution.
While the holding of the recent elections in Ethiopia is a positive step, more remains
to be done to address the political, security and humanitarian challenges that the
country faces. The United Nations remains committed to supporting these efforts.
85. I remain deeply concerned about the deteriorating situations in the Lake Chad
Basin and the wider Sahel region. Those complex and interconnected conflict
situations will require consistent, comprehensive and innovati ve approaches,
including closer collaboration between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. They will further require the active engagement of
regional economic communities and regional mechanisms and ad hoc arrangements,
and the involvement and support of grassroots organizations, particularly women and
youth groups. There is also an urgent need to increase efforts towards achieving
sustainable development to address the root causes of conflict and promote
peacebuilding and reconciliation. Equally, our collective efforts are required to
encourage Chad and Mali to advance their respective political transitions, considering
that the political stability of these two countries is intrinsically linked to the peace,
stability and development of the broader Sahel region.
86. I congratulate the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, upon his re-election for a second term, and am grateful for his continued
leadership, unwavering support and commitment to th e partnership with the United
Nations. I also express my appreciation to the organs of the African Union, African
Member States and the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms for
their cooperation in addressing challenges to peace and securi ty in Africa. Finally, I
wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative to the African Union,
Hanna Serwaa Tetteh, as well as the staff of UNOAU and all United Nations and
African Union entities working to advance the cause of peace and secur ity in Africa.

16/16

21-11423
