48

General A11embly--Seventh Seeeion

2. D"clares these members and alternate memhers
to be appointed for a three-year term to commence on
1 January 1953.
409th plen,ar)' meeting,
20 December 1952.

672 (VII). Co-ordination between the United Nation• and the specialized agencies: administrative and budgetary co-ordination
A

The General Assembly
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report u of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Buclgetary Questions dealing with the administrative huclgets of the specialized agencies for 1953 and of the
Secretary-General's report u on common servL·es an<l
co-ordination of services of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies at various centres;
2. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
to the recommendations and suggestions made in the
Advisory Committee's report, as well as to the views
expressed by Members during the seventh session of
the General Assembly :
3. Requests the Scl-rctary-General, in consultation
with the executive heads of the specialized agencies
and with the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questicms, to give continuing attention
to the co-ordination oi administrative procedures and
services.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

B
Tlie General Assembly,
Noting the increase in the activities of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies and the related
increase in their financial responsibilities,
1. Considers that the present system for the audit
of their financial accounts may not be the most suitable
a See document A/2287.
11 See document A/C.5/504.

and efficient that can be devised to meet these increased
requirements;
2. 111vites the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the specialized agencies, in consultation with
the Joint Panel of Auditors, to review in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination the present audit
procedures and arran~ements, and to make appropriate
recommendations on any changes or improvements they
ma1• consider desirable;
3. Invites the governments of :\iember States to
submit any views or recommendations they may have
on this question to the Secretary-(;eneral for his considention and for transmittal to the specialized agencies
and the Advison· Committee on Administrative and
nmlgetary Questlons;
4. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to examine the recommendations of the Administrative Committee on Coordination and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its eighth session;
S. Decides to include an item in the provisional
agenda of the eighth session of the General Assembly
entitled "Review of audit procedures of the United
:\' ations and the specialized agencies".
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

673 (VII). Audit reports relating to expenditure
by specialized agenciee of technical assistance
funds allocated from the Special Account
The General Assembly
1. Accepts the audit reports 18 relating to expenditure by specialized agencies of technical assistance
funds allocated from the Special Account for the period from the inception of the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance to 31 December 1951;
2. Takes note of the observations 17 thereon of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Buclgetary
Questions.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.
18

See document A/C.5/518.

17 See document A/2Z70.
