S/PRST/2009/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6234th meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 December 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council notes with concern the postponement of the first
round of the presidential election, scheduled for 29 November 2009 in the
18 May 2009 communiqué of the Permanent Consultative Framework of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement, which was endorsed by all the main
Ivorian political actors.
“The Security Council welcomes the positive steps taken by the Ivorian
actors, in particular the publication of the provisional voters list and of the list
of candidates. It further welcomes the 3 December 2009 communiqué of the
Permanent Consultative Framework. It commends the Facilitator, President
Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso, for his continued efforts to support the
peace process in Côte d’Ivoire.
“The Security Council takes note that the Permanent Consultative
Framework considered, on the basis of a presentation by the Independent
Electoral Commission, that the postponement of the elections was due to
technical and financial constraints and that the first round of the Presidential
elections would be organized by the end of February or the beginning of
March 2010. It urges the Ivorian actors to address the remaining tasks and to
hold open, free, fair and transparent presidential elections in accordance with
international standards at the earliest possible date.
“The Security Council notes again that the publication of a final voters
list certified by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General is crucial
for the holding of open, free, fair and transparent presidential elections. It
urges the Ivorian stakeholders to meet their commitments to support the
elections and to facilitate this process without delay, in particular during the
38 day phase during which the provisional list can be challenged before
Independent local Electoral Commissions and courts. It urges again the Ivorian
authorities to allow equitable access to public media, consistent with the Code
of Good Conduct for Elections. It reiterates its intention to react as
appropriate, consistent with its resolution 1880 (2009), towards those who
would block the progress of the electoral process.

09-63972 (E) 081209

*0963972*

S/PRST/2009/33

“The Security Council welcomes the signature by President Laurent
Gbagbo on 17 November 2009 of several military rules and regulations,
including seven decrees. It urges the Ivorian parties to make further concrete
progress, before and after the elections, to advance the reunification and
disarmament processes.
“The Security Council recalls that it will review the mandate and the
troop level of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) by
31 January 2010. It reiterates its determination to bring its full support to a
credible electoral process in Côte d’Ivoire. It requests the Secretary-General to
provide to it, in the report referred to in its resolution 1880 (2009), options for
the future direction of UNOCI, in particular in light of the publication of the
final voters list and of a credible electoral timeframe, including preliminary
indications on timing, benchmarks and modalities for a possible drawdown of
the operation.”

2

09-63972
