IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

situation of the refugees continues to be a matter of serious
concern;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General
and to all the staff of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, recognizing
that the Agency is doing all it can within the limits of
available resources, and also expresses its thanks to the
specialized agencies and private organizations for their valuable work in assisting the refugees;
3. Reiterates its request that the headquarters of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East should be relocated to its former site
within its area of operations as soon as practicable;
4. Notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable to find a
means of achieving progress in the implementation of paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III) and requests the Commission to exert continued efforts towards
the implementation of that paragraph and to report to the
Assembly as appropriate, but not later than 1 October 1983;
5. Directs attention to the continuing seriousness of the
financial position of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as outlined
in the report of the Commissioner-General;
6. Notes with concern that, despite the commendable
and successful efforts of the Commissioner-General to collect additional contributions, this increased level of income
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East is still insufficient to cover essential budget requirements in the present year and that, at
currently foreseen levels of giving, deficits will recur each
year;
7. Calls upon all Governments as a matter of urgency
to make the most generous efforts possible to meet the
anticipated needs of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, particularly
in the light of the budgetary deficit projected in the report
of the Commissioner-General, and therefore urges noncontributing Governments to contribute regularly and contributing Governments to consider increasing their regular
contributions.
108th plenary meeting
/6 December 1982

37/121.

International co-operation to avert new flows
of refugees

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 47
Taking note of the comments and suggestions submitted
by Member States, organs and organizations of the United
Nations and specialized agencies in response to General
Assembly resolutions 35/124 of 11 December 1980 and
36/148 of 16 December 1981,
Stressing the importance of adopting a constructive and
future-oriented approach in considering the question of international co-operation to avert new massive flows of
refugees,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 36/148 on international cooperation to avert new flows of refugees;
3. Welcomes the comments and suggestions submitted
in response to General Assembly resolutions 35/ 124 and
36/148 by Member States, organs and organizations of the
United Nations and specialized agencies:
47

A/37/416 and Add. I.

107

4. Decides to enlarge the Group of Governmental Experts on International Co-operation to Avert New Flows of
Refugees, established in accordance with paragraph 4 of
resolution 36/148, from seventeen to twenty-four members;48
5. Reaffirms the mandate of the Group of Governmental
Experts as defined by resolution 36/148 by stressing the
need for members of the Group to embark upon the study
in question in the framework of a constructive, futureoriented approach and in conformity with the spirit which
must form the basis of friendly relations and close cooperation among Member States;
6. Requests the Group of Governmental Experts to be
mindful of the importance of reaching general agreement
whenever that has significance for the outcome of its work;
7. Renews its call upon Member States that have not yet
conveyed to the Secretary-General their comments and suggestions on this item to do so as soon as possible;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a compilation of the replies received in accordance with paragraph
7 above and to provide the Group of Governmental Experts
with all necessary assistance and facilities for the completion
of its task;
9. Calls upon the Group of Governmental Experts to
hold, as soon as possible, the meetings which had already
been arranged and to submit a report to the SecretaryGeneral in time for deliberation by the General Assembly
at its thirty-eighth session;
JO. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "International cooperation to avert new flows of refugees''.
108th plenary meeting
16 December 1982
37/122.

Israel's decision to build a canal linking the
Mediterranean Sea to the Dead Sea

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 36/l 50 of 16 December 1981,
Recalling the rules and principles of international law
relative to the fundamental rights and duties of States,
Bearing in mind the principles of international law relative
to belligerent occupation of land, including the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949, 46 and reaffirming their applicability to all Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 49
Recognizing that the proposed canal, to be constructed
partly through the Gaza Strip, a Palestinian territory occupied in 1967, would violate the principles of international
law and affect the interests of the Palestinian people,
Confident that the canal linking the Mediterranean Sea
with the Dead Sea, if constructed by Israel, will cause direct,
serious and irreparable damage to Jordan's rights and
legitimate vital interests in the economic, agricultural,
demographic and ecological fields,
Noting with regret the non-compliance by Israel with
General Assembly resolution 36/150,
I. Deplores Israel's non-compliance with General
Assembly resolution 36/l 50:
48
One additional seat is to be rotated between the Latin American,
African and Asian regions.
49
A/37/328-S/15277 and Corr. I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-seventh Year, Supplement for April,
Mav and June 1982. document S/15277.

108

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

2. Emphasizes that the canal linking the Mediterranean
Sea with the Dead Sea, if constructed, is a violation of the
rules and principles of international law, especially those
relating to the fundamental rights and duties of States and
to belligerent occupation of land;
3. Demands that Israel not construct this canal and cease
forthwith all actions and/or plans taken towards the implementation of this project:
4. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies, governmental and non-governmental organizations not to assist,
directly or indirectly, in preparations for and execution of
this project and strongly urges national, international and
multinational corporations to do likewise;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor and assess, on a continuing basis and through a competent expert

organ, all aspects-juridical, political, economic, ecological and demographic-of the adverse effects on Jordan and
on the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, arising from the implementation of the Israeli
decision to construct this canal and to forward the findings
of that organ on a regular basis to the General Assembly;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Israel's decision to
build a canal linking the Mediterranean Sea to the Dead
Sea".
108th plenary meeting
16 December 1982
