S/PV.7130

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7130th meeting

Monday, 10 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Ms. Jiang Hua
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Note by the President of the Security Council (S/2014/106)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2014/131)

14-25718 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1425718*

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7130

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

On 8 March, Libyan oil was loaded on a North
Korean flagged vessel, the Morning Glory, by armed
groups that have been blockading a number of oil
terminals and fields in eastern Libya for many months.
That constitutes an illegal act and violates Libya’s
sovereignty over its ports and natural resources.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/106)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2014/131)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Libya to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tarek Mitri,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/131, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. I also wish to draw the attention
of Council members to document S/2014/106, which
contains the note by the President of the Security
Council transmitting the report, prepared in accordance
with paragraph 14 (d) of resolution 2095 (2013), of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1973 (2011).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Tarek Mitri and His Excellency
Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana, Permanent Representative
of Rwanda, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Mitri.
Mr. Mitri: The Council has before it the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (S/2014/131), which covers the events
in that country since his last report on 5 September
2013 (S/2013/516).

2/8

10/03/2014

Three months ago, I spoke before the Council (see
S/PV.7075) of the steady decline in the security situation
across Libya, and of mounting popular frustration with
the political process. I alluded to the strong polarization
resulting from disagreement over the management
of the transition period, reflecting deeper political
and ideological divisions. On 2 March, the General
National Congress building was stormed by protestors
demanding its dissolution. About 150 young men
ransacked the main chamber and assaulted members,
four of whom were injured. I strongly condemned
the violence against the General National Congress
members and premises, re-emphasizing the need to
respect legitimate State institutions. While upholding
the right to freedom of expression, I also made it clear
that the use of force to achieve political objectives is to
be unequivocally rejected.
The decision of the General National Congress on
3 February with regard to the transfer of authority in
due course to a constitutionally elected legislative body
did not defuse tensions ahead of 7 February, the date
some have interpreted — controversially — as that on
which the term of the General National Congress should
have ended. Acknowledging public pressure, that body
opted for early elections, establishing de facto a new
transitional period — a third — to continue until the
end of a longer constitutional process. It has formed
a 15-member committee to consider amendments to
the Constitutional Declaration, issued by the National
Transitional Council in August 2011.
Intense efforts to resolve differences and negotiate
an agreement on the management of the transitional
period, including the future of the General National
Congress and the Government, have not succeeded in
bringing an end to the divisions that have paralysed the
political process. Considerable differences remain over
holding both parliamentary and presidential elections,
and the extent of powers to be granted to a future
president. The application of the political isolation law
remains a contentious issue as well.
Throughout this process, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has consistently

14-25718

10/03/2014

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7130

encouraged the different parties to reach agreement
on the main national priorities and the management
of the transition. To that effect, I convened regular
consultative meetings with leaders of the major political
and civil society forces.

the General National Congress. Strong resentment and
animosity have grown between the two main — though
not homogeneous — camps. Libya faces the risk of
embarking on a new trajectory of unprecedented
violence.

In the previous three months, there has been a
dramatic increase in violence across the country.
In January and early February, clashes took place in
the Warshafana area west of Tripoli, within earshot
of UNSMIL’s compound. In Sabha, in the south, and
Kufra, in the south-east, political, economic and social
grievances spilled over into armed violence between
rival groups, many along ethnic and tribal lines. Former
regime supporters took advantage of the situation to
occupy Government facilities for some time. In Sabha,
violence resulted in over 100 fatalities, including those
of children and the elderly. It also led to the displacement
of hundreds of families and shortages of fuel, food and
medical supplies. In coordination with the national and
local authorities, the United Nations moved quickly to
provide displaced families in Awbari and Sabha with
emergency relief items. Providing relief items to Kufra
is also under way.

On 18 February, two armed brigades gave an
ultimatum to Congress members to step down within
five hours or face military intervention. That escalation
followed a series of attacks against media outlets that
have strongly disapproved of the General National
Congress. In my contacts with political and brigade
leaders and in a public statement, I called for restraint,
warned against resorting to violence and appealed for a
return to political dialogue. In a meeting with the two
brigades, I reiterated that position and asked them to
resolve political problems by political means. It is widely
believed that UNSMIL had a role in helping to avert
violence on that occasion. It is regrettable, however,
that some voices of criticism, and even slander, failed
to recognize the true motives and effects of the United
Nations initiatives.

In the east the unabated campaign of targeted
assassinations, bombings and abductions has reached
intolerable levels. Many victims have been security
and judicial personnel, but civilians have also suffered
unchecked terror and intimidation. The killing in
Benghazi on 24 February of seven Egyptian nationals,
all Christians, is a sad illustration of the dangerous
lawlessness. I take heart from the unequivocal
condemnation and repulsion with which the Libyan
public and leaders have reacted to those killings.
In Benghazi, a city that prides itself on its role
in putting an end to decades of tyrannical rule, the
public’s sense of anger is mounting. While the primary
responsibility for reining in the perpetrators of the ugly
campaign of terror lies with the State, that will only
be possible with concerted efforts by the Government
and political, civic and revolutionary forces for the
protection of the civilian population. I must say that in
that context the United Nations was criticized for what
is seen as its impotence by those whose expectations
extend far beyond what the United Nations Mission
is mandated to do in terms of protecting the civilian
population.
Nation-wide demonstrations have taken place
since early February against the continued tenure of

Mindful of our neutrality, respect of national
sovereignty and strict adherence to non-interference in
the internal affairs of Libya, I have persistently called
on all actors on the Libyan scene to uphold national
interests and refrain from threatening to use force to
resolve political disputes. I also have reiterated the
United Nations support to the safeguarding of the
legitimacy of Libya’s elected institutions and their role
in a peaceful transfer of their authority to an elected
body.
On 20 February, elections took place to the
Constitution Drafting Assembly, with 649 candidates
running in those elections. Fifty-four women competed
for the six reserved seats and 509,043 voters cast
their ballots, representing 46 per cent of the 1,101,541
registered voters. One million Libyans registered to vote
this time, whereas there were 2.7 million in 2012. In
addition to the Amazigh boycott of the polls, there was
a sizeable boycott by the Tabu and Tuareg in the south.
Their stance relates to their demand for a consensual
decision-making mechanism in the Constitution
Drafting Assembly regarding their rights. There had to
be re-run of the polls on 26 February in about 2 per cent
of centres. In some of them, polling did not take place
because of the boycott. Security considerations in the
city of Derna meant that no polling took place there. A
total of 13 seats out of 60 from across Libya have not
been filled.

14-257183/8

S/PV.7130

The situation in Libya

There has been an alarming increase in attacks on
journalists and media institutions. Several television
stations in Tripoli and Benghazi were the target of
armed acts of vandalism. A number of journalists and
media figures were abducted. Attacks on media outlets
and personnel were, and must be, condemned.
In February, the General National Congress
promulgated a law that punishes with imprisonment
any person found to be undermining the 17 February
revolution, publicly insulting the legislative, executive
or judicial authorities or disgracing the national
flag. The law was criticised by many Libyans as
incompatible with Libya’s Constitutional Declaration
and its international human rights obligations. We have
called upon the General National Congress to bring the
law in line with international human rights standards.
On 2 March, the 90-day deadline set by the law
on transitional justice for completing the screening of
detainees expired. Initial figures suggest that the process
has yet to be completed. UNSMIL remains concerned
about reports of continuing torture, deaths in custody,
kidnapping and secret detentions by brigades nominally
affiliated to the Ministries of Justice or Defence. The
handover of all detainees to the effective control of the
State is a prerequisite for the establishment of the rule
of law in the country.
Efforts to strengthen the State’s ability to assume
its security responsibilities continue to be hindered by
the absence of a political agreement over the rebuilding
of a national army, the integration of revolutionary
fighters and the collection of weapons. A solution to that
problem will require a clear strategy and the provision of
a number of assurances to the revolutionaries, who are
only nominally under State authority. That will include
a recognition of their contributions to the revolution
and safeguards for their legitimate rights and interests.
Despite a number of systemic problems, efforts by
the United Nations persevere. In addition to advice and
technical assistance, there has been special attention
given to developing national programmes to control
arms and ammunition stockpiles, heavy weapons and
small arms and light weapons. I am pleased to report
that the Government has responded positively and
taken steps to create a structure to address those issues.
International and well-coordinated support to
Libya is vital. In that regard, I welcome the holding and
results of the Rome conference, held on 6 March with the
participation of a large number of countries, including

4/8

10/03/2014

the five permanent members of the Security Council,
neighbouring countries and other friends of Libya. The
people of Libya expect that the international community
will assist them in the difficult task of building a State
with strong and accountable institutions. Support
to Libya, however, can be meaningful and effective
only if there is unequivocal commitment on the part
of Libya’s leaders to this goal and a political will to
resolve, through dialogue and concerted efforts, the
major problems of the country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Mitri
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Gasana.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
by that resolution. The report covers the period from
10 December 2013 to 10 March 2014, during which
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations.
On 10 February, I provided an open briefing to all
Member States, noting that while the total number of
issues before the Committee had decreased over the
past year, the complexity of the issues had significantly
increased. I reminded delegations that the Committee
and the Panel of Experts relied on the cooperation of
Member States to successfully undertake their work
and asked delegations to respond to the Committee’s
and the Panel’s letters in due course and to consider
favourably any requests for visits made by the Panel.
The Panel, which participated via video-teleconference,
explained the two-way arms embargo, with a focus on
detailing exemptions to the arms embargo into Libya,
highlighting the need for Member States supplying
lethal materiel to the Libyan Government to include
a note from the Libyan body responsible for arms
procurement — the Military Procurement Department
in the Libyan Ministry of Defence — in order to
minimize the risk of supplies being diverted to various
armed groups, who might at a later stage use these
supplies to undermine the Government’s authority.
Concerning the asset freeze, the Panel reported
that some Member States lacked the national legal
framework to properly implement the asset-freeze
measures. Furthermore, the Panel stressed that where
frozen assets belonging to designated individuals were
sought by the Libyan Government on the grounds that

14-25718

10/03/2014

The situation in Libya

they were stolen from the Libyan people, this should
occur only after a competent court had made a finding
to that effect.
Concerning the travel ban, the Panel encouraged
delegations to share with the Committee or the Panel any
information they may have about the listed individuals.
On 15 February 2014, the Committee received the
final report of the Panel of Experts under resolution
2095 (2013). I will briefly summarize some observations
contained in the final report. Concerning the arms
embargo, the Panel concluded that the proliferation of
weapons to and from Libya remained a major challenge
to the stability of Libya and the region. In that context,
the Panel noted that the control of non-State armed
actors over the majority of stockpiles in Libya, as
well as ineffective border control systems, remained
primary obstacles to countering proliferation and that
Libya had become a primary source of illicit weapons,
including man-portable air defence systems. The Panel
further noted that investigations relating to transfers
to 14 countries reflected a highly diversified range
of trafficking dynamics and that trafficking from
Libya was fuelling conflict and insecurity, including
terrorism, on several continents, which was unlikely to
change in the near future.
While the Panel lauded the creation of the Military
Procurement Department as the focal point for security
assistance, it expressed concern about a number of
outstanding issues: the lack of centralized oversight
of military procurement; the absence of identified
procurement focal points for Ministries other than
the Ministry of Defence; the lack of clarity regarding
precise end-users; and the limited capacity of the
various forces to manage and secure their stockpiles.
Finally, the Panel also expressed concern about
transfers to Libya in violation of the arms embargo,
including non-notified deliveries to the national forces
and transfers to non-State end-users, in particular the
civilian market.
Concerning the asset freeze, the Panel focused
its efforts on the hidden assets of listed individuals,
including those of Saadi Al-Qadhafi. The Panel
revealed further instances of Member States lacking
the legislative capacity to implement the assetfreeze measure, which in one instance resulted in the
dissipation of almost $2 million in funds that should
have been frozen. The Panel expressed concern about
the confusion as to the means and the legality of

S/PV.7130

repatriating frozen assets allegedly stolen by designated
individuals to Libya.
With regard to the travel ban, the Panel reported
that two individuals listed under the travel ban, Aisha
Al-Qadhafi and Mohammed Al-Qadhafi, had left
Algeria and travelled to Oman, in violation of the travel
ban, and that it continued to investigate an alleged plot
to smuggle Saadi Al-Qadhafi and his family to Mexico
in 2011.
The Committee discussed the report and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in informal
consultations on 26 February. The report was generally
well received and lauded for its wealth of information.
The main points that emerged from the discussion
were the serious concern about the persistent arms
proliferation from Libya; the need to further clarify
arms procurement structures and procedures in Libya;
cooperation with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya concerning the storage and security of stockpiles;
and how to carry forward the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts. Of the 15 recommendations, the
Committee agreed to take follow-up action on 9. Two
recommendations required no action and the Committee
simply took note of them, and two recommendations
were addressed to the Security Council. The Committee
put on hold the remaining two recommendations
pending the outcome of follow-up action related to
other recommendations.
Lastly, let me refer to some updated statistics on
the issues dealt with by the Committee since the last
periodic report to the Council. In relation to the arms
embargo, the Committee approved two exemption
requests and received two notifications on which no
negative decision was taken. The Committee also
responded to one request for guidance from a Member
State.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Gasana
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, and the Luxembourg
delegation on your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council this month. I thank you for the
opportunity to address the Council at this meeting.
Allow me to begin by expressing my gratitude to
Mr. Tarek Mitri, Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his briefing and for

14-257185/8

S/PV.7130

The situation in Libya

his efforts in that role to assist the Libyan people in
establishing democracy and building State institutions.
I would also like to express my deep gratitude to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
continued dedication and efforts to support the Libyan
people and authorities at this sensitive stage.I also
thank His Excellency Ambassador Gasana, Permanent
Representative of sisterly Rwanda and Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for his
briefing on the work of the Committee in recent
months and for presenting the report of the Panel of
Experts (S/2014/106, annex). And I would like to
thank all Council members for continuing to express
their understanding of this stage of Libyan history
and the complex requirements of the situation on the
ground, as well as their continued readiness to support
the legitimate authorities in guaranteeing Libya’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
There was a very short time period between the
date of today’s meeting and the issuing of the Arabic
translation of the report of the Panel of Experts. We
were therefore unable to obtain the Government’s
opinion concerning certain points contained in the
report. I will therefore confine myself to some general
remarks and preliminary comments based on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/131) and the report of
the Panel of Experts.
There is no doubt that not one Libyan would deny
that the situation in Libya is not as we would desire.
More than two years since the fall of the Al-Qadhafi
dictatorship, we have yet to succeed in creating genuine
institutions. To date, we have failed to create a central
body to enforce the rule of law, deter violators and
prevent impunity. That is the main cause of the weak
central authority. Libyans — nearly all of them — agree
on the dire need to change the working methods at the
highest levels of authority and in most sectors in order
to achieve true progress.
That could appear difficult, in the light of the
political rivalries among various factions and the
excessive personal ambitions of some political leaders,
and even some military leaders. However, the Libyan
people in general are determined to correct the
situation and to achieve the objectives that made up
the foundation of the revolution. The Libyan people are
confident in the support of all friendly peoples, and I
myself am confident that a fundamental change will be
seen this year in the Libyan political scene.

6/8

10/03/2014

Ensuring security remains the first priority for
Libyan citizens. Without security, authorities cannot
function, citizens are unable to carry out economic
activities and development remains unrealized.
However, security cannot be achieved merely by
pressuring the Libyan authorities to carry out their
responsibilities, whether such pressure is domestic or
international. What is needed is the practical support
of the international community in responding to the
requests of the Libyan Government, providing advice,
supporting and building capabilities and extraditing
fugitives.
Today, Libya faces two threats in the security
domain. The first concerns extremist groups with
international associations and linkages that seek, by all
possible means, to restructure the State based on their
own vision. They use violence and terrorism to prevent
the emergence of any legitimate force they perceive as
a threat.
The second threat is manifested by remnants of the
prior regime, including groups that have retained their
weapons in various areas of the country and are seeking
to undermine stability at every opportune moment,
with coordination and direct support from senior
officials of the former regime who now live outside of
Libya, especially those residing in Egypt, the United
Kingdom, Germany and some Eastern European States.
The events of the first week of February and subsequent
investigations of those involved have proven the extent
of the involvement of leaders of the previous regime,
especially those in the Niger, Tunisia and Egypt.
On this occasion, I cannot forget to thank the
Government of the sisterly nation of the Niger for
its quick response to Libyan demands to expedite
Abdallah Mansour — a military leader of the former
regime — and Saadi Al-Qadhafi, after those authorities
verified that they were involved in undermining Libya’s
stability.
We hope that sisterly Egypt will also respond to
the Libyan Government’s request and extradite the
wanted individuals who are now in Egypt as soon as
possible, especially since their destructive activities
would engage the efforts of the Libyan authorities and
keep them busy, thus undermining efforts to control the
borders and prevent weapons smuggling. That, in turn,
would have negative repercussions on Egypt’s security.
The extradition of fugitives and wanted individuals
is not only a bilateral issue, but an international

14-25718

10/03/2014

The situation in Libya

commitment according to Security Council resolutions
calling upon States to assist Libya in combating
impunity. We therefore encourage the Council to not
lose sight of the matter.
I would like to point out that Libya’s weak central
authority and the Government’s lack of a deterrence
force have encouraged certain outlaws to disrupt oil
exporting ports by force. As a result, Libya’s income
over the past several months has declined by over
70 per cent, compared to normal levels, leading to a
huge treasury deficit that is currently being off-set by
the Government’s sovereign accounts. If the situation
were to continue and current spending levels remain
the same without any austerity measures, the country
could face bankruptcy, resulting in threats to and the
undermining of the social order.
Those outlaws have transgressed every boundary
in their attempts to export oil by illegitimate means.
They even succeeded recently in convincing an oil
tanker to come to the port of Sidra in order to take on
a quarter of a million gallons of crude oil, the proceeds
of which were then diverted to that outlaw group. In
that regard, I would like to warn every party connected
to that tanker, whether the ship’s flag State, the nation
to which the owner of the tanker belongs or the State
to receive the oil shipment, that they are all parties to
a violation of Libya’s sovereigntyand to the crimes of
smuggling and piracy of the resources of the Libyan
people. That will have very serious consequences. The
Libyan authorities, present and future, will not tolerate
it.
In this forum, I would also like to draw the
international community’s attention to the fact that
the Libyan authorities, despite their scanty defence
resources, have taken steps necessary to detain the ship
and prosecute its crew. The international community,
and the States concerned for protecting the safety of
the Mediterranean environment, should help Libya to
enforce national and international law by detaining the
ship so that we will not have to use force against it,
since such a step would definitely result in polluting of
vast areas of the Mediterranean’s waters and coasts and
would require international efforts and huge resources
to bring under control. The Libyan Government hopes
that the Security Council will take a clear position
on the matter that emphasizes its support for Libya’s
sovereignty over its territory and resources.
Regarding the assets freeze, I would like to
remind that Security Council resolutions oblige United

S/PV.7130

Nations Member States to identify and freeze assets
owned or controlled by individuals and entities listed
on sanctions lists. That can be carried out only if the
States involved issue directives to financial institutions
on their territories.
Unfortunately, many have not done so, despite
suspicions of the existence of assets belonging to
individuals and entities on those lists in those States’
territories. The Panel of Experts notes, in paragraph
219 of its report that it found no country among those
visited had the capability of freezing assets subject
to only a designation of individuals or entities in a
Security Council resolution. In paragraph 221, the
Panel also says that
“[t]his situation has serious implications for the
implementation of the asset freeze measures under
the Libyan sanctions regime, as well as on extant
asset freeze measures and any similar measures
that may be imposed by the Security Council in
the future. The lack of capability of some Member
States to fulfil their obligations under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations nullifies the
effectiveness of such measures.”
Accordingly, Libya strongly supports the Panel’s
recommendation in paragraphs 189 (b) and 190 of its
report. I should mention that Libya follows due process
regarding all frozen assets in order to prove that they
belong to the Libyan people, and demands their return
through judicial processes in the countries where those
assets are located. Libya relies on the good intentions of
the Governments involved in expediting such processes
and the return of the assets to the Libyan people as soon
as possible, as is specified in the Security Council’s
resolutions.
Concerning the arms embargo, I reaffirm that any
request for approval of exports of weapons to Libya that
is not made through the Mission of Libya to the the
United Nations or with its knowledge will be considered
to be a request from a party that does not belong to
the Libyan Government, and the exporting party will
take responsibility for that before the Security Council.
I also affirm that the Military Purchases Department
of the Ministry of Defence is the party responsible for
requests to obtain arms import permits, and that the
Minister of Defence is the only official responsible for
issuing end-user certificates.
Mr. Ali Zeidan, the Prime Minister of Libya,
has sent a letter to the Secretary-General and to you,

14-257187/8

S/PV.7130

The situation in Libya

Madam President, as President of the Security Council,
in which he requests an extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya for another
year. We hope that the Council will respond positively to
that request so that the Mission will be able to continue
in its support for the Libyan people at this critical stage
in their history. The Mission’s role is indispensable at
this stage. Libyans are grateful to the United Nations
for the support the Mission provides in deferent area,
and hope that support will continue. We look forward
to increased support from the Council so that we can
achieve security, justice and national reconciliation and
transition to truly democratic rule. We hope that the
Security Council will be more responsive to the Libyan
people’s aspirations by approving the following actions.
First, listing more individuals from among the
officials of the former regime on the travel-ban and

8/8

10/03/2014

assets-freeze lists, especially those who are live in
Egypt. Secondly, demanding that all States freeze
the assets of all officials of the former regime whose
Libyan assets have been frozen and to approve the
automatic return of those assets to the Libyan people
once it has been proved that they belong to the Libyan
people, without having to refer to the Sanctions
Committee. Thirdly, responding quickly to any request
submitted by the Libyan Government for a designation
on the travel-ban and asset-freeze lists of individuals,
businesspeople and entities who cooperated with the
family of Al-Qadhafi and his senior officials.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

14-25718
