S/2021/890

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 October 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020)
and 2585 (2021)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the seventy-fifth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018),
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020), paragraph 3 of resolution 2533 (2020) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2585 (2021), in the last four of which the Council requested
the Secretary-General to provide a report at least every 60 days on the implementation
of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to entities of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Sy rian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from entities of the United Nations system
regarding their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the months of August
and September 2021.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
Violence further intensified in the Idlib de-escalation area in the
north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period,
including intensified airstrikes, mutual shelling and limited clashes, amid
a surge in coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases. In northern Aleppo
Governorate, mutual shelling, airstrikes, occasional skirmishes and raids
across contact lines increased.
2.
Millions of people across the north and north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic are affected by the water crisis and are un able to reliably access
sufficient and safe water on a regular basis, owing to the unprecedented
low water levels of the Euphrates, erratic and low rainfall, the reduced

21-14722 (E)

251021

*2114722*

S/2021/890

operational capacity of Uluk water station and disruptions to the water
system. The prevalence of waterborne diseases in the affected areas has
risen. The loss of crops and of agricultural livelihoods will likely worsen
already high rates of food insecurity and malnutrition. Women and girls
are disproportionately affected owing to their pro minent role in the
agriculture sector. To respond to pressing needs, the United Nations
released a consolidated plan targeting 3.4 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance.
3.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) verified 206 incidents during the reporting period in
which at least 126 civilians, including 17 women and 44 children, were
killed as a result of hostilities. In addition, at least 197 civilians, including
24 women and 74 children, were injured as a result of hostilities across the
Syrian Arab Republic.
4.
In the south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, heavy shelling and
intensified ground clashes across parts of Dar‘a Governorate in August, in
particular in the Dar‘a al-Balad neighbourhood, displaced more than
38,000 people. Civilians who remained in Dar‘a al-Balad had restricted
access to food and to basic goods and services. In early September,
following the negotiation of a new agreement between the parties, the
security situation in Dar‘a al-Balad stabilized. Most of the displaced
persons returned home and public services are being restored.
5.
COVID-19 transmission rates in the Syrian Arab Republic remained
high, exacerbating an already dire humanitarian situation. In the northwest, a surge of the COVID-19 Delta variant since the end of August led
to more than 1,000 people testing positive daily, further taxing an
overburdened health system. Across the country, only 1.6 per cent of the
population has been fully vaccinated.
6.
Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and their
partners continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. This included
World Food Programme (WFP) food assistance for 5.0 million people in
August and 4.8 million people in September, across all 14 governorates,
as well as increased cross-line deliveries and a continuation of the crossborder mechanism. On 31 August, WFP completed a cross-line delivery of
food and nutrition assistance from government-controlled Aleppo city,
Aleppo Governorate, to a warehouse in opposition-controlled Sarmada
city, Idlib Governorate. This is the first cross-line delivery to the northwest of the Syrian Arab Republic since 2017.
7.
The access landscape in the Syrian Arab Republic remains complex,
with different geographical areas and different types of services requiring
the use of different operating modalities. In the north -east, between
January and September, 1,575 trucks containing humanitarian assistance
crossed lines, an average of 175 a month. In August and September, the
World Health Organization (WHO) delivered three cross-line shipments,
including two airlifts and one road convoy, and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) supported cross-line deliveries by 31 trucks of
over 40 tons of supplies, while other United Nations agencies also
provided cross-line assistance. During the reporting period, 13
consignments consisting of 470 trucks crossed into the north -west of the
Syrian Arab Republic from Turkey through cross-border operations, all
through the Bab al-Hawa crossing.

2/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

Humanitarian update
3.
Violence further intensified in the Idlib de-escalation area in the north-west of
the Syrian Arab Republic, coinciding with a significant surge in COVID -19 cases.
Airstrikes and mutual shelling continued to kill and injure civilians, including women
and children. Aerial bombardments intensified mostly south of the M4 highway,
damaging civilian infrastructure almost daily. Airstrikes also reportedly impacted on
the outskirts of an internally displaced persons camp in Ma‘arratmisrin in early
September. Mutual shelling and clashes between armed opposition groups and
government and pro-government forces across contact lines in the Idlib de-escalation
area continued.
4.
Mutual shelling, airstrikes, occasional skirmishes and raids across contact lines
intensified in the northern part of Aleppo Governorate, including airstrikes in the
southern countryside of Afrin district. For the first time since the ceasefire in March
2020, violence affected Bab town and surrounding areas. On 5 and 6 August, shelling
injured at least 24 civilians and caused structural damage to civilian homes.
Improvised explosive device attacks also continued, and unclaimed vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device attacks in Bab and Afrin killed civilians.
5.
Millions of people are affected by the water crisis across the north and north-east
and are unable to reliably access sufficient and safe water regularly owing to a range
of factors, including the unprecedented low water levels of the Euphrates, erratic and
low rainfall, the reduced operational capacity of Uluk water station and disruptions to
the water system. The prevalence of waterborne diseases in the affected areas has
risen, placing additional strain on a public health system already debilitated by years
of crisis and overburdened by the COVID-19 pandemic. Poor rainfall and drastically
reduced irrigation have also led to loss of crops and of agricultural livelihoods. This
is expected to significantly worsen the already high rates of food insecurity and
malnutrition in the region. Because women comprise 70 per cent of the agriculture
workforce, and 25 per cent of households are headed by women, women’s incomes are
particularly affected if insufficient water to irrigate lands leads to crop losses. Lack of
access to safe, potable and clean water also has an impact on the health of women and
girls, including their reproductive health. On 9 September, the United Nations released
a plan entitled “Water crisis in northern and northeast Syria: immediate response and
funding requirements” to respond to the needs of some 3.4 million people in the
governorates of Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah, Raqqah and in north-eastern Aleppo who
have been affected by the water crisis. Projections suggest consecutive anomalous dry
conditions in the upcoming winter season, potentially exacerbating the already dire
economic and agricultural outlook and further affecting livelihoods and food
insecurity.
6.
At Uluk water station, pumping remained limited during the reporting period.
From 20 August to 10 September, the station stopped functioning as a result of
insufficient electricity and a reduction in the access needed for technicians to carry
out maintenance and repairs. On 10 September, the power supply from Darbasiyah
power station was reinstated and Uluk water station started to pump again. Water
supply subsequently reached the Tall Tamr area and the Himmah reservoir. On
12 September, a technical team was able to access Uluk water station to conduct
repairs and maintenance. At the end of the reporting period, Uluk water s tation
remained functional, with 22 of its 34 boreholes functioning.
7.
Disruption of potable and agricultural water continued to be reported in the city
of Bab and the surrounding areas, affecting some 185,000 people. Bab has been
among the top subdistricts reporting waterborne diseases across the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2017. The United Nations continued to advocate for the
resumption of water supply to the city from the Ayn al-Bayda station.
21-14722

3/25

S/2021/890

8.
Some 58,400 people, 93 per cent of them women and children, remained at Hawl
camp as of the end September. Some 77 per cent of the children were under the age
of 12. The security situation at the camp further deteriorated during the reporting
period, with OHCHR documenting 11 murders and the injury of three civilians by
unidentified perpetrators. Since January 2021, there have been at least 77 murders
and 26 attempted murders. Access to food, medical care, clean water, protection and
other basic services remains limited and the spread of COVID -19 is of concern.
Regular threats and attacks against humanitarian workers, including camp
management staff, forced some aid organizations to suspend programmes,
jeopardizing access to even the most basic services. The United Nations continued to
advocate for the provision of security at the camp in a manner that does not endanger
residents or violate their rights and that does not restrict humanitarian access.
9.
Da’esh, which has been designated as a terrorist group by the Security Council,
continued to launch attacks in areas across Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah and eastern rural
Homs. The destruction of a major gas pipeline south-east of Damascus led to power
outages in the city and surrounding areas. Government and pro -government forces
carried out counter-Da’esh operations in multiple areas of the central Syrian desert.
Separately, the Syrian Democratic Forces continued their counter-Da’esh operations.
10. In the southern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, heavy shelling and intensified
ground clashes across parts of Dar‘a Governorate in August, in particular in the Dar‘a
al-Balad neighbourhood, displaced over 38,000 people, including almost 15,000
women and more than 20,000 children. Civilians who remained in Dar‘a al -Balad
faced acute shortages of food, water, electricity, fuel and cooking gas, while health
facilities experienced gaps in medical supplies. The Shifa’ Hospital and the National
Hospital of Dar‘a were reportedly hit by mortars on 30 August, resulting in minor
structural damage. In early September, following the negotiation of a new agreement
between parties, the security situation in Dar‘a al-Balad stabilized. Several security
incidents continued to be reported across the south-west, however, including
exchanges of fire, ambushes and targeted killings.
11. Since civilian movement to and from the area began, 77 per cent of displaced
persons have returned home, including all those residing in shelters. Around 10 per
cent of internally displaced persons living in host communities have reported the
severe damage that has occurred to their homes as presenting a barrier to their return.
Explosive hazard contamination has also reportedly hampered returns. Schools in
Dar‘a reopened on 12 September. In Dar‘a al-Balad, public services such as water,
electricity and telecommunication networks are being restored. Dar‘a al-Balad and
Tishrin bakeries have resumed operations after a two-month suspension. Food
distributions recommenced across the Governorate on 10 September, damaged
schools were rehabilitated and some humanitarian partners have resumed regular
programming in Dar‘a al-Balad.
12. The United Nations remained without humanitarian access to the 12,000 people
living in Rukban. Residents of the Rukban area continue to live in dire conditions,
with limited access to food, water, health care and other basic services. Efforts by the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the United Nations to support the voluntary transfer of
some residents on 11 September had to be cancelled when drivers were accosted upon
arrival at the camp (see para. 55 below). The United Nations continued to advocate
for immediate humanitarian access and assistance to reach those who remained at the
camp.
13. COVID-19 transmission rates in the Syrian Arab Republic remained high and
likely far beyond official records, exacerbating an already dire humanitarian situation.
Laboratory capacity remains insufficient. Protective and medical equipment are in short
supply. As at 1 October, some 34,600 cases, including 2,247 deaths, had been reported
4/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

by the Ministry of Health. In the first three weeks of September the reported case load
for COVID-19 had increased by 70 per cent, raising concerns of a fourth wave across
the country. This has had a severe impact on hospitals, and hospitals that have been
assigned to the case management of severe COVID-19 cases are now 100 per cent
occupied. Many primary health-care facilities and hospitals have had to suspend
services owing to the growing number of infections among health staff. The situation
is particularly dire in the north-west, where a surge of the COVID-19 Delta variant
since the end of August led to more than 1,000 people testing positive daily. There has
been a 170 per cent increase in the total number of positive cases in September alone,
overburdening intensive care units and further stretching the health system. In addition
to a severe oxygen shortage, limited equipment to test for COVID-19 is also an issue.
This spike is also affecting the ability of women and adolescent girls to access sexual
and reproductive health services, including maternal health services.
14. Vaccinations are under way across the Syrian Arab Republic, prioritizing health care workers, the elderly, people with comorbidities and teachers. On 15 August, the
Syrian Arab Republic received the second batch of vaccines provided through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, totalling 138,240 doses, of
which 11,232 doses were sent to the north-eastern part of the country. An additional
170,400 doses were received in September, of which 12,800 doses were also sent to
the north-east. The next tranche of vaccines provided through the COVAX Facility of
244,800 doses is expected shortly. A separate shipment of more than 36,480 doses
was sent to the north-west part of the country on 15 August. A third and fourth batch
of vaccines provided through the COVAX Facility, of 358,800 and 45,200 doses,
respectively, crossed into the north-west on 3 and 13 September. The north-eastern
part of the Syrian Arab Republic received an additional 41,000 doses alloc ated
through bilateral donations. As at 30 September 2021, a total of 835,917 doses of
COVAX Facility and bilaterally donated vaccines had been administered, including
146,120 doses administered in the north-west. To date, only 1.6 per cent of the
population is fully vaccinated. Coverage of routine immunization dropped in 2020
owing to limitations of movement and fears of infection by COVID -19, in addition to
the effects of the economic crisis on family incomes.
15. The economic crisis continued to affect civilians across the country. According
to WFP data in August 2021, 44 per cent of interviewed households in the Syrian Arab
Republic reported poor or borderline food consumption, an increase from 41 per cent
a year ago. This trend was higher among households headed by women (49 per cent)
compared with households headed by men (43 per cent), and was more pronounced
among internally displaced persons (53 per cent) and returnees (47 per cent) compared
with residents (39 per cent). This deterioration highlights a sustained worsening trend
in the food security situation across the country. Based on data from the Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), wheat production for 2021 is
estimated at around 1.05 million tons, compared with 2.8 million in 2020, and is only
a quarter of the pre-crisis average of 4.1 million tons (during the period 2002 –2011),
posing a risk of wheat and flour shortages in the Syrian Arab Republic and worsening
food insecurity. The worsening economic situation has had a further impact on
production and transportation costs as well as on the availability of quality seeds and
livestock feed for farmers.
16. The latest household survey conducted by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and WFP under their socioeconomic impact assessment indicated
a decreased monthly income in July 2021 compared with July 2020 for 37 per cent of
surveyed households. One in five micro- or small businesses surveyed had to close,
and others reported a decrease in their financial profitability. The further erosion of
purchasing power and the degradation in households’ economic capacity pushed nearly
7 of 10 households interviewed in August (69 per cent) to buy food on credit,
21-14722

5/25

S/2021/890

representing an increase of 5 per cent year-on-year, with a wider share recorded among
households headed by women (76 per cent). The high price of commodities and the
limited livelihood opportunities in the Syrian Arab Republic have also led many
families to adopt food-based coping strategies, such as reducing the number of meals.
Update on overall developments
17. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria announced the convening
of the sixth session of the small body of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva from
18 to 22 October. This announcement came after intense engagement with Syrian
interlocutors, including the Co-Chairs of the Constitutional Committee nominated by
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition Syrian Negotiations
Committee, and regional and international actors, which facilitated agreement by the
Co-Chairs on the methodology for the Constitutional Committee, thus paving the way
for the Committee to work on a process of drafting constitutional reforms, in
accordance with its mandate and in line with its terms of reference and core rules of
procedure (S/2019/775).
18. The Special Envoy continued to emphasize the importance of a nationwide
ceasefire as a necessary step in any peace process. He continued t o stress the
importance of action on the crucial matter of detainees, abductees and missing
persons as a humanitarian and human rights imperative and as a step towards building
trust between parties to the conflict. The Special Envoy also continued to seek the
engagement of international actors on issues of common concern and interest that can
build trust and momentum towards a political solution to the conflict, in line with
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
Protection
19. Civilians across the Syrian Arab Republic continued to suffer the direct and
indirect consequences of armed conflict and violence. From 1 August to 26 September,
OHCHR documented 206 incidents in which at least 126 civilia ns, including 17
women and 44 children, were killed as a result of hostilities. In addition, at least 197
civilians, including 24 women and 74 children, were injured. Hostilities included
airstrikes, ground-based strikes and attacks carried out by improvised explosive
devices and explosive remnants of war, as well as armed clashes and targeted killings
at the hands of various parties to the conflict or by unidentified perpetrators.
20. Military activity and violence perpetrated by parties to the conflict c ontinued to
have a severe impact on civilians and civilian objects across the Syrian Arab Republic.
Civilians continued to be killed and injured by intermittent shelling and airstrikes in
the Idlib de-escalation area and in surrounding areas, as well as by fighting between
and within various armed groups in the northern and eastern parts of the country.
Many of these attacks appeared to be targeting civilians or were carried out near
locations of civilian character. Considering the patterns observed, it app ears that
parties to the conflict have seemingly failed to respect key principles under
international humanitarian law.
21. The highest number of civilian casualties were documented in government controlled areas, where at least 46 civilians, including 5 women and 12 children, were
killed and at least 67 civilians, including 8 women and 27 children, were injured by
ground-based strikes, drive-by shootings and explosive remnants of war.
22. In Dar‘a, hostilities escalated between pro-government forces and former armed
opposition forces. From 1 August to 5 September, OHCHR documented at least 15
civilian deaths, including 3 women and 5 children, and 32 civilian injuries, including
4 women and 9 children. OHCHR also documented damage to three mosques and six
schools.
6/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

23. Parties to the conflict continued to systematically target civilians, including
through killings, arbitrary deprivation of liberty, torture, ill-treatment and
kidnappings, and continued to violate civilian’s rights to freedom of movement and
expression, peaceful assembly and association.
24. Parties to the conflict continued to arbitrarily detain individuals in areas under
their control. In most cases documented by OHCHR, detain ees were denied
information about the reasons for their arrest and their rights to due process. The
families of detainees were denied information concerning their whereabouts, raising
concern that, in some cases, such detention may constitute enforced disa ppearance.
OHCHR continued to document cases of detainees who died in custody, allegedly
owing to natural causes. Families either coincidently learned about these deaths or
when government authorities contacted them directly. In many such cases, individual s
appeared to have been subjected to enforced disappearance and their detention by the
Government did not become known until their deaths were acknowledged. The bodies
were rarely returned to their families. Family members were also denied the
opportunity to question the cause of death stated in the notification or to know the
whereabouts of the bodies.
25. Ongoing hostilities continued to impede civilians’ access to health care and
education. Parties to the conflict continued to systematically intimidate a nd target
civilians, including those working in education, health services and the media, as well
as humanitarian personnel. Such tactics included arbitrary deprivation of liberty as
well as attacks using improvised explosive devices. Women and girls conti nued to be
at risk for multiple forms of gender-based violence, including early marriage.
26. During the reporting period, four verified incidents caused damage to educational
facilities. On 18 August, Banin al-Balad secondary school, in Dar‘a al-Balad
neighbourhood, Dar‘a city, sustained structural damage in crossfire. On 27 August, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) supported Safsaf and Ayn Karim schools in Dar‘a camp when they were
damaged after several reported ground-based strikes landed in Dar‘a city. On
3 September, one missile in Ayn al-Arus town, Idlib Governorate, fell inside school
premises, damaging the building. On 5 September, several rockets hit an educational
institute in Ma‘arratmisrin town, causing civilian casualties, including six children,
and destroyed the building. Additional incidents have yet to be verified as part of the
United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism.
27. The Surveillance System for attacks on health care of WHO reported six
incidents affecting health care during the reporting period, with one health -care
provider killed and two others injured. The attacks impacted the Suwayda’ public
hospital (Zaid Ash-Shariti), the Damascus public hospital (Al-Mujtahid), the National
Hospital of Dar‘a and the Dar‘a Shifa’ Hospital in August, and the Dar‘a al -Balad
Health Centre of the Ministry of Health in September.
Humanitarian response
28. Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and their partners
continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic (see table 1). Assistance included
WFP food assistance for 5.0 million people in August and 4.8 million people in
September across all 14 governorates. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) supported 126 operational community/
satellite centres and 117 mobile units across the country, providing integrated
protection services to persons of concern. Explosive ordnance risk education teams
trained by the Mine Action Service delivered awaren ess sessions to over 18,630
civilians, promoting safe behaviour in communities most affected by explosive
ordnance contamination. The United Nations continued to support the COVID -19
21-14722

7/25

S/2021/890

response across the Syrian Arab Republic, including by enhancing surveill ance and
diagnostic capacity, procuring vital medical supplies and equipment, supporting
clinical readiness, protecting the delivery of essential health -care services, supporting
protective measures in schools, promoting vaccine acceptance and supporting t he
roll-out of vaccinations.
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other organizations
through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic: August and September 2021
Organization

Average number of
people reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

30 900

International Organization for Migration

161 500

Mine Action Service

18 630

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

430 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

650 000

United Nations Development Fund

43 300

United Nations Population Fund

221 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

173 500

World Food Programme

4 900 000

World Health Organization

844 000

29. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, assistance provided by United Nations
agencies included WFP food assistance for 3.7 million people in August and for
3.5 million people in September. UNHCR reached 430,000 people with protection,
shelter and core relief items. FAO assisted 61,850 people through regular
programming. WHO supported the Ministry of Health in conducting a national
COVID‐19 vaccination campaign from 5 to 16 September and delivered essential
equipment and devices to laboratories to boost testing capacities. The Mine Action
Service carried out 37 assessment missions in western Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, in
agriculture and residential zones to mark areas for clearance. UNICEF provided
262,000 people, including more than 145,200 children, in nine subdistricts with safe
water. Through mobile teams and fixed clinics in 91 subdistricts, UNICEF provided
outpatient consultations to over 131,600 people, 110,100 of them children. UNRWA
provided cash assistance for 347,900 Palestine refugees.
30. Among the cross-border humanitarian assistance delivered into the north-west
of the Syrian Arab Republic, WFP delivered food assistance for 1.3 million people
each month in August and September. To respond to the urgent shelter needs of
displaced people and host communities, UNHCR assisted 27,000 people in Idlib
Governorate through four cross-border trans-shipments. The International
Organization for Migration brought multisectoral assistance to 202,000 people.
UNFPA continued to build local health-care capacities and to support the provision
of quality, lifesaving reproductive health services to the most vulnerable people in the
north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, providing 122,000 pregnant and lactating
women with monthly e-vouchers to purchase hygiene items and reaching more than
440,900 women with reproductive health and gender-based violence services. These
efforts have focused on laying the foundation for longer-term health system recovery
and resilience, including by supporting health emergency risk management capacities.

8/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

Delivery and monitoring of cross-border assistance
31. As with aid programming from within the Syrian Arab Republic, cross -border
deliveries are conducted in line with humanitarian principles and based on
independent assessments of need. All United Nations operations are conducted in
response to needs identified in the annual humanitarian needs overview. Individual
United Nations system entities delivering humanitarian programming also regularly
assess needs through their monitoring operations, and joint assessments are
conducted, including in response to systemic shocks such as the COVID -19
pandemic. Based on those assessments, individual cross-border shipments are
initiated by the United Nations and coordinated with humanitarian partners.
32. Assistance delivered through the United Nations cross-border mechanism is
monitored throughout its delivery at four distinct levels: (a) at the border by the
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Repub lic, which verifies
the humanitarian nature of United Nations cross-border assistance; (b) at warehouses
inside the Syrian Arab Republic, where aid is confirmed upon arrival at warehouses
by trusted and vetted implementing partners and by United Nations-contracted thirdparty monitors; (c) at distribution points, where videos and time -stamped, geotagged
photos are used; and (d) after distribution with beneficiaries, including through
beneficiary interviews and community feedback mechanisms. United Nations
agencies’ transparency and accountability systems have been adapted to individual
operational needs, such as Quick Response Codes to track individual items in real
time, end-to-end third-party monitoring systems that track supplies from the
warehouse in Turkey to the beneficiary, and monitoring at distribution sites
throughout the distribution process. These monitoring and oversight measures are
further outlined in the report of the Secretary General on the review of United Nations
humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations (S/2020/401).
33. The United Nations continues to engage with donors and partners to ensure
accountability, including preventing aid diversion in areas where Security Council designated terrorist organizations are present. Transparency is critical in such a
complex operating environment, and the United Nations works closely with
implementing partners and donors on all aspects of the response. Regular reviews are
being conducted to ensure that aid is going exclusively to the civilians who are in
greatest need. Systems are in place to identify and respond to any reports of aid not
reaching the intended beneficiaries.
Cross-border distribution mechanisms
34. In the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance is provided
through different cross-border distribution mechanisms. Food and non-food items are
provided directly (in-kind assistance) or in some cases indirectly through cash or
voucher systems. Beneficiaries of in-kind food or non-food items are selected according
to needs-based assessments undertaken by humanitarian organizations and based on
agreed eligibility and vulnerability criteria. Humanitarian partners in the north -west
perform distributions at a specific time and place, often monthly, at a market square or
other central location, or through door-to-door distributions (owing to, in particular,
COVID-19-related preventive measures). People must show proof of identification and
match their names to distribution lists verified by the implementing partners.
35. According to the latest numbers available, 13 per cent of food assistance was
delivered as cash and voucher in July, while cash/voucher assistance represented
approximately 23 per cent of the total assistance for non-food items in August. People
receiving vouchers or cash are selected on the basis of needs assessments and agreed
eligibility and vulnerability criteria, similar to beneficiaries of in -kind assistance. The
mode of assistance chosen in each location is based on a determination of the most
21-14722

9/25

S/2021/890

efficient means of meeting critical needs. Prior to starting the programme, a market
assessment is performed to assess the availability and frequency of supplies in
markets, as well as the accessibility of markets and vendor capacity. Paper vouchers
with a security seal and a serial number are created for use at verified vendors. People
receive their vouchers at an agreed location on a specific day and must show proof of
identification. All used vouchers are collected from the vendors for verification. For
cash assistance, an agreed amount of money is transferred to the individual based on
the survival minimum expenditure basket, which is reviewed and updated monthly by
a technical working group. People obtain their cash through a money service
contracted by the implementing partner for the delivery.
36. Other forms of assistance are provided through a wide range of services,
including, but not limited to, supplying existing medical facilities with essential
health items and schools with fuel and providing protection services for gender-based
violence cases and support for livelihood activities. Medications are supplied to
pharmacies or medical facilities for their use, requiring pres criptions. Support also
includes providing salaries to medical workers and teachers.
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners (see
annex II) through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: August and
September 2021 (monthly average)
(Thousands)

1 306

483
24
Early
recovery/
livelihood

0

Nutrition

22

1

94

Non-food
Education
items/shelter

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners through cross -border
deliveries, by sector and by district: August and September 2021 (monthly average)

10/25

Governorate

District

Early
recovery/
livelihood

Aleppo

Afrin

2 477

–

27 500

–

900

–

–

Aleppo

Bab

4 133

–

–

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

352

–

43 454

750

1 500

–

4 500

Aleppo

Jarabulus

306

–

–

–

1 500

–

–

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

255

–

55 000

–

–

–

75 000

Idlib

Harim

974

–

319 461

–

4 375

–

14 241

Idlib

Idlib

8 577

992

38 013

1 304 974

13 500

–

–

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

7 282

–

–

–

–

–

–

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

21-14722

S/2021/890

37. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee Migration Monitoring,
which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Early recovery and livelihoods activities
38. Early recovery and livelihoods activities represent a core pillar of the
humanitarian response in the Syrian Arab Republic, with the aim of enabling people
in need to regain their way of life by reconnecting them with essential services and
livelihood opportunities. The United Nations and its partners support early recovery
and livelihoods projects across five distinct domains: (a) repair and rehabilitation of
critical civilian infrastructure; (b) removal of debris and solid waste; (c) income generating activities and market-based interventions; (d) vocational and skills
training; and (e) social cohesion and community interventions.
39. Early recovery interventions are based on rigorous analyses of drivers of local
conflict as well as local power dynamics to ensure that patterns of inequality and
exclusion are not perpetuated. Interventions aim at not only rendering basic services
more effective, but also more accountable and inclusive. Community participation in
the rehabilitation of infrastructure and services builds social cohesion by promoting
intercommunal cooperation on common interests.
40. To reduce the impact of the economic downturn and the COVID-19 pandemic,
partners in early recovery and livelihoods activities provided a wide range of
livelihood opportunities during the reporting period. For example, cash -for-work
schemes provided people with an income while simultaneously supporting the
rehabilitation of critical civilian infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, and
providing opportunities to manufacture critical items, such as face masks, locally.
United Nations agencies also created business opportunities and supported
entrepreneurship. UNHCR enabled 2,720 individuals to start a business and provided
vocational training to 1,930 individuals. UNDP supported 1,590 rural enterprises,
benefiting 7,950 people. With the support of UNDP and UNRWA, 7,980 people across
12 governorates in government-controlled areas took up temporary jobs, while 2,460
people benefited from regular employment opportunities, including 56 households
headed by women. FAO provided 6,960 people in Aleppo with animal fodder,
supported 54,000 people in Aleppo, Hasakah and Dayr al-Zawr in increasing herd
sizes and trained 890 people in nutrition-sensitive agriculture, school gardening and
irrigation management. UNICEF provided monthly cash transfers to 6,300 families
of children with disabilities. Through cross-border assistance, in the governorates of
Idlib and Aleppo, early recovery and livelihoods activities partners provided short term work opportunities for 1,750 individuals in 14 subdistricts, supported 1,500
individuals in starting a business in 17 subdistricts and trained 3,500 individuals in
15 subdistricts.
41. Early recovery and livelihoods partners also supported the rehabilitation of
critical civilian infrastructure to strengthen basic services. UNDP rehabilitated two
schools for 650 children, one clinic and parts of the sewage system in Dayr al-Zawr
and one clinic in Aleppo, as well as fishing-related infrastructure in Tartus. UNDP
further removed 8,550 tons of solid waste in 33 neighbourhoods in Aleppo and Tartus.
Through cross-border assistance, early recovery and livelihoods partners rehabilitated
two markets in the Ariha subdistrict, removed 12,000 m 3 of debris and waste in five
subdistricts and rehabilitated one education facility in Aleppo Governorate and two
health-care facilities in Darat Izzah in Idlib Governorate. Moreover, access to basic
utilities such as electricity, water and sewage systems was restored for 1,629
households.

21-14722

11/25

S/2021/890

42. Several early recovery and livelihoods projects were aimed at strengthening
social cohesion at the community level. In government-controlled areas, UNDP
supported 13 initiatives targeting 1,900 individuals to promote social cohesion. Early
recovery and livelihoods partners also supported social cohesion through cross -border
assistance by convening 30 community and civic engagement initiatives in eight
subdistricts in Aleppo and Idlib governorates.
Humanitarian access
43. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian par tners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. Principled humanitarian action depends on the
ability to independently assess needs and deliver assistance and to monitor and
evaluate impact independently, including by engaging regularly and direct ly with
affected people. The access landscape in the Syrian Arab Republic remains complex,
as different geographical areas and different types of services require the use of
different operating modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are
based in the country, with over 600 deployed in humanitarian hubs outside Damascus,
in Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus.
A further 3,610 UNRWA staff members are deployed across the country. This
decentralized presence contributes to greater access and proximity to affected
populations. Across the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian aid is distributed and
implemented primarily by national actors, including non -governmental organizations
(NGOs) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
44. Analysis of access combines quantitative and qualitative aspects, with reporting
consolidated from United Nations agencies as well as international and national
NGOs for each response modality. Recognizing the overall difficult landscape in
which humanitarian operations take place, data indicate an overall degree of improved
humanitarian access throughout the country, demonstrating that 62 per cent of people
in need of assistance, or 8.3 million, live in areas with lower levels of access
constraints, 35 per cent, or 4.7 million, live in areas with moderate access constraints,
and 3 per cent, or 400,000, live in areas with high access constraints. The data also
point to an increased mission approval and an extended physical presence of
humanitarian country team members in the north-east and Dayr al-Zawr.
Nevertheless, conflict-related dynamics continue to have a significant impact on
access, with the presence of mines and unexploded ordnance being the single most
prominent constraint.
Access in government-controlled areas
45. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to reach owing to administrative impediments and security approvals
included Shaffuniyah, Mayda‘a and Kafr Batna in eastern Ghutah and Bayt Jinn and
Mazra‘at Bayt Jinn in western Rif Dimashq.
46. In the south of the Syrian Arab Republic, heavy shelling and ground clashes
across parts of Dar‘a Governorate affected United Nations mobility and access. In
August, humanitarian partners reported access restrictions, including road closures,
which affected the delivery of a wide range of life-saving assistance to displaced
persons and the treatment of the injured in Dar‘a al-Balad. Following an agreement
on 6 September between parties, some humanitarian partners have recommenced
operations. On 10 September, regular food assistance from WFP to Dar‘a Governorate
resumed and food rations sufficient for some 263,050 people were dispatched. WFP
continues to reach 450,000 people with overall food assistance monthly.

12/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

47. United Nations personnel and third-party contractors continued to travel to field
locations, along with national NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to conduct
assessment, monitoring, logistics and administrative support missions. Between
1 August and 20 September, 2,097 regular programmatic movements took place with
programme or blanket approvals. That represented a 7 per cent increase compared
with June and July, when 1,960 such missions took place (see table 3). 1
Table 3
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals a from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by type:
1 August to 20 September 2021
Type of mission

Blanket approval

Programme approval

Total number

Assessment missions

41

4

45

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

876

25

901

1 082

0

1 082

69

0

69

2 068

29

2 097

Monitoring missions
Security, logistics and administrative support missions
Total

Note: The total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals does not include the missions
conducted by WHO third-party monitors from 1 August to 20 September 2021.
a
Missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval from t he Ministry
of Foreign Affairs.

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals from within
the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by
governorate: 1 August to 20 September 2021

__________________
1

21-14722

United Nations personnel and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside of
Damascus obtain “blanket approvals” to carry out movements as part of their regular
programming. These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements.
13/25

S/2021/890

48. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
United Nations submitted 218 new requests, of which 182 (83 per cent) were
approved (see table 4). This takes into account the 10-day response period by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and does not negatively count requests that were
submitted but are still in process.
Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring specific approval by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs: 1 August to 20 September 2021
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Percentage approved

Assessment missions

45

35

78

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

20

18

90

Monitoring missions

90

66

73

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

30

30

100

Explosive ordnance assessment missions

33

33

100

218

182

83

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cross -line generally require
specific approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. An additional 14 missions were requested by United
Nations agencies during the reporting period, all of which are currently in process. Figures outlined in table 4
are based on internal data reported by United Nations agencies and reflect submissions made and approvals
received during the reporting period (August to September) of the present report. The figures may therefore
differ from those recorded by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, with which discussions are bein g
held to align methodologies.

Cross-line access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
49. In the north-west, WFP successfully completed a cross-line delivery of food and
nutrition assistance on 31 August from government-controlled Aleppo city, Aleppo
Governorate, to a warehouse in opposition-controlled Sarmada city, Idlib
Governorate. The assistance delivered was sufficient for 43,500 people for one month.
Distributions are anticipated to start in October. This is the first time since 2017 tha t
humanitarian assistance has reached the north-western part of the country from
government-controlled areas. UNICEF also provided cross-line support for water,
sanitation and hygiene services for 130,000 people in non-government-controlled
areas in Idlib through a partnership with the private sector.
50. The United Nations continued to engage with the parties concerned regarding
further cross-line assistance to the north-west from inside the Syrian Arab Republic,
including through multi-agency cross-line convoys. Challenges to sustainable crossline operations into the north-west, however, continue, including identifying a
suitable distribution modality that is acceptable to both the Government and
concerned parties in the north-west, and securing security guarantees from parties on
the ground.
Cross-line access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
51. In the north-east, the United Nations and humanitarian partners maintained
regular and sustained humanitarian access in most parts of Hasakah Governorate and
some parts of Raqqah Governorate.
52. Efforts continued towards the delivery of sufficient and su stained medical
assistance to areas in the north-east outside of government control. In August and
September, WHO delivered three cross-line shipments, including one road convoy
14/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

and two airlifts, carrying 57,360 kg of aid sufficient to provide 56,285 treat ments and
support 18,092 trauma cases. The shipments included a range of medical items as well
as vaccines, including 8,360 doses of COVID-19 vaccines, which were provided to
77 primary health-care centres and 19 hospitals. Supplies to hospitals were deliv ered
directly by WHO, while supplies to primary health-care centres were delivered
through partners as well as through health authorities in Hasakah, Dayr al -Zawr and
Tabaqah. WHO cross-line supplies have been based on need assessments, conducted
jointly with health partners working in the north-east. WHO reported no major
operational or logistical challenges during those deliveries. While the United Nations
has continued to scale up deliveries of health supplies to the north -east across lines
of control, needs continue to outstrip the response. NGOs supporting over 110 health care facilities across the north-east continued to face delays in securing reliable
supply chains, leading to shortages of essential medicines such as paediatric
medications, insulin and cardiovascular and tuberculosis medicines as well as a lack
of laboratory supplies and treatment for acute malnutrition. Health -care services
continued to be affected by access challenges and underinvestment.
53. During the reporting period, WFP provided some 598,800 people with food
assistance monthly in non-government-controlled areas of the north-eastern part of
the Syrian Arab Republic. All WFP food assistance distributed to these areas was
delivered from its warehouses inside the Syrian Arab Republic and dispatched onward
to its cooperating partners for distribution. UNHCR, supported by NGO partners,
delivered core relief items cross-line to over 15,000 beneficiaries in the north-east.
UNICEF reached over 9,600 people cross-line with COVID-19 vaccines, screened
more than 28,000 children for acute malnutrition and provided 29,000 children with
routine immunizations, in addition to providing non-food items and support for
education, protection and water, sanitation and hygiene, reaching thousands of
vulnerable people cross-line in the north-east.
54. Other areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult for United
Nations agencies to reach from Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between
parties in control. Despite these challenges, UNICEF supported cross-line routine
immunizations and COVID-19 immunization services in the districts of Ayn al-Arab
and Manbij and provided water, sanitation and hygiene services for 25,000 people in
12 camps. The United Nations continues to explore options to establish cross-line
access to the Ra’s al-Ayn-Tall Abyad area.
55. The most recent United Nations humanitarian convoy to reach Rukban from
within the Syrian Arab Republic was undertaken in September 2019. Access by
commercial trucks, using informal routes, has been sporadic. Since the decision by
the Government of Jordan in March 2020 to close the border as a preventive measure
to contain the spread of COVID-19, people from Rukban who require medical care
have been unable to gain access to the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of
the border. Critical health cases continued to be referred to Damascus, in coordination
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, but those who left for treatment have not been
allowed to return to the Rukban area. As part of the United Nations ongoing
engagement with parties to identify durable, safe and dignified solutions for civilians
living in Rukban, the United Nations supported a mission, alongside the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent, to aid the voluntary departures of famili es who had expressed a desire
to leave Rukban and requested assistance to do so. On 11 September, a convoy of five
trucks entered Rukban to provide support for registered families who wanted to leave
voluntarily. All relevant stakeholders had given permissions and assurances for the
safety of the drivers and of the departing families. While inside Rukban, a small group
of individuals obstructed the convoy and assaulted a driver. As a result, the mission
was cancelled.

21-14722

15/25

S/2021/890

Cross-border access in the Syrian Arab Republic
56. United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one authorized
border crossing following the adoption of Security Council resolutions 2533 (2020)
and 2585 (2021). All United Nations humanitarian assistance into the north -west of
the Syrian Arab Republic continues to be routed through th e Bab al-Hawa crossing,
and 486 trucks carrying humanitarian supplies have used that crossing point since
Council resolution 2585 (2021) came into effect. The number of trucks that crossed
in August is lower compared with the previous reporting period, owing to the large scale pre-positioning of supplies before the expiration of Council resolution 2533
(2020). Cross-border deliveries are expected to significantly increase again in the
months ahead, commensurate with the massive needs in the north -west of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
57. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533
(2020) and 2585 (2021). The Monitoring Mechanism monitored and confirmed the
humanitarian nature of 13 consignments consisting of 470 trucks that crossed into the
country from Turkey, all through the Bab al-Hawa crossing. That brought the total
number of trucks monitored since the beginning of operations to 50,302 (40,330
through Bab al-Hawa, 5,268 through Bab al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109
through Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns or questions regarding the humanitarian
nature of those consignments. For every shipment that crossed the border, the United
Nations provided 48-hour advance notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, including information on the humanitarian goods to be delivered, the number
of trucks, the United Nations owner and the destination (district). The Mechanism
continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Government of Turkey.
Visas and registrations
58. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: 1 August to 25 September 2021
Number
requested

Number
approved

Number rejected

Number pending

Visas requested during reporting period

98 a

52

1

38

Renewals requested during reporting period

139

108

–

31

Visas pending from before reporting period

73

27

2

44

Renewals pending from before reporting period

62

50

0

12

Type of request

a

The United Nations withdrew seven visa requests submitted during the reporting period.

59. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
60. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent armed clashes, air strikes and regular exchanges of indirect
artillery fire and other types of attacks by or among parties to the conflict.

16/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

Humanitarian relief personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with
explosive remnants of war, including unexploded ordnance and landmines.
61. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 20 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed.
62. A total of 15 staff members of the United Nations system (all from UNRWA)
are still detained or missing as at the end of the reporting period, including one staff
member detained in September.

III. Observations
63. In September, a grim announcement reminded us of the appalling suffering and
losses of the Syrian people. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights confirmed that over 350,000 identified individuals were killed in the first
decade of the conflict. More than 1 in every 13 was a woman, and almost 1 in every
13 was a child. This figure is certainly a significant undercounting of the actual
number of deaths. It does not include enforced disappearances or missing persons.
64. Ongoing hostilities, the deepening economic crisis, water shortages and the
COVID-19 pandemic continue to push millions of already vulnerable Syrians into
even deeper crisis. Needs are by far outstripping available resources, as people across
the Syrian Arab Republic struggle daily to make ends meet. Communities are
determined to restart their lives, yet desperately need an end to the conflict, lifesaving
aid, early recovery support and respect for fundamental human rights to do so. It is
incumbent on all relevant parties to expand effort to provide Syrians in need with a
more dignified life and a sense of hope for the future.
65. Despite the March 2020 ceasefire agreement in the north-west and more recent
local agreements in the southern part of the country, civilians continue to be killed
and injured, and tens of thousands have been displaced during the reporting period.
The blatant disregard for the lives of civilians is truly appalling. All parties to the
conflict must respect and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in accordance
with international humanitarian law and human rights law and take all feasible
precautions to avoid, and in any event to minimize, incidental loss of civilian life,
injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects. I remind all States, in particular
those with direct influence over parties to the conflict, that they are bound to take
proactive steps to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, including as it
relates to the protection of civilians.
66. I welcome the cross-line delivery of food and nutrition assistance into the northwest of the Syrian Arab Republic, the first United Nations cross-line mission since
2017. This progress is a vital step towards expanding the overall humanitarian
response, as needs continue to grow. However, while the United Nations continu es its
efforts to strengthen access into the north-west from inside the Syrian Arab Republic,
at this point such cross-line convoys, even if deployed regularly, could not replicate
the size and scope of the cross-border operation. Sustainable cross-line operations
into the north-west also require agreement on a suitable distribution modality that is
acceptable to both the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and concerned parties
in the north-west, as well as security guarantees from parties on the ground . The
United Nations will continue its efforts in this regard. As is described in detail in the
present report, cross-border assistance remains the central part of the humanitarian

21-14722

17/25

S/2021/890

response to ensure that aid reaches, in an effective and transparent manner, the
millions of people in need in this area. A robust monitoring system and rigorous
oversight measures are in place to ensure the integrity of all deliveries and
distributions. With greater access and expanded funding, the United Nations could do
more to help the rising number of people in need. I reiterate my call upon all parties
to the conflict to allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian
relief for all civilians in need, which is impartial in character and conducted without
any adverse distinction, in accordance with international humanitarian law.
67. COVID-19 remains a grave concern across the Syrian Arab Republic. In the
north-west, the Delta variant has led to a surge that is overwhelming an already
overstretched health system. Cases have also increased pressure on the health-care
system in the north-east, as well as throughout the country. While the vaccination rollout is ongoing, I remain deeply concerned that only 1.6 per cent of the population is
fully vaccinated. The timely delivery of COVID-19 vaccines to the Syrian Arab
Republic using all access modalities remains essential. I reiterate my call for a
dramatic increase in the scale and pace of vaccinations to protect lives and
livelihoods.
68. In March 2020, I called for the waiving of sanctions that may impede access to
essential health supplies, COVID-19-related medical support or food in the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is encouraging that a technical dialogue between relevant Member
States and humanitarian actors about sanctions and humanitarian operations in the
Syrian Arab Republic is under way. I hope that the relevant parties can find ways to
address the challenges that several humanitarian actors in the country face in ensuring
adequate and reliable access to financial services.
69. The Special Envoy continues his efforts towards securing the unilateral release
of persons arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, with priority given to women, children,
older persons and those who are sick, to lay a foundation for cr edible justice,
accountability, true reconciliation and sustainable peace. The majority are held by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I call upon the Government and other
parties to account for the fate and whereabouts of those they are detaining and to
allow humanitarian and human rights agencies access to all places of detention. All
persons in detention should be promptly informed of charges against them, afforded
fair and prompt trials and be released immediately if they are found to be detain ed
arbitrarily. Deaths in custody should be promptly and transparently investigated,
identified perpetrators brought to justice and the families of the deceased informed
and compensated in cases of wrongful death.
70. Continued impunity for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law remains of grave concern. Perpetrators of such
violations must be held accountable. I call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as all States, civil society and
the United Nations system, to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under Internation al Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing relevant
information and documentation. Accountability for serious violations and abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law is both a legal requiremen t and
central to achieving sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call
for the situation in the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
71. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the Syrian Arab Republic,
I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with the special
18/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

procedures of the Human Rights Council and with OHCHR, including through the
establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promo te human
rights.
72. The Special Envoy continues his efforts as he prepares to convene a sixth
session of the Constitutional Committee’s small body and endeavours to build a wider
political process, based on constructive international diplomacy, to promote political
progress to implement all aspects of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). A
process of concrete, mutual and reciprocal steps could help advance the political
process. I look forward to continued engagement by Syrian, regional and international
interlocutors with my Special Envoy. The plight of civilians obliges all concerned to
take concrete steps towards a sustainable peace for the Syrian people, who have
endured unimaginable suffering for far too long.

21-14722

19/25

S/2021/890

Annex I
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: August
and September 2021 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 24 August, two boys were killed and two girls were injured when a reported
unexploded ordnance detonated in agricultural land near Suwwaghiyah village
in northern rural Idlib.
• On 7 September, seven civilians, including one woman, two girls and two boys,
were injured when a reported airstrike landed in a house in the proximity of
Maryam internally displaced persons camp near Ma‘arratmisrin city in northern
rural Idlib.
• On 7 September, four civilians, including one woman and one boy, were killed
when reported ground-based strikes landed in a residential area of Idlib city.
• On 8 September, a boy and his mother were injured when a reported ground based strike damaged a residential building in Mara‘yan village in southern rural
Idlib.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 5 August, two men were killed and two men were injured after a reported
ground-based strike landed in Hazwan village in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 5 August, six civilians, including one woman and one boy, were injured
when several reported ground-based strikes landed in Bab city.
• On 6 August, 12 civilians, including two women, four boys and two girls, were
injured when several reported ground-based strikes landed in Bab city in eastern
rural Aleppo.
• On 23 August, seven civilians, including six men and one boy, were injured
when a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated in I‘zaz
city in northern rural Aleppo.
• On 1 September, two boys were killed after a reported landmine exploded in
Siftik village in north-west rural Aleppo.
• On 16 September, a civilian woman was arrested by local police in Afrin city in
north-west rural Aleppo. The reasons for her arrest and detention remain unclear
to her family. Her fate is currently unknown.
• On 17 September, eight civilian men were injured when a reported magnetic
improvised explosive device detonated in Bab city in eastern rural Aleppo.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 8 August, two men and one woman were shot and injured by unidentified
perpetrators in phase No.1 in Hawl camp in eastern rural Hasaka h.

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
20/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

• On 17 August, a woman was killed and five civilians, including two boys, one
girl and one woman, were injured when several reported ground -based strikes
landed in Abu Rasayn town in northern rural Hasakah.
• On 25 August, a man was shot and killed by unidentified perpetrators in phase
No. 1 in Hawl camp in eastern rural Hasakah.
• On 25 August, the body of a woman was discovered in Hawl camp. Unidentified
perpetrators shot and killed the woman.
• On 18 September, a man was reportedly detained in Ra’s al-Ayn city in western
rural Hasakah. He reportedly died in custody several days later.
Hama Governorate
• On 7 August, three boys and one girl were killed and six other civilians,
including a woman, two girls and two boys, were injured when a reported
ground-based strike landed near their home in Qastun al-Gharbi village in
western rural Hama.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 2 August, a girl was injured when a reported ground-based strike landed in
the Dar‘a camp area in Dar‘a city.
• On 6 August, a civilian man was injured when several reported ground -based
strikes landed in Nahtah town in eastern rural Dar‘a.
• On 14 August, three civilians, including one woman and one boy, were injured
after several reported ground-based strikes landed in Jasim town in northern
rural Dar‘a.
• On 23 August, a man was killed after a reported ground -based strike landed in
Dar‘a al-Balad area in Dar‘a city.
• On 27 August, Safsaf and Ayn Karim schools in Dar‘a camp were damaged when
several reported ground-based strikes landed in Dar‘a city.
• On 27 August, a woman was killed and six other civilians, including one woman,
were injured when reported ground-based strikes landed in Tafas in western
rural Dar‘a.
• On 28 August, one boy and two girls were killed and their mother was injured
when a reported unexploded ordnance detonated near their house between the
towns of Qarfa and Ibt’a in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 29 August, two men were killed after a reported ground-based strike landed
in Dar’a al-Mahattah in Dar‘a city.
• On 29 August, two women were killed and four civilians were injured after
several reported ground-based strikes landed in Jallayn town in western rural
Dar‘a.
• On 30 August, three civilians, including a 9-year-old girl and her mother, were
injured after several reported ground-based strikes impacted in Dar‘a al-Mahattah
area in Dar‘a city.
• On 30 August, a civilian man was injured when a separate reported groundbased strike landed in Dar‘a al-Mahattah area in Dar‘a city.
• On 3 September, a man was killed by reported sniper fire while working in an
agricultural area near Tafas in western rural Dar‘a.

21-14722

21/25

S/2021/890

• On 8 September, a man was killed when a reported unexploded ordnance
detonated in front of his house in Dar‘a al-Balad area in Dar‘a.
• On 8 September, a man was injured when a reported ground-based strike landed
in Tasil town in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 10 September, two boys were injured when a reported ground -based strike
landed near their home in Tasil town in western rural Dar‘a.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 11 August, two men were killed when a reported landmine detonated in
Duwayr town in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 25 August, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in Basirah
city in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 29 August, three civilian men were killed and one civilian man was injured after
a reported landmine detonated near Duwayr town in eastern rural Dayr al -Zawr.
• On 5 September, a boy was killed and another two boys were injured as result
of what was reported to be a landmine exploded in an agriculture area in the
village of Izbah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 4 August, four civilians, including two girls and one boy, were killed and
one woman and one girl were injured after several reported ground-based strikes
impacted in Safawiyah village in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 6 September, a civilian was injured when several reported ground -based
strikes landed in Khalidiyah village in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 8 September, a man was reportedly abducted and beaten in Suluk town, in
the area of Tall Abyad in Raqqah Governorate. He was later released.

22/25

21-14722

S/2021/890

Annex II
List of United Nations humanitarian cross-border
operating partners

21-14722

1.

AFAQ

2.

ATAA Humanitarian Relief Association

3.

Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development

4.

Al Resala Foundation

5.

Al Sham Humanitarian Foundation

6.

Al-Ameen for Humanitarian Support

7.

Alseeraj for Development & Healthcare

8.

BAHAR

9.

BINAA for Development

10.

Basma for Relief and Development

11.

Basmeh & Zeitooneh for Relief and Development

12.

BigHeart

13.

Bonyan

14.

CARE International

15.

Children of One World

16.

Deutsche Welthungerhilfe e.V. (German Agro Action)

17.

Doctors of the World Turkey

18.

GOAL

19.

Ghiras Al Nahda

20.

Global Communities

21.

Hand in Hand for Aid and Development

22.

Handicap International

23.

Hope Revival Organization

24.

Human Appeal Turkey

25.

Human Rights and Freedoms and Humanitarian Relief Foundation

26.

Humanitarian Initiative Association

27.

Humanitarian Relief Association

28.

Ihsan for Relief and Development

29.

Independent Doctors Association

30.

Insan Charity

31.

Insani Inisiyatif Dernegi

32.

International Humanitarian Relief

33.

Islamic Relief Worldwide

23/25

S/2021/890

24/25

34.

KUDRA

35.

Maram Foundation for Relief and Development

36.

Massrat – The Establishment for Human Care and Development

37.

Medina Association

38.

Mercy without Limits

39.

Mercy-USA for Aid and Development

40.

Muzun for Humanitarian and Development

41.

NAS

42.

Nasaem Khair

43.

Norwegian Refugee Council

44.

Orange

45.

Orient for Human Relief

46.

POINT

47.

People in Need

48.

Physicians Across Continents

49.

Qatar Charity

50.

Qatar Red Crescent Society

51.

REACH Initiative

52.

Relief Experts Association – UDER

53.

Relief International

54.

SANED Organization

55.

SENED Organization

56.

SKT organization

57.

Sadad Humanitarian Organization

58.

Saed Charity Association

59.

Shafak Organization

60.

Social Development International

61.

Solidarités International

62.

Space of Peace

63.

Syria Relief

64.

Syria Relief and Development

65.

Syrian American Medical Society Foundation

66.

Syrian Engineers for Construction and Development

67.

Syrian Expatriate Medical Association

68.

Takaful Alsham Charity Organization

69.

The HALO Trust

70.

The Mentor Initiative
21-14722

S/2021/890

21-14722

71.

The Syrian Association for Relief and Development

72.

Turkish Red Crescent

73.

Ufuk for Relief and Development

74.

Union of Medical Care and Relief Organization

75.

Violet Organization

76.

War Child Holland

77.

Watan Foundation

78.

White Hands

79.

White Hats Organization for Sustainable Development

80.

Woman Support Association

81.

World Vision International

82.

Yol Rehberi Insan Haklari Dernegi

25/25
