S/PV.8926

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8926th meeting

Monday, 13 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Climate and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39234 (E)
*2139234*

S/PV.8926

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Climate and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Namibia, Nauru, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and Vanuatu
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2021/990, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
2/14

13/12/2021

Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Namibia, Nauru, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania, the United
States of America, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the vote.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I take the floor on
behalf of Ireland and the Niger, the co-penholders for
draft resolution S/2021/990, which is before the Council
for its consideration this morning.
Many months of effort have gone into bringing
this text to the Council table today. However, as we all
know, it has taken years of leadership and engagement
by many countries to reach this point. I thank colleagues
around the table for their engagement and support.
Today, we come to the Council to ask it to take
the modest first steps to strengthen its ability to begin
to assume its own responsibility on the defining
issue of this generation: climate change. The draft
resolution is aimed at responding to the climate-related
security risks affecting the conflicts on the Council’s
agenda — no more, no less. We have no doubt as to the
appropriateness of the Council considering this topic. It
is argued by some that the Council is not the right forum
and that, in addressing climate change and its impacts,
the Council would establish a separate process to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. We respectfully but resolutely disagree.
The draft resolution is about enabling the Security
Council to address climate change with the tools it
has within its mandate. The Council has already taken
steps to integrate climate-related security risks into
21-39234

13/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

some of its mandated operations. However, we must
go further. It is long overdue for the principal organ of
the United Nations dealing with international security
to take responsibility for integrating climate-related
security risks across its conflict resolution, prevention
and mediation work.
It could not be clearer from discussions at the
twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties
to the Climate Change Agreement that we are facing a
climate crisis. It is a crisis of today, not only of tomorrow.
The Glasgow Climate Pact, adopted by consensus last
month, is clear that, as temperatures rise, impacts from
climate and weather extremes, as well as slow-onset
events, will pose an ever-greater social, economic
and environmental threat. Glasgow recognizes the
importance of coherent action to respond to the scale
of needs caused by the adverse impacts of climate
change. This coherent action, which the international
community collectively has called for, must include the
work of this important organ. It is inconceivable that
the Council should look away.
Today, 113 Members of the Organization have
joined in co-sponsoring this draft resolution. Council
engagement on this issue would reflect the will of
the majority of United Nations Member States. As an
elected member that is here to represent the interests
of all United Nations Member States, we see it as
our responsibility to bring this draft resolution to the
table today. We have heard first-hand the voices of
those living the reality of climate-related insecurity
around this very table, many times now, not least from
the presidency of the Niger, representing a country
tragically impacted.
It has been suggested that there is no clear scientific
basis for linking climate change with international
peace and security. We refute this. The data is there
and it is compelling. What the Council needs is a
framework to enable the capture and consideration of
this evidence. We need to better understand this link.
Ignoring or rejecting the facts will not achieve that.
This is not an issue facing only one region or only
one country. We need to look at it globally, as well as
in regional and country contexts. Regional action is,
of course, important. Many organizations recognize
the importance of addressing the security implications
of climate change, including the African Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Pacific Islands Forum, the League of Arab States,

S/PV. 8926

the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
European Union. Every one of us here today has a role
in one or another of those regional organizations and is
part of the work under way there. It is now time that the
Security Council also step up.
Finally, Ireland and the Niger are firmly of the
view that consideration of the draft resolution must
proceed this morning. Time is not on our side in any
aspect of climate issue. We cannot afford to delay in
addressing the ways in which climate-related security
risks are undermining international peace and security.
Doing so would leave the Council weakened in its
ability to deal with this issue. Over 113 Member States
have now co-sponsored this draft resolution today — a
clear, majority of the countries of the world sharing
our collective determination to take this important
step and adopt this draft resolution. Not all Security
Council members share or are of the same views on
this question, but we hope that we can recognize the
common ground in our positions and allow the draft
resolution to be adopted.
Our plea — a plea backed by the majority of the
members of the General Assembly — is for all Security
Council members to support this text.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As we have said earlier and repeatedly, draft
resolution S/2021/990, on climate and security, is
unacceptable to Russia. I shall once again explain our
position in detail.
The sponsors did not and do not want to listen to our
clarifications. They did not want to talk about this issue
in substance. They did not want to hear any arguments,
either from us or from other members of the Security
Council or States Members of the United Nations.
We oppose creating a new area in the Council’s work
that would establish a generic, automatic connection
between climate change and international security,
turning a scientific and socioeconomic issue into a
politicized question.
The provisions of the draft resolution integrating
such a connection as “a central component into
comprehensive conflict-prevention strategies of the
United Nations” (S/2021/990, para. 2) and into the
mandates of peacekeeping and political missions could
bring with it a whole range of consequences.
First, positioning climate change as a threat to
international security diverts the attention of the

21-392343/14

S/PV.8926

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council from genuine, deep-rooted causes of conflict
in the countries on the Council’s agenda. This is
convenient for those countries that are actively helping
these conflicts to erupt or that have undertaken military
activity as a diversion from the Security Council
mandate, or simply do not want to provide the countries
in need with the necessary practical help in the area of
development.
That having been said, the lamentable position of
many of the most vulnerable States, from a climate
perspective, is a direct consequence of previous
colonial policies from Western donors. I would tell
them directly how well they have devised this idea of
blaming greenhouse-gas emissions, and the Sun and the
Moon as well, and of suggesting that the responsibility
lies with developing countries themselves. They have
not, however, managed to convince us of that today.
We also note that our Western partners, who are
presenting climate change as a source of political
instability, prefer not to draw attention in the Council to
the other side of their arguments, namely, the negative
consequences of conflict and their impact on the
environment. The loss of biodiversity, deforestation,
the effect of chemical substances and soil pollution as
the result of military activity and intervention in the
domestic affairs of States require measures to restore
the environment over decades and hardly contribute
to the fight against climate change. We stand ready to
actively draw the Council’s attention to the issue.
Secondly, the instability of specific countries and
regions is owing to a range of specific reasons that
can differ from each other in their makeup and scale.
The draft resolution is not aimed at helping countries
or work on any specific situation. Instead, it takes a
general approach to climate, contrary to the principles
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We have drawn the attention of those
who wish to shift the blame. It is clear what they are
trying to do.
I will address myself specifically to those countries
that, following the examples of the blame-shifters,
have come to believe that such a one-sided
approach — assessing everything through the climate
lens — might in some way be effective. I should like
to cite Pushkin, our famous poet, who wrote better
than many on the subject of love. In one of his poems,
4/14

13/12/2021

he writes, “Ah, it is easy to deceive me!/I long to be
deceived myself!”
It is completely possible that many of the countries
in need that are awaiting help from donors entertain
fanciful notions concerning their potential saviours.
In that regard, it is difficult to offer any advice other
than that they turn to history, which, unfortunately,
illustrates that donors rarely respond in kind to any
favourable good intentions. However, we accuse no
one and are even quite understanding. Many countries
simply do not have a choice when donors impose a
certain viewpoint on them. Besides, it is always easier
to blindly follow than it is to work out the subtleties of
this or that issue.
Returning to attempts to create an entire range
of mandates for political experts on climate, I will
explain in detail why that is unacceptable. It is implied
that peacekeepers are qualified to assess the impact of
climate change on specific locations after undergoing
some sort of training within a short period of time.
It is also suggested that the results of that dubious
analysis — the impact of climate change on peace and
security — are presented to the Council in reports of
the Secretary-General. The quality of such analyses
and especially their conclusions would be questionable,
to say the least.
Furthermore, such an approach would be a ticking
time bomb. Its purpose would be to have a way to
include virtually any country on the Security Council’s
agenda if it is deemed to be undesirable by someone.
It would be easy to find a pretext, as the whole world
feels the impact of climate change. Real climate change
research should really be the prerogative of climate
and weather experts. Such analytical work requires the
appropriate training of experts, technical equipment
and a great deal of time.
Members will agree that giving political workers
the task of rapidly drawing conclusions that could
lead to intervention in the domestic affairs of States is
simpler than strengthen monitoring and early warning
systems to respond to natural disasters in developing
countries without any political agenda, especially than
actually providing the funds that were promised for
those purposes.
Thirdly, the fight against climate change and
adaptation to its negative consequences are a question
of sustainable development. The connection between
climate and socioeconomic challenges in one form
21-39234

13/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

or another, was supported by the absolute majority of
countries whose representatives have spoken during
specialized open debates that have recently been
organized by the Niger presidency of the Security
Council, but which more closely resembled meetings of
the Second Committee and the Economic and Social
Council. For that reason, the substantive work should
be carried out within expert forums, the main one of
which is the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
It is particularly sad to see the attempt to force
the adoption of the draft resolution when there is
currently a clear lack of consensus among the members
of the Security Council, as countries have a hard time
agreeing on how to implement the Paris Agreement,
as we saw in Glasgow, and on truly needed measures
to fight climate change. The climate agenda should
provide a unifying role to ensure success in carrying
out individual and joint activities, not to sow discord,
particularly for political ends.
You know, Sir, that there is no consensus on the
draft resolution that has been put to the vote. You have
received a number of letters from delegations — both
members and non-members of the Security Council.
Dissent was also expressed earlier, during the
aforementioned open debate on the subject. We call
on you not to sow discord within the Security Council
on such an important subject. It is the presidency’s
responsibility to push towards effective decisions
instead of sowing discord.
In so saying, we are not just rejecting this; instead
of this one-sided approach, we are proposing an
alternative, guided by a comprehensive approach that
takes different countries and regions into account. We
have been impressed by the number of States that have
expressed deep concern about the issues facing the
Sahel. Let us look at our alternative draft resolution.
As has already been said, that region is being held
hostage to a complex range of not only climate
challenges, but also social, economic and political
threats that are exacerbated by terrorism and must be
looked at holistically, while considering the specific
circumstances of the region. If we really want to ensure
that the United Nations and its Security Council will
help, then we must be guided by that approach now and
in the future.
The President (spoke in French): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

S/PV. 8926

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Estonia, France, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Niger,
Norway, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam
Against:
India, Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, 2 against and
1 abstention. The draft resolution has not been adopted,
owing to the negative vote of one permanent member
of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland is deeply
disappointed that the Security Council has failed to
adopt draft resolution S/2021/990, on climate and
security. We regret the decision of certain countries
to use their right of veto to block the adoption of this
groundbreaking draft resolution. We believed that the
weight of evidence and clarity of argument would bring
the Council to a consensus.
However, despite months of consultations — I
underline that, months of consultations — and the strong
support of the majority of United Nations Member
States, that was sadly, not the case. Today could
have represented a point of inflection. Today should
have represented a point of inflection. Today was an
opportunity for the Council to recognize for the first
time the reality of the world that we are living in and
that climate change is compounding insecurity and
increasing instability. That is a real and present threat
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
We could have met our responsibility to accept this
reality in our work.
Adopting the draft resolution would have been
a modest first step, enabling the Council and the
Secretariat to understand more clearly the impact of
climate-related security risks, start asking the right
questions and seek to identify answers. Instead, we
have missed the opportunity for action and we look
away from the realities of the world we are living in.

21-392345/14

S/PV.8926

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ireland’s view is clear: the veto is an anachronism.
We regret the use of the veto in all circumstances and
we very much regret its use today. The fact that the
majority of the United Nations membership — 113
countries — co-sponsored the draft resolution that the
Council has now rejected is telling. Today is another
reminder — as though we needed one — that the
Security Council sorely needs reform.
Ireland, with our co-penholder, the Niger, did not
set out on the process thinking we would see a veto. We
believed that the weight of evidence would bring the
Council to consensus. We worked tirelessly to deliver
on that. Sadly, despite months of discussion, we did not
achieve the result that we and 113 other United Nations
Member States wanted to see.
We continue to believe that bringing forward the
draft resolution was the right thing to do. Discussions
on the topic have been ongoing for 14 years, but today
is the first time a thematic draft resolution has been
tabled for adoption. Today was the first opportunity for
the Council to show the international community that it
is ready to take on its responsibilities.
As we have worked with partner countries both
inside and outside the Council in the past year, we
have become more convinced than ever that the United
Nations must understand and take action on the security
implications of climate change. The support of the 113
United Nations Member States that co-sponsored the
draft resolution demonstrates the expectation among
the majority of United Nations Member States that the
Security Council should factor the security risks of
climate change into its decision-making processes.
Through the processes that brought us to this point
today, we have consolidated support at the United
Nations and can galvanize work to focus on the issue in
the future. For our part, we remain undaunted.
Despite the result today, let us be clear: climate
change is already firmly on the Security Council’s
agenda. The Council has recognized its impacts on
peace and security in a number of country-specific and
regional contexts. The Council can and must continue
to build on that to ensure that climate-related security
risks are addressed as part of the Council’s work.
Ireland will continue to press for a strong and
robust approach to climate and security across the
entire Council agenda.
6/14

13/12/2021

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.
Due to its responsibility to safeguard international
peace and security, the Security Council is obligated
to consider all situations that have or could potentially
have an impact on global security. Resolution 2535
(2020), which was adopted by the Council at the
initiative of France and Tunisia, constitutes a clear
example in that regard.
For the 113 countries that sponsored draft
resolution S/2021/990, on the impacts of climate change
on conflict situations, a link clearly exists in the sense
that climate degradation serves to exacerbate security
challenges, especially in the Sahel and Lake Chad basin
regions. For landlocked countries, their very existence
as geographical entities is at stake. That is a fact and the
reality. The force of the veto can block the adoption of a
text, but it cannot hide that reality — the truth.
During the high-level debate on the issue held on
9 December in the Council (see S/PV.8923), some were
unwise enough to call us short-sighted. On the contrary,
we can see very clearly. We have never considered
situations of insecurity exclusively in terms of the
impacts of climate change, nor have we minimized
the role of those forums already comprehensively
addressing the issue. However, no one can prevent us
from stating that climate change is an exacerbating
factor among the root causes of insecurity, because we
live that reality every day. That is why we insist upon it.
Some have claimed that including the impacts of
climate change on security on the Council’s agenda
is irrelevant, given that other structures are already
addressing the issue. In that case, why did the Council
adopt resolutions related to the coronavirus disease
pandemic while the World Health Organization exists
and is more than capable? Those who did not support
our initiative, which enjoys the broad consensus of
Member States, are perhaps the short-sighted ones. We
are fully aware that the opposition to change in which
some indulge is the principal reason that keeps the
Council from innovating.
To the rest of the membership, we are proud to
have made our contribution to raising awareness on the
issue, which has an impact not just on security but also
on the future of our planet. It is up to those permanent
members of the Security Council and those who will
succeed us to make their own contribution.
21-39234

13/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I take the floor to submit
India’s explanation of vote.
India is second to none when it comes to climate
action and climate justice, but the Security Council is
not the place to discuss either issue. In fact, the attempt
to do so appears to be motivated by a desire to evade
responsibility in the appropriate forum and divert the
world’s attention from an unwillingness to deliver
where it counts.
In line with our tradition of living in harmony with
nature, Prime Minister Modi announced, last month in
Glasgow, an ambitious climate action vision in the form
of five nectar elements, or Panchamrit.
First, India will take its non-fossil energy capacity
to 500 gigawatts by 2030.
Secondly, India will meet 50 per cent of its energy
requirements for renewable energy by 2030.
Thirdly, India will reduce its total projected carbon
emissions by 1 billion tons from now until 2030.
Fourthly, by 2030, India will reduce the carbon
intensity of its economy to less than 45 per cent.
Fifthly, by the year 2070, India will achieve the
target of net-zero emissions.
India now ranks fourth in the world in installed
renewable energy capacity. India’s non-fossil fuel
energy has increased by more than 25 per cent in the
past seven years and has reached 40 per cent of its
energy mix. Alongside that, India has also provided
institutional solutions to build cooperation at the
international level. We initiated the International
Solar Alliance and the Coalition for Disaster-Resilient
Infrastructure. Those are noteworthy initiatives that
will make a real difference.
The world is also developing awareness that lifestyle
change plays a critical role and my Prime Minister has
called for the principle of lifestyle for environment as a
mass movement.
Today, India may be moving forward on the
subject of climate change with great courage and high
ambition, but India also understands the challenges of
fellow developing countries, which it shares fully, and
will continue to voice their concerns and expectations.
The international community, particularly the
developing and the least developed countries and

S/PV. 8926

small island developing States, have striven, for the
past two decades under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) process,
to make common but differentiated responsibilities a
basic principle of global climate action. That is at the
heart of climate justice.
To move forward decisively, affordable access to
climate finance and technologies has become critical.
Developed countries must provide climate financing of
$1 trillion at the earliest. It is necessary that climate
finance be tracked with the same diligence as climate
mitigation. The reality is that developed countries have
fallen well short of their promises. It is particularly
important to recognize that because today’s attempt to
link climate with security really seeks to obfuscate the
lack of progress on critical issues under the UNFCCC.
We are also concerned by the manner in which this
issue has been brought before the Security Council.
Over the past nearly three decades, all Member States
have negotiated collectively and with consensus an
elaborate equitable architecture to combat every
aspect of climate change. In arriving at far-reaching
consensual decisions, we tried to accommodate each
other’s interests and specific national circumstances.
That comprehensive process has, in fact, been carried
out under the United Nations-led UNFCCC, with
the participation of all Member States. In turn, the
UNFCCC has been informed by members’ priorities.
It addresses both the immediate needs of developing
countries and the commitments of developed countries.
It seeks a balance among mitigation, adaptation,
financing, technology transfer, capacity-building, et
cetera. In effect, it takes a holistic view of combating
climate change that is equitable and fair.
We therefore need to ask ourselves what it is that we
can collectively do under draft resolution S/2021/990
that we cannot achieve under the UNFCCC process. Why
is it that one needs a Security Council resolution to take
action on climate change when we have commitments,
made under the UNFCCC, to concrete climate action?
The honest answer is that there is no real requirement
for this draft resolution except for the purpose of
bringing climate change under the ambit of the Security
Council. The reason for that is so that decisions can
be taken without the involvement of most developing
countries and without recognizing consensus. All that
can be done in the name of preserving international
peace and security.

21-392347/14

S/PV.8926

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let us therefore be clear about the issues today.
Decisions regarding climate change are sought to
be taken out of the wider international community
represented at the UNFCCC and given instead to the
Security Council. Ironically, many of the Security
Council members are the main contributors to climate
change due to historical emissions. If the Security
Council takes over the responsibility for this issue,
a few States will have a free hand in deciding on all
climate-related issues. That is clearly neither desirable
nor acceptable.
We recognize the fact that climate change has
impacted the lives of many people and may even have
exacerbated conflicts in the Sahel and other parts of
Africa. India remains committed to peace, security
and development in Africa and the Sahel region, both
bilaterally and within the United Nations. Many projects
in those geographical areas testify to our sincerity.
However, viewing conflicts through the prism of climate
change is misleading. The oversimplification of causes
of conflict will not help to resolve them; worse, it can
be misleading. That is the reason that India supported
a draft resolution focusing exclusively on the Sahel, but
that was not considered by the sponsors for reasons best
known to them.
Today’s draft resolution attempts to undermine
the hard-won consensus that we reached in Glasgow.
This draft resolution will only sow the seeds of discord
among the larger United Nations membership. It sends
the wrong message to developing countries that, instead
of addressing their concerns and holding developed
countries responsible for meeting their commitments
under the UNFCCC, we are willing to be divided and
sidetracked under the guise of security. This draft
resolution is a step backwards from our collective
resolve to combat climate change. It seeks to hand
over that responsibility to an organ that does not work
through consensus or reflect the interests of developing
countries. India had no option but to vote against it.
In conclusion, let me state that there should be no
confusion about our determination to combat climate
change. We will always support genuine climate action
and serious climate justice. We will always speak up for
the interests of the developing world, including Africa
and the Sahel region, and we will do that in the right
place — the UNFCCC.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway deeply regrets that
draft resolution S/2021/990, on climate and security,
8/14

13/12/2021

was not adopted today. We remain steadfast that the
adverse effects of climate change matter to conflict and
peace and that they should therefore also matter to the
Security Council. Climate change is not a problem of
the future. It is here now and it affects every region in
the world.
At last week’s open debate (see S/PV.8923), we
heard first-hand accounts of the many different ways
in which climate change manifests itself on the ground.
There were urgent calls for the Security Council to
consider its various impacts on peace and security and
recommend ways to prevent and manage climate risks.
It has been 10 years since the Security Council
first acknowledged climate change as an emerging
risk factor for global peace and security. In that time,
United Nations peace missions have found themselves
operating in increasingly complex environments, where
non-traditional threats, such as climate change, must be
factored in. The Council needs a better understanding
of the potential effects of climate pressures and shocks
on such efforts to build and sustain peace for the sake of
preparedness, resilience and the protection of civilians,
as well as the ability of its missions to operate.
Let me also reiterate that the climate security
agenda is, at its heart, a preventive agenda. Including
climate risk in analyses and responses can only enhance
our peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts. The aim
is to climate-proof conflict prevention and peace and
security efforts, not to take on the task of other United
Nations bodies.
A thematic resolution on climate and security
would have helped to guide the Security Council’s work.
While disappointed by today’s result, we will continue
to work with all Council members on improving both
our understanding of and approaches to climate-related
security risks.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We sincerely regret that your presidency, Sir,
has been overshadowed by the division that we warned
about. But we need to move forward.
I reiterate that, as a responsible member of the
United Nations and its Security Council, the Russian
Federation, together with India and China, does not
share the approach imposed by Western States, which
has already led a large number of States that are
awaiting assistance to believe in it.
21-39234

13/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

The sponsors of draft resolution S/2021/990
speak of 113 countries supporting the draft resolution.
What about the 80 countries that did not support the
draft resolution? Many colleagues have criticized
maintaining the veto in the Security Council, saying
that we have seen yet another example of its abuse by
Russia, which ignored the opinion of 113 States. I will
provide another interpretation of what happened.
The international community is deeply divided
on climate issues. We saw that in Glasgow, but at
that time the need to achieve a consensus forced our
Western colleagues to behave democratically and
consider the positions of all countries. Now we see an
anti-democratic attempt to ignore the opinion of those
80 Member States that did not support the draft text and
to impose on them the position of climate activists. That
would be a very divisive action, which would result in a
setback in combating climate change. Only our negative
vote was able to stop this process, which is insurance
against this kind of scenario. This is the best indication
of the fact that the veto is a key piece of insurance for
our work and similar unacceptable scenarios.
Furthermore, it became even clearer that the
domination of the Security Council by Western
countries, in trying to evade responsibility for their
own actions by using the climate as a cover, is an
anachronism. In our discussions of Security Council
reform, we must strengthen the voice of developing
countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and not
the collective West, to correct this course, but we are
seeking a solution with a comprehensive approach and
that does not indulge attempts to shift the blame.
We recognize the fact that there are a range of
different interconnected problems: climate change,
natural disasters, poverty, weak local authorities and
terrorism. Those are a very heavy burden for some
countries and regions and each situation is unique.
As was shown by the open debate on 9 December
(S/PV.8923), the international community is focused
on all the real concerns about the Sahel. The Council
needs to work in other regions as well. In line with
that approach, Russia, together with China and India,
proposed a draft resolution on assistance for the Sahel
region. Our draft resolution, unlike that of the Niger and
Ireland, includes the whole panoply of problems that the
region faces and is aimed at mobilizing international
efforts, including financing, to provide multilateral
assistance to those who need it.

S/PV. 8926

We are ready for a substantive and constructive
working relationship with all members of the Council.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom, too, regrets the outcome of the
voting on draft resolution S/2021/990.
For more than 75 years, across thousands of
resolutions, the Security Council has sought to
address the greatest challenges to international peace
and security. It is clear that climate change is such a
challenge. In the past few years, the political consensus
has caught up with the scientific consensus that climate
change is caused by human activity and the burning of
fossil fuels and that those changes have a direct impact
on peace and security.
Member States on the forefront of climate change,
like those in the Sahel, where temperatures are rising
50 per cent faster than global averages, are acutely
aware of this. They know we do not have the luxury of
time. Small island developing States, where sea levels
are rising faster than global averages, know we do
not have the luxury of time. Mountain States, whose
glaciers are melting, know we do not have the luxury
of time.
At the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, we saw that countries can work together to
take decisive action. And today, well over 100 Member
States, including many developing countries, as well as
countries outside the Security Council, sponsored this
draft resolution.
We welcome steps taken by all Council members
and Member States to combat climate change, but
actions must follow words. The Security Council can
play its part. More frequent reporting on the links
between climate and security would be a good start.
Climate change is a threat to us all. The
consequences of inaction will be catastrophic. We must
act now. We must all act now. We must all act now. The
United Kingdom therefore strongly supported this draft
resolution and will continue to support further action
across the United Nations, including in the Security
Council, to combat climate change.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): We thank you, Mr. President,
as a co-penholder, and Ireland for your efforts to bring
draft resolution S/2021/990 to the floor and to the wider
United Nations membership for its co-sponsoring of the
draft resolution.

21-392349/14

S/PV.8926

Maintenance of international peace and security

Kenya is disappointed at the use of a veto. We
believe that the importance of this measure can still
enjoy progress on the basis of consensus. We are ready
for further efforts in this regard and shall engage on the
draft resolution submitted by the Russian delegation.
Kenya voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2021/990, but did not co-sponsor it, not because it
did not support its aim, but because it is profoundly
convinced of the importance of taking just action on
climate change. We had hoped for and advocated
consensus. Our reticence on moving forward without
consensus came from understanding that there is a
profound risk in the adoption of the draft resolution
without that broad-based agreement.
In the coming years, the effort that has been
undertaken by the co-penholders, and perhaps by the
Russian Federation, will be built on, and it is crucial
that further efforts make sure that its course is correct,
as I shall explain. For the record, we want to be clear on
Kenya’s reasoning.
We listened carefully to the draft resolution’s
detractors. Even while disagreeing with some of their
points, we saw that there were important arguments
that they were making that could have been included.
In addition, we sought consensus because it has been
the primary mode of decision-making in regard to
climate change action. It underpins the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
At the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the
UNFCCC in Glasgow, our need to embrace consensus
meant that we, as part of Africa, had to swallow a bitter
pill, as previous commitments on climate change action
were reversed. In Glasgow, previous commitments
made by countries whose economies have been the
primary cause of climate change were dialled back.
Dangerous obstacles to energy access and development
were put in the path of developing countries that are
suffering most disproportionately from climate change.
If only the outcome in Glasgow had been voted on, but it
was not. Where was the commitment to climate finance
and to the development path of developing countries
in Glasgow?
In Glasgow, we embraced consensus and agreed to
an outcome that while deeply dissatisfying, at least kept
the process alive. It must be said that the reversals in
Glasgow were supported by some of the very members
of the Security Council that are today the strongest
10/14

13/12/2021

supporters of the draft resolution. It leaves us now to
wonder what has changed between Glasgow and the
Security Council Chamber. What is it that they hope
will be achieved on climate change in the Security
Council beyond the UNFCCC? What commitment can
they now proclaim with such strength in New York that
they could not in Glasgow?
We must also recall the Security Council’s consistent
resistance to taking ambitious action to enable United
Nations support for African missions to effectively
respond to escalating terrorism threat in regions, such
as the Sahel. On the one hand, you have resistance to
just climate change action, on the other, to bold action
against terrorism. Yet there is a seeming enthusiasm
for a draft resolution that combines climate change and
security. If climate change is indeed the code red for
humankind, as the Secretary-General put it — and as
it certainly is in the shorter term to members such as
small island developing States — it is clear that it will
be a fundamental challenge to peace and security. We
hope that future work on this issue will focus as much
on the countries impacted by climate change as those
with the leading responsibility in causing it.
As the Council seeks to undertake actions to
resolve wars escalated or even caused by the effects
of climate change, we call on it to have the moral
courage to also deal with the major emitters. We look
forward to the Security Council reforms that may one
day ensure that countries disproportionately affected
by climate change are represented by permanent or
veto-wielding members.
Kenya will continue to champion advancing the
climate and security nexus. As next year’s co-Chair of
the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security, our
delegation will do all it can to enable discussions that
embrace balance, consensus and ambition. We will also
advocate for this issue to enjoy a more comprehensive
science-policy interface in the work by the United
Nations Environment Programme and related bodies,
in the hope that it enjoys a consensus that enables
clear commitments and actions. We now encourage the
delegations that have professed the importance of this
issue to once again re-engage on other proposals that
have been put forward or, indeed, put forward further
proposals, which the Kenyan delegation will be happy
to consider on the basis of consensus.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): Viet Nam thanks Ireland
and the Niger for the important draft resolution
21-39234

13/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

(S/2021/990) that the Security Council just voted on.
Had it been adopted, it would have provided a framework
for the Council’s consideration of, and response to,
the security implications of climate change on issues
on its agenda. It would also have allowed the Council
to integrate climate-related security risks in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, post-conflict
reconstruction and humanitarian efforts. It could
have been a major step forward for the international
community, including the security Council, to take
concrete actions on an issue of great concern and
urgency for humankind and the countries, communities
groups and peoples vulnerable to climate-related
security risks.
Viet Nam is among the countries most vulnerable
to the adverse impacts of climate change, including sealevel rise. Combating climate change has consistently
been our priority during and prior to our term on the
Security Council, and it will continue to be so beyond
our term in the Council and within other international
forums in the framework of comprehensive efforts
to support strong and meaningful climate action. We
concur that the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change remains the primary and inclusive
forum for negotiating climate action.
However, a matter of such multifaceted significance
requires urgency and the enhanced efforts of each and
every country in the whole Organization, including with
regard to the security dimension. It therefore does not
exclude the role of the Security Council as the primary
organ in charge of the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council must tackle the security
challenges of climate change, including through its most
effective tool of early warning systems and preventive
diplomacy. That is essential if we are to effectively and
proactively address this defining challenge of our time
That is why Viet Nam voted in favour of the draft
resolution. We commend Ireland and the Niger for their
efforts in engaging with all 15 Council members and
presenting a carefully drafted text. We deeply regret
that the Security Council could not reach consensus on
such a significant matter at this pivotal moment. The
unity of the Council would have contributed to a more
system-wide coherent response to the adverse impacts
of climate change, including security-related aspects,
which are crucial to ensuring sustainable peace in
situations on the Council’s agenda.

S/PV. 8926

Although consensus did not prevail on this thematic
draft resolution today, given the urgency of these
critical issues, we believe that all Council members
should commit to ongoing discussion, cooperation
and engagement in order to reach consensus. On many
occasions, the Security Council has demonstrated
its solidarity, unity and agility in taking collective
actions in the face of global challenges. Let it not fail
the expectations of the international community and
its people.
To that end, we will continue to be actively involved
in all constructive activities and initiatives to advance
this agenda in the spirit of consensus, solidarity and
mutual understanding. There are concrete measures
that the Council and the United Nations wider
membership at large can undertake to bolster effective
climate action.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank the delegations of the Niger and
Ireland for their efforts to advance this critical issue.
By vetoing this draft resolution (S/2021/990),
Russia has stopped the world’s most important organ
from maintaining international peace and security from
taking a small, practical and necessary step to combat
the impacts of climate change.
The climate crisis is a security crisis — one of
the most pressing of our time. It is a threat to every
person in every nation on every continent. That is why
combating the climate crisis is a top priority of our
Administration. As Secretary-General Guterres put it:
either we stop it — or it stops us. We categorically reject
the notion that Security Council action undermines the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). In fact, it does exactly the opposite. The
Security Council can and should complement support
and reinforce our collective work under the Paris
Agreement and the UNFCCC in ways that are necessary
to fight the security threat. Only the Security Council can
ensure that the security impacts of climate change are
integrated into the critical work of conflict prevention
and mitigation, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, disasterreduction and humanitarian response.
Specifically, this text would have been a modest but
meaningful move forward on those goals. It provided
the Council with practical, actionable steps to equip the
States Members of the United Nations and numerous
United Nations bodies, including peacekeeping

21-3923411/14

S/PV.8926

Maintenance of international peace and security

missions and special political missions, with tools
to better address the security implications of our
changing climate.
That is why we are dismayed that Russia blocked the
Council from taking this important step to combat the
consequences of the climate crisis. Given the enormity
of the challenge, adopting this draft resolution was the
very least we could do. Today, the veto of this resolution
has let the world down, and there is no justification for
taking that action.
Nevertheless, I want to recognize that a majority
of Council members voted in favour of today’s draft
resolution. A clear majority of Member States endorse
Security Council action on this issue. The fact that more
than 113 countries co-sponsored the draft resolution
signals the overwhelming support for the text within
the United Nations membership.
Russia may have blocked this draft resolution, but
our global movement cannot be stopped. The momentum
will only build from here. I therefore once again thank
all the members that supported the draft resolution and
the many that co-sponsored it. Their support reaffirms
that we must address the climate crisis and its impact on
peace and security. And we will do it together, despite
efforts by some to stop us.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation abstained from voting on the
draft resolution contained in document S/2021/990
on climate and security, submitted by Ireland and the
Niger. I would like to explain China’s voting position
as follows.
First, China has always attached great importance
to tackling climate change, actively participated in
relevant international cooperation efforts and played
a responsible and constructive role. We have made
important contributions to the conclusion, entry
into force and follow-up implementation of the Paris
Agreement. At a time when the Paris Agreement
encountered serious setbacks, China did not change
its mind and unswervingly acted as an activist to
implement the Agreement. China has also taken
practical measures within the framework of SouthSouth cooperation to do its very best to help other
countries cope with the challenges of climate change.
On the issue of climate change, China will do its utmost
to fulfil all the commitments it has made. China has
always taken a positive attitude towards anything that
12/14

13/12/2021

is conducive to global environmental governance and to
developing countries.
Secondly, climate change is a by-product of
humankind’s pattern of unsustainable development
since the industrial revolution. Only in the process of
green transformation and sustainable development can
this problem be fundamentally addressed. Climate
change has the potential to affect peace and security, but
the nexus between climate and security is very complex.
It is relatively clear that compared with the
microconcept of climate change, environmental
degradation, droughts and floods, food shortages and
unfair distribution of resources are the most concrete
and direct factors that may lead to tensions and conflicts.
In contrast, the transmission mechanism from climate
change to security risks is far from clear. The analysis
of drivers of climate factors on security risks must be
put into two specific contexts before it is possible to
draw a conclusion of any practical significance.
We will not avoid serious discussion of this issue,
while efforts must be made to avoid securitization of
climate issues by those who arbitrarily believe that
climate change is their only human security challenge
or the main challenge. That is not a scientific attitude.
It is not good either for international cooperation in
addressing climate change nor for effective conflict
resolution. On the contrary, it may actually water down
attention to the core issues, and it may actually have a
negative impact.
Thirdly, the most important way to deal with the
impact of climate change is to significantly reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions until net zero is achieved. In
this regard, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities is an unshakable cornerstone. No
matter which platform and from which angle the
climate issue is discussed and dealt with, it cannot
deviate from this basic principle. Developing countries,
especially African and small island countries, are faced
with special difficulties and situations brought about
by climate change. And developed countries have the
responsibility to help them strengthen capacity-building
and enhance their economic and social resilience.
The draft resolution did not address any of these
important issues. Obviously, the discussion of this
fundamental dimension has not been pursued, and
this is not fair. We feel that it is concerning that, if we
continue on this path, developed countries will have new
excuses not to take up their historical responsibilities
21-39234

13/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8926

and not honour their commitments. In addition, the
African Union Peace and Security Council adopted
a communiqué on 9 March 2021, setting out specific
propositions on the common expectations of African
countries on climate and security issues. Unfortunately,
these were not fully reflected in the draft resolution.

draft resolution. We also hope that those present and
those who are not present, namely, members of the
General Assembly, will co-sponsor this draft resolution.
Just like the response to global challenges, the handling
of climate issues needs greater cooperation but certainly
not confrontation.

Fourthly, the judgment of the value of the Council’s
actions on the climate issue does not depend on how big
a step we take or how loud we talk about it, but on the
practical significance of our efforts. What we need is
not more written reports, but measures to provide real
help to regions and countries in conflict. At present,
what developing countries are most concerned about,
which Secretary-General Guterres has repeatedly
stressed, is that developed countries earnestly
implement their commitments in the areas of climate,
finance, technology transfer and capacity-building.

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish) We thank Ireland and the Niger for their work
as authors of the draft resolution contained in document
S/2021/990, in particular for having presented a
reasonable draft, showing flexibility on several of
its provisions and addressing most of the concerns
expressed throughout the consultations, including
those of my country.

What the Security Council needs to do is not a
political show. If some countries are really paying
good attention to climate change, then they should
support the Council to use its unique authority to
establish a monitoring mechanism and help developed
countries fulfil their obligations and ensure that their
commitments are honoured.
If the Secretary-General is to be asked to take
action, then he should appoint a new special envoy
to oversee climate finance and promote technology
transfer. Commitments should not be only words. This
is the most pressing, most important issue right now.
It is not true that the Security Council is not doing
anything on climate change. The fact of the matter is the
Security Council has already dealt with climate issues
in the context of a number of country-specific matters
on the Council’s agenda. We advocate that the Council
continue on this path and deal with climate issues from
the perspective of peace and security.
On the basis of accurately grasping the mechanism
of climate-driven security risks, we need to study
targeted responses. Climate change has had a serious
impact on the Sahel region, and countries in the region
are looking for practical help from the international
community. China, Russia and India have jointly
submitted a draft resolution focusing on security
issues in the Sahel region, including climate-change
challenges, the aim of which is to effectively respond
to the specific concerns of the countries in the Sahel
region. We hope that members of the Council will
constructively participate in the consultations on this

However, despite that, the draft resolution was
blocked, thereby giving us an opportunity to recall that,
since the establishment of this Organization in 1945,
Mexico has disagreed with the inappropriately named
so-called right of veto, predicting that it could lead to
paralysis in the Security Council. That does not promote
dialogue or debate — on the contrary, it hinders it.
The draft resolution before us responds to a pressing
threat to the international community today, as we were
able to see less than a week ago in the open debate held
on the issue in this Chamber (see S/PV.8923). The draft
also recognizes the central nature of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and focuses
on the comprehensive analyses entrusted to the Security
Council for taking action.
For all of those reasons, Mexico regrets the fact
that the draft resolution has not been adopted, despite
enjoying the support of 12 of the 15 members of the
Security Council and the co-sponsorship of 113 States
Members of the United Nations.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ireland and the Niger
for tabling draft resolution S/2021/990, on which the
Council has just voted. I would like also to reiterate
our gratitude to them for their efforts to advance the
adoption of the draft resolution.
My delegation regrets the fact that the Council
was unable to adopt the draft resolution today. Once
again, it is unfortunate that the Council could not speak
with one voice on such an inclusive issue pertaining to
collective security.
My country’s delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution, based on our conviction that climate change

21-3923413/14

S/PV.8926

Maintenance of international peace and security

is one of the factors affecting international peace and
security in many regions, including the Sahel. The
Security Council must therefore take those threats into
consideration in an integrated and systematic manner as
it shoulders the primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and security.
During its term on the Council, my country has
sought to include unconventional threats, such as
climate change and pandemics, on the Council’s agenda.
That is because we are convinced that those phenomena
pose a threat to collective security and therefore should
not be overlooked by the Security Council.
Since peace and security are interlinked with many
factors, it is necessary to take an evolving approach
as we address those factors that fuel conflicts and
violence. We hope that we can continue to work within
and outside the Informal Expert Group on Climate and
Security to reach a consensus on the active role to be
played by the Council in addressing climate threats.
We stress the need for that to be done with unity of
the Council, consensus and distribution of roles in
complementarity with other United Nations organs
and bodies.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): Estonia voted in favour of
draft resolution S/2021/990, presented today by Ireland
and the Niger, and co-sponsored by a clear majority
of the United Nations membership because the effects
of climate change pose a clear and serious threat to
international peace and security, to stability and, in
some cases, even to the existence of States. We firmly
believe that the United Nations Security Council has

14/14

13/12/2021

a critical role to play in responding to climate-related
security risks. Therefore, the outcome of today’s vote
is disappointing.
The draft resolution presented would have ensured
a more structured and systemic approach and created
the necessary tools to enable the United Nations to do
its part in preventing and resolving conflicts that are
driven by the effects of climate change. We know that
there is no credible answer from those Council members
that have chosen to ignore those challenges that pose a
threat to international peace and security, which is the
Security Council’s primary responsibility.
By adopting the draft resolution, the Security
Council would have sent a strong message to thousands
of Pacific islanders from across the Blue Pacific who
have been repeatedly saying that climate change is the
most persistent and gravest threat to peace and security
in their region. We would also have shown all others
most vulnerable to the effects of climate change that
their voices are being heard.
While Estonia’s term as an elected member of the
Security Council will soon come to an end, we reiterate
the importance of keeping this most important topic
on the Security Council’s agenda and weigh on the
conscience of other current and incoming members to
continue to do so.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
mores names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

21-39234
