UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1835”

MEETING:

11 AUGUST

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l835)

.. ... .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .. .... .. .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Report of the Security Council Committee on the Admision of New Members
concerning the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam (S/11794) . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , a.. . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1835

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1835th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 11 August 1975, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Shizuo SAITO

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Acosta
Rodriguez (Cuba), Mr. Neugebauer (German Democratic Republic), Mrs. Jeanne Martin CissP (Guinea),
Mr. B&y&z (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Czarkowski (Poland), Mr. Datcu (Romania), Mr. Hussein
(Somalia) and Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

(Japan).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic,
China; Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United *Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland,
United Republic
of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l835)

1.

Adoption

2.

Report of the Security Council Committee on the
Admission
of New Members
concerning
the
applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
(S/l 1794)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will
now consider the report of the Security Council
Committee
on the Admission
of New Members
[S/11794]. In addition to that report, the Council has
before it two draft resolutions,
one recommending
the admission of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
[S/11795] and the other recommending
the admission of the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
[S/l 17961. Both texts are sponsored by the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Guyana, Iraq,
Mauritania,
Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the United Republic of Cameroon and the
United Republic of Tanzania.

of the agenda

was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption

3. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President,
the
circumstances surrounding my participation in the last
meeting of the Security Council were not sufficiently
propitious for me and my delegation to offer traditional but sincere felicitations
to you. I ,wish therefore to say now, Sir, how pleased I am to see you, a
distinguished son of Japan, occupying the presidency.
Your wide diplomatic
experience and your sense of
fair play -are attributestihich
should render your
tasks lighter than they otherwise might have been.
My delegation pledges to you its full co-operation.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Report of the Security Council Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the applications
of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and- the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam (S/11794)
1. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
of States that are not members of the Council have
.addressed letters to me requesting that they be
invited to participate in the Council’s debate on the
issue on its agenda. They are the representatives of
Cuba, the German Democratic
Republic,
Guinea,
Hungary,
India,
Poland,
Romania,
Somalia
and
Yugoslavia. In conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter, namely those of Article 31,
and in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure and the usual practice of the
Council,
I propose to invite the representatives
I have just mentioned to participate in the Council’s
discussion without the right to vote. In view of the
limited number of places available at the Council
table, I would request them to take -the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
They will be invited to take places at the Council
table when they wish to address the Council.

4. May I also take this opportunity
to ‘say a word
of deep gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Plaja
of Italy, for his skill, his tact and his patience
when he presided over the Council’s activities during
the month of July.
5. The issues with which the Security Council is
faced today-the
applications
by the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam for membership in the United Nations-are
of intense interest not only to the Vietnamese people
but to the whole international community,
for peoples
the world over have followed with anguish, and some
indeed with bitterness, the long and resolute struggle
.of -the -.valiant- Vietnamese people to recover their
freedom and independence and by that struggle to
reaffirm the inalienable right of all peoples to determine their own future without foreign interference.
1
i

6. The people of Viet-Nam
have endured a long
nightmare.
During that nightmare their society and
their country were rent apart by an explosive power
of a kind previously unknown to man’s experience.
They lived through an attempt at biocide. They
withstood an incendiary policy directed against them.
They refused to be cowed by repressive might.
The Vietnamese people spared no sacrifice to achieve
their goal. Throughout
their long struggle, the Vietnamese have had succour from, and the support of,
peoples all over the world. Not least among these
have been those from non-aligned countries and from
the non-aligned movement as a whole. Their victory
is a peoples’ victory, a victory for small countries
willing to stand by the justice of their cause.

should be examined and voted on separately and on
its own merits”.’
That opinion was so important that
the General Assembly in 1948 saw fit in its resolution
197 (III) to recommend
it as a guide for future
action by both the Council and the General Assembly.
10. In this connexion, therefore, Guyana welcomes
the applications which are before us. We salute the
people of the Republic of South Vie&Nam and the
people of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
in
their aspirations for participation
in the activities of
the United Nations. We are fully behind those aspirations and will lend our firm support to the applications. My delegation, the Government
and people
of Guyana, look forward to a prolonged period of
fruitful and mutually beneficial co-operation with the
Vietnamese
people, their Governments
and their
representatives in many-sided collaboration.

7. The fact that we are considering these applications
in the month when, 30 years ago, another holocaust
took place in Asia, should impel us to pause and
reflect. Today, we can, with qualified satisfaction,
look back at the evolution of the international situation
since those fateful days. The forces for national
liberation
have gained strength immeasurably,
and
the cold war no longer rages. A new ethic, tentative
in its beginnings but now strident in its manifestation,
will encompass us all. Yet habits of thought from
that bygone era still haunt us. They continue to inform
some attitudes which can lead to decisions at variance
with present-day requirements and the current aspirations of the vast majority of the basic constituents
of global society, the people.

11. I would not like to let slip this occasion without
expressing my delegation’s views on a thought which
has emerged in our recent deliberations
and which
has found its way into the records of the Council.
It concerns the decisions the Council takes in the
conduct of its business. It is a matter relating to our
procedures. When Guyana joined the Council, it did
so ‘on the understanding
that decisions, whether of
procedure or substance, would be made in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
taking into account practice in so far as it was relevant
and agreed to by us. We are thus worried to find
the argument being advanced, as it recently was,
that a democratic exercise in decision-making,
which
naturally flowed from the logic of internal rigour and
consistency,
was variously
described as “misuse
of the provisional rules of procedure”
and “procedural manoeuvres”. Let us be wary, lest we confuse
substance with form. But, above all, let us be careful
not to attribute to others, motives and reasons for
action which derive from a perception which does full
justice neither to deeply held views nor to the unchallenged responsibilities
of the Council.

8. Guyana is firmly committed to the goal of universality of membership
in the United Nations. Thus,
my delegation will always remain ready to support
measures, even if they are partial ones, which will
advance us towards that objective. But the approach
of the international
community
must not be selective
by whim, it must be rational. Impediments
will occur
which will delay our march towards the realization
of that goal. Whenever they do, as for example with
countries still divided which have not together postponed the prospect of reunification,
Guyana is
prepared to be patient and constructive.

12. The Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
Sweden, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Republic
of Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania
have sponsored two draft resolutions contained in
documents S/l 1795 and S/l 1796. These draft resolutions are simple and straightforward.
No extensive
elaboration
of their contents is thus required. The
texts seek respectively to recommend to the General
Assembly that the Republic of South Viet-Nam and
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
be admitted
to membership
in the United Nations. On behalf
of the sponsors, I have great pleasure in introducing
these draft resolutions and commend them to the
members of the Council.

9. It will therefore come as no surprise if I say that
my delegation will look askance at any suggestion
or proposal which seeks to frustrate the movement
towards universality
of membership
in the United
Nations if it proceeds on the premise that the acceptance of one application is conditional on the acceptance of another. In short, my delegation is opposed
to the reintroduction
of the concept of the “package
deal” into the conduct of the business of the Council
in relation to its consideration
of applications
for
membership
in the United Nations. We advocate,
instead, acceptance of the advice of the International
Court of Justice, when, as long ago as 1948, in
response to a question put to it by the General
Assembly, it concluded in a majority opinion that:
“The provisions of Article 4 [of the Charter] necessarily imply that every application
for admission

13. Mr. SUNDBERG
(Sweden): My country has
always considered universality
one of the essential
2

throes of war for as long as the United Nations has
existed. It is therefore imperative to recall that it is
incumbent upon us all to contribute substantially and
with solidarity
to the enormous work of reconstruction ahead. It is a duty also for the Organization.
The decades of warfare have left deep wounds which
it is the clear responsibility
of the world community
to heal.

corner-stones of an effective United Nations. Consequently, it is our position that all applications from
qualified States to become Members of the Organization should be dealt with and seriously considered
in the light of the relevant provisions of the Charter.
We therefore regret that our recent deliberations
could not result in an agreement which would have
enabled the Council to act in a positive and substantive manner on all the three applications
which it
had received. Nevertheless,
the Council has today
an opportunity
to take a further important
step
towards the desired universality of the Organization.

19. The long war in Indo-China
has had a deep
impact on the minds of people all over the world.
It has had divisive effects which have made themselves
felt within the United Nations. In this respect also,
the entry of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and
the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
as Members
of the Organization
would mark an important
step
and it would have a healing effect on the climate
of international
co-operation.

14. We have on our agenda a report of the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. My delegation has
found them in full accordance with the requirements
of the Charter and has joined with other members
in sponsoring two draft resolutions recommending
to the General Assembly the admission of the two
applicants as Members of the United Nations.

20. When my delegation casts its positive votes
here today, it will be an expression of the firm
conviction
and desire of the Swedish people and
Government that the republic of South Viet-Nam and
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam must be enabled
to take their place in the United Nations to which
they are entitled. We appeal to all concerned to make
such an outcome possible in order that we shall be
able soon to receive the two delegations which have
come here as full Members of the Organization.
My delegation for its part would like to extend its
warm welcome to them, and we are convinced that
our future co-operation will be as close and friendly
as the co-operation which has evolved between our
countries.

15. The entry of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
into the
United Nations would be an event of great importance and, indeed, a decision of quite special significance. It would mark the final confirmation
of the
end of the long struggle for national independence
and liberation for the people of that so sorely tried
area of the world, a struggle which was bound to be
victorious in the end. It would enable those States
to take their rightful place among the community
of
nations. They have their indispensable
contribution
to make to the cause of international
co-operation.
Their membership would also further consolidation in
that troubled region and it would be symbolic of
their hopes and expectations now finally to be able
to build their future in peace and stability.

21. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): As has been
officially declared previously by the delegation of the
Soviet Union at an earlier meeting of the Security
Council-something
which I am pleased to repeat
here-we express our deep gratification that the time
has now come when the two Vietnamese
States,
the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam,
which have won their independence and sovereignty, now have a full opportunity
to apply to the United Nations to become fullfledged Members of the Organization. The delegation
of the Soviet Union resolutely supports these applications and will vote for the admission of those
States to membership in the United Nations.

16. The people of Sweden has gained deep and
lasting sympathy for the Vietnamese
people, and
my country has therefore supported their long struggle for freedom. We have supported their right to
shape their own destinies, without foreign interference, and to choose their own political
and
economic system.
17. Our support for their cause also takes on special
importance
in a wider perspective. The conflict in
Indo-China has basically been a matter of the rights
of small countries to sovereign independence within
the international
system, the right of people to live
their own lives. We thus hope that the liberation
struggle in Viet-Nam will also lead to wider recognition
of and respect for the legitimate aspirations of small
and poor States.

22. We also actively supported the application of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam and the application of
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam for. membership
in the United Nations when, pursuant to a decision
of the Security Council,
those applications
were
considered
in the Committee
on the Admission
of New Members. The Soviet Union has become a
sponsor of the nine-Power draft resolutions on the
admission to membership
in the United Nations of
both the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.

18. In this connexion, we must not forget that the
effects of the war on the peoples of the two States,
on the soil, the agriculture,
the industry and the
economy and well-being of the country as a whole
have been devastating.
The area has been in the
3

23. We are deeply convinced that both Vietnamese
States fully meet the requirements
laid down in the
Charter of the United Nations that must be met by
States wishing to become Members of the Organization. These two sovereign States have suffered in a
lengthy struggle and have won their right to sovereignty and independence, and have proved by deeds
that they are prepared to assume the obligations
contained in the Charter and that, together with
other peace-loving States, they are prepared to fight
for the establishment
on earth of genuine intemational peace and security and for the extension
throughout the earth of detente in international affairs
to consolidate peace and security for peoples. We
are also deeply gratified to see that official observers
from the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam
are present in this
room-Mr.
Dinh Ba Thi and Mr. Nguyen Van Luuand we heartily welcome them.

the principles of peaceful coexistence and mutually
beneficial co-operation in everyday affairs, and when
the specific task of all peace-loving States is to be
concerned that international
detente acquires an ever
more concrete material form.
28. In this connexion, the Security Council cannot
fail to take into account the results of the Conference
on Security and Co-operation
in Europe, on which
General Secretary Brezhnev has said: “They can be
useful even beyond the boundaries of Europe. This
powerful impulse”,
he emphasized, “has been given
by this meeting of leaders of the 35 participating
States, and is destined to help all in Europe and
elsewhere to live in peace”.
29. The consideration today by the Security Council
of the applications
of the Republic of South VietNam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam for
United Nations membership,
and a positive decision
by the Security Council on both these matters, will
definitely help us to take another step forward on the
way to strengthening
peace throughout the world.
This will be a substantial contribution
to solving the
common task of making the process of detente in
international
affairs irreversible and of reaching a real
milestone on the road towards fruitful and mutually
beneficial co-operation among all States.

24. The fact that the Security Council is today
considering the question of the admission to membership in the United Nations of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
is a genuine reflection of the tremendous and irreversible changes which have occurred in the world,
thanks to the tireless effforts of all peace-loving .and
progressive forces, and primarily the countries of the
socialist community.
This is one of the many positive
results of the policy of detente in international
affairs.

30. The Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
whose applications for
United Nations membership we are considering today
have not .only won universal respect but have also
received broad international recognition. This is borne
out by the single fact that the overwhelming majority
of members of the Security Council have recognized
both these States and have established diplomatic
relations with them. We are gratified to note that
during the consideration
by the Committee
on the
Admission
of New Members of the applications
of these two Vietnamese States, the overwhelming
majority of Security Council members emphasized
that these countries fully meet the requirements for
admission to membership
in the United Nations as
defined in the Charter. Consequently;
on that basis
we can say, without fear of contradiction,
that both
Vietnamese States will make a worthy contribution
to the activities of the United Nations, and that the
Organization
itself, with their admission, will have
taken’ a further important step forward on the way
to ensuring its complete and genuine universality.

25. Viet-Nam’s
‘victory in its long, heroic struggle
is primarily the victory of its dauntless and valiant
people which have suffered so many bitter trials.
Its unflagging patriotism
and its firm belief in the
justice of its cause, its high degree of organization
and self-sacrifice have paved the way for it to this
final victory. The tremendous
sacrifices that the
Vietnamese people have borne have not been in vain.
The Vietnamese people have won broad sympathy
_~
and respect throughout the world.
26. The admission of the two Vietnamese States to
the family of States Members of the United Nations
will be an important
contribution
in the further
consolidation
of international
peace, security and
mutual understanding
among peoples. It is needless
for me to say that the positive solution of this question
undoubtedly
will help to promote the strengthening
of international co-operation and to consolidate peace
and security not only in South-East Asia and on the
Asian continent but throughout the world as well,
and will also promote the further development
of
friendly relations, co-operation
and mutual understanding among States and peoples on the basis of
the universal recognition of the principle of peaceful
coexistence.

31. The Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
have many friends.
In this connexion, the Security Council cannot fail
to pay heed to the statement made by the Co-ordinating Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries on
7’ August in connexion with the Council’s consideration of the applications
for admission
of these
two Vietnamese States to membership in the United
Nations [S/11793]. The Co-ordinating
Committee,
consisting of 17 States, and speaking on behalf of the

27. We are now living in an era when the development of international
relations has reached a new
stage, when we are focusing on the task of embodying
4

relations between our two Marxist-Leninist
parties
and our two countries and peoples are strengthening
and developing.. This is an excellent example of
fraternity and co-operation and of socialist intemationalism in action.”

large number of countries belonging to the non-aligned
movement,
officially
declared that they fully and
unambiguously
supported the admission to United
Nations membership of the two Vietnamese States.
32. The Security Council must take into account
this position expressed by the non-aligned States and
their Co-ordinating
Committee,
as well as their
common appeal to the Security Council to admit these
two States as Members of the United Nations. This
is the wish, the will and the demand of the overwhelming majority of United Nations. Members. That
collective
statement is a striking and convincing
example of the very broad support of a large group
of countries of the third world and of their solidarity
with the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
regarding the participation of these two States in the United Nations.
It is a fresh demonstration
of the friendship and
co-operation of peace-loving peoples with the Republic
of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam. To fail to heed this opinion and this demand
would be a great historical mistake. The friends of
the two Vietnamese States which are not members of
the Security Council have today come to this meeting
of the Council in order to raise their voices in support
of. the admission of these two countries to United
Nations membership
and to express their complete
solidarity with them regarding those applications to the
United Nations on this matter.

35. Any attempt to impede the admission of these
two States to United ‘Nations membership
is completely unjustified and baseless, and it would be even
more illogical to connect the admission
of these
States with any other side issues that have no relevance
to the question of the admission of the two Vietnamese
States to membership in the United Nations. We can
declare quite definitely
that to attempt to impede
the admission
of these States to United Nations
membership
could not be understood
or justified
by 99.9 per cent of the States Members of the United
Nations.
36. In conclusion,
may I express ‘my conviction
that the Security Council will take a positive decision
today on the applications
of these two Vietnamese
States and will recommend to the General Assembly
that they be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. This is an international
political necessity
that has come to maturity, and it will have a beneficial effect on the general state of international
affairs and relations, and will also enhance the prestige
and activities of the United Nations.
37. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (translation
from
Chinese): The Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the
Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
submitted their
applications for admission to membership in the United
Nations on 15 and 16 July 1975 respectively.
The
Chinese delegation holds that in accordance with the
relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United
Nations, both the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam are fully qualified
for membership in the United Nations. We therefore
firmly support their applications and are of the opinion
that the Security Council should recommend the admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
to membership
in the
United Nations. Accordingly,
we have joined the
sponsors of the two draft resolutions submitted by the
non-aligned Member States.

33. We must not fail to point out that the very fact
that nine States members of the Council have
sponsored the draft resolutions recommending
the
admission to United Nations membership
of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
shows that the just cause of
the two Vietnamese States in fact enjoys genuine and
broad international support. We note with some pride
that the Soviet Union entertains the closest and most
friendly relations with the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.
Faithful
to the principles of internationalism
and the solidarity
of peoples fighting for their liberty and national
independence, the Soviet Union has consistently been
in favour, and will continue to be on the side, of the
patriots of North and South Viet-Nam.
34. The Soviet Union and the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam are linked by many years of friendship
based on mutual understanding
and comprehensive
co-operation;
it is the friendship of two fraternal
socialist States and peoples. In the letter of General
Secretary Brezhnev to the Society of VietnameseSoviet Friendship in connexion with its twenty-fifth
anniversary, it was stated that:

‘38. The Vietnamese people are a heroic people, and
the Vietnamese nation a great nation. For decades, in
order to achieve independence and liberation,
they
carried .out protracted
and indomitable
struggles
against imperialism
and have won one great victory
after another.
Back in August 1945, the entire
Vietnamese people, under the leadership of President
Ho Chi Minh, rose up courageously to seize political
power from the aggressors and established the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.
But immediately
thereafter, imperialist armed intervention forced the Vietnamese people to take up arms to wage a valiant
war of resistance.

‘The Soviet people can say with some pride
that throughout the 30 years of existence of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, the Soviet Union
has been shoulder to shoulder with the Vietnamese
people, their brothers. We are gratified that the
5

-

39. After the signing of the Geneva Agreements in
1954,* the Vietnamese
people could have realized
their national independence and the reunification. of
their motherland.
However, the flagrant violation of
these Agreements by the United States and its intervention and armed aggression against Viet-Nam forced
the Vietnamese people again to carry on a heroic and
arduous war against United States aggression and for
national salvation. With the powerful support and
assistance of the North Vietnamese people and the
people of the whole world, the South Vietnamese
people persevered in a protracted
people’s war,
frustrated the various schemes of aggression on the
part of the imperialists
and the puppet clique, thus
leading to the signing of the Paris Agreements of 1973r2
However, with imperialist abetment and support, the
Nguyen Van Thieu puppet clique went further to
violate the Agreements unscrupulously
by refusing
to realize national concord and ceaselessly invading
the liberated areas of South Viet-Nam.
In the face
of this situation, the army men and civilians of South
Viet-Nam
resolutely fought a just war of counterattack in self-defence, waged a revolutionary
war to
defeat the counterrevolutionary
war and finally won
the brilliant victory of the complete liberation of South
Viet-Nam, thus opening a new era in which the entire
territory of Viet-Nam has been liberated.

and sincerely wish them continuous new and greater
victories in their cause of revolution and construction.
We are also convinced that upon admission to membership in the United Nations, the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
will make positive contributions
to the realization of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations together will all the other justiceupholding Member States.
43. Mr. BOOH BOOH (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President,
at the time when the Security Council is taking up
the consideration proper of the applications for admission to the United Nations of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
it is a great pleasure for me, on behalf of my delegation, to congratulate
you most warmly on your
accession to the lofty post of President of the Security
Council for this month. Because of the wealth of
your experience’ in the problems of the Organization,
and also because of the respect and the confidence
which you enjoy among your colleagues, we are
convinced that our work will be carried out in an
atmosphere of serenity and will be crowned with
success. Mr. President, you can rely on the frank
and constant co-operation
of my delegation for the
satisfactory accomplishment
of your delicate task.

40. The victory won by the Vietnamese people has
major historical and international
significance. It has
given forceful encouragement to the oppressed nations
and peoples of the world that are still carrying on their
struggles and has set up a brilliant example for the
anti-imperialist
revolutionary
cause of the people
throughout the world. As pointed out by Chairman
Mao Tsetung in his statement of 20 May 1970, “The
people of a small country can certainly defeat aggression by a big country, if only they dare to rise in
struggle, dare to take up arms and grasp in their
own hands the destiny of their country”.

44. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity to express the sincere gratitude of my delegation
to the representative of Italy, Mr. Plaja, and to his
principal assistant, Mr. Cavaglieri, for the inestimable
services-appreciated
by all-that
they rendered the
Security Council during the month of July.
45. In the report of the Committee
on the Admission of New Members [S/11794], the majority of the
members of the Committee proposed that the Security
Council recommend
to the General Assembly the
admission of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam to the United
Nations. On behalf of the Government of the United
Republic of Cameroon, my delegation unreservedly
supports the conclusions contained in the report, first
because they are inspired by the necessary principles of
universality,
effectiveness and democratization
of
the United Nations, to which my country attaches
great importance,
and further because these conclusions faithfully reflect the political situation in the
new Indo-China.

41. During the post-war period the Vietnamese
people have also achieved gratifying successes in
healing the wounds of war and in rehabilitating
and
developing
industrial
and agricultural
production.
The international
prestige of Viet-Nam is increasingly
on the rise, and it has won broad international
support and sympathy. Now there are over 80 countries that have established diplomatic
relations with
or given recognition to the Democratic ,Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
respectively.

46. The policy of non-alignment
and non-exclusive
co-operation with all countries of goodwill which my
country tirelessly pursues has for several years led
the United Republic of Cameroon to extend the scope
of its friendship to many countries of Asia and, in
particular, to establish diplomatic relations with both
the Government of the Democratic Republic of VietNam and the Provisional Revolutionary
Government
of South Viet-Nam. These relations have proved to be
fruitful and beneficial to all sides.

42. China and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam are neighbours
as closely linked as the lips and teeth. The Chinese
and Vietnamese peoples are near and dear comradesin-arms and brothers. The Chinese people have
always firmly supported the Vietnamese people in their
struggle against imperialism and for national liberation.
In the years to come we will, as always, firmly
support the just struggle of the Vietnamese, people
6

47. In the course of the long war which was imposed
on the Vietnamese people, my Government constantly
and unequivocally
made clear the support of the
Cameroonian
people for the just and heroic struggle
of the Vietnamese people, thus strengthening the real
and historical solidarity of the Afro-Asian peoples.
We salute the resounding victories recently won by
the people of Viet-Nam, which create favourable conditions for that era of peace and prosperity so much
desired by the States of Indo-China and the sine qua
non that will permit the great economic and human
potential of Viet-Nam
to serve the cause of the
reconstruction and reunification of that country.

resolutions
S/11795 and S/11796 now before
Council and is about to vote for their adoption.

the

51. Any attitude that would lead to a delay in the
admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam to the United
Nations would, in the opinion of my delegation,
have no serious justification
and would be based on
circumstances extraneous to the merits of both applications. Such an attitude would undeniably reveal a
gross attempt continuously to interfere in the affairs
of the Vietnamese people in flagrant violation of the
purposes and principles of the Chartes and scorn
for the wishes expressed by the overwhelming
majority of the States of the world. We are certain
that such a manceuvre would meet with the firm disapproval of all peace-loving
and freedom-loving
countries.

48. My delegation firmly believes that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
are States devoted to peace, and to the
independence
of peoples; they are States which
respect both the principles contained in the Charter
of the United Nations and those which guide the
action of the non-aligned
countries. Heirs of an
ancient and wonderful civilization,
from now on
free from the constraints of wars of aggression, yet
benefiting from a wealth of experience of anti-colonial
and anti-imperialist
struggle, the two Vietnamese
States are, in the opinion of my Government,
sufficiently qualified to make a positive contribution
to the work of the Organization
and, in particular,
to the effort to establish an international
order that
will be more just and more in accord with the aspirations of the peoples of the world.

52. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, first of all, on behalf of my
delegation, I should like to congratulate you upon
your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. You may be assured
that the delegation of France will support your wise
efforts in guiding our work. We feel certain that we
are in good, firm and equitable hands. The excellence of the relations existing between Japan and
France-relations
of which Mr. de Guiringaud,
a
former Ambassador of France to your great country,
would have liked to speak himself-is
another reason
for offering you our good wishes in the accomplishment of your responsible task.

49. Interpreting
the conditions
laid down in the
Charter regarding the admission of new members, the
International
Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion
of 28 May 1948, clearly stated that

53. At this point I should like again to say how
very much we appreciated
the presidency of our
friends from Italy during the month of July.

‘6 . . . a Member of the United Nations which is called
upon, in virtue of Article 4 of the Charter, to
pronounce itself by its vote, either in the Security
Council or in the General Assembly, on the admission of a State to membership in the United Nations,
is not juridically
entitled to make its consent to the
admission dependent on conditions not expressly
provided by paragraph 1 of the said Article;”

54. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolutions recommending
to the General Assembly
admission to the Organization
of the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam.
We wish to explain the reasons for our
two votes.
55. The Vietnamese
people have lived through
tragedies which have aroused the entire world,
engaged the efforts of two Secretaries-General
of the
United Nations and led France to call unceasingly
for the political solutions that were so clearly necessary. It was in order to promote those solutions that
my country offered Paris as the venue of conferences
which, for several years running, brought’ together
the protagonists of a too lengthy conflict. The end
of that conflict began to become possible in 1973,
but the weapons were silenced only recently.

and that
‘1 . . . in particular,
a Member of the Organization
cannot, while it recognizes the conditions set forth
in that provision to be fulfilled by the State concerned, subject its affirmative vote to the additional
condition that other States be admitted to membership in the United Nations together with that
State.“’
That advisory opinion was, furthermore,
endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 197 (III) of
8 December 1948.

56. The time now seems to have arrived to come
to the aid of a region which has suffered such travail
from international
and civil war and help it to join
the United Nations family and thus confirm that a
new page can be turned. .We shall support the admis-

50. It is in the light of the foregoing considerations
that my delegation has become a sponsor of draft
7

sion of the Republics into which the people of VietNam are now divided, since that is what they request,
since they are peace-loving
and since they have
committed
themselves to compliance with the obligations arising from the Charter.

expressed ourselves in favour of all three applications
placed before the Council for examination.
In doing
so, we were inspired by our adhesion to the principle of universality
of the United Nations and our
conviction
that within the Organization
problems
can more easily be discussed and pressed towards
a solution if all the parties concerned are present.
We have therefore expressed our regret that only
two of the current applications have gone through the
required procedure.

57. No one is unaware that France and Viet-Nam
once had a .joint destiny and that my country has
with the two applicants and their people a number of
historic and friendly ties, as well as diplomatic,
economic and cultural relations. These reasons militate
naturally in favour of the affiiative
votes which
will be cast by my delegation, which takes pleasure
in greeting the presence in this chamber of the
observers of the two Republics of Viet-Nam.

63. My delegation, however, is pleased to see the
two draft resolutions on the remaining applications
ready to be voted on. We see in this a further sign
of the end of the long tragedy which developed in
those two countries and the a sign of the participation of the Vietnamese
Republics in the world
effort for a higher degree of co-operation
for the
welfare of peoples.

58. I need hardly add that-and
this is the third
reason for our favourable
vote-France
remains
devoted to its ideal of universality.
In my statement
of 6 August [183&h meeting] I expressed regret that
we were unable to include in the agenda the candidacy
of South Korea. We hope that the spirit of universality
will not fall victim to the unfortunate
common
practice of linking votes to one another, and we also
hope that the attainment of every possible degree of
universality will not come up against theories linking
candidacies on the basis of superficial regional similarities.

64. In conformity with my country’s position, my
delegation will vote in favour of those draft resolutions, not only on the basis of the relations which
Italy has established with the two States in question,
but also as proof of my delegation’s conviction that
the presence of the two Vietnamese
States in the
United Nations will contribute to the work of the
Organization
and to the full understanding
of the
questions and needs of that area of Asia.

59. For its part, France wishes to dispel every
remnant of the cold war and works to that end.
We hope that the interested Powers and the United
Nations bodies will have a lofty awareness of their
responsibilities
in negotiating the difficult problem of
Korea, which must be settled according to specific
facts without losing sight of the simultaneously
global
and progressive nature of the process of detente to
which we are all attached. The sense of conciliation
and reconciliation,
the will to peace which Asia and the
world need have guided us throughout the debates of
the Security Council, which are about to come to an
end. This sense will continue to guide us in the future
in every circumstance.

65. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
may I add my congratulations
to you on your assumption of the high office of President of the Security
Council. Many historic ties bind your country and
mine, both island States, and our relations are of the
closest. As for yourself, Sir, I personally have had
the opportunity
to appreciate your outstanding qualities both as a diplomat and as a man, in a long and
happy co-operation in difficult circumstances, a long
way away from the Council chamber. I am therefore
particularly delighted to have the privilege of making
my first major statement in the Security Council
under your chairmanship.

60. Mr. CAVAGLIERI
(Italy): Mr. President,
I
should like first of all to express to you again the
congratulations
and best wishes of the Italian delegation on your presidency during the present month
of August. We have the fullest confidence in your
actions, and we wish to assure you of our firm cooperation.. I should like also to thank those representatives who expressed appreciation
concerning the
presidency of Mr. Plaja during the month of July.

66. I should like also to offer ,the thanks of my
Mission to our European partners, Mr. PIaja and
Mr. Cavaglieri, for the sterling services they gave the
Council during the month of July.
67. The admission of new members is normally one
of the happiest tasks which we undertake in the
Council, My delegation has over the years been
proud to sponsor the application of many new Memmany former
British
Non-Selfbers, including
Governing Territories.
Today, however, what should
have been a happy occasion has been tarnished by
the recollection that the third request for admission
to the Organization
was arbitrarily
dismissed in a
manner which reflects little credit on the Council.
I must acknowledge that I found some of the arguments which were advanced by those who opposed
the consideration
of the application of the Republic

61. I wish to confirm the position of the Italian
delegation with respect to the two draft resolutions
before the Council on the applications for admission
to the United Nations submitted by the Governments
of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of North Viet-Nam.
62. -My delegation has already stated its support for
the admission of the two States. Actually we had
8

of Korea somewhat surprising. It -was, for example,
implied by several speakers that somehow the Republic of Korea was not fully independent. This argument
was deployed with particular
eloquence
by the
-representative
of the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic who described South Korea as a “puppet
regime” [ibid., pm-u. 1301.

in the Charter and solemnly undertake to carry out
these obligations. In these circumstances my Govemment is pleased to support their applications.
73. The United Kingdom has diplomatic
relations
with both these Governments
whose applications
we are now considering.
We wish them success in
tackling the formidable tasks of reconstruction
and
national reconciliation
which confront them. We
believe that it is right and proper that they should
become Members of the United Nations.

68. Since this argument came from the representative of the Byelorussian SSR, I listened to it with
particular attention. But may I remind the Council
that some 80-odd countries
maintain
diplomatic
relations with the Republic of Korea. And anyone
who has had dealings, as I have had, with the South
Korean Government,
will know that, whatever its
characteristics,
lack of independence is not one of
them.

74. As the representative
of the United Kingdom
pointed out at our last meeting of the Council
[ibid.],
the Government
of the United Kingdom
believes that membership
in the United
Nations
should not be restricted to countries with whose
political and social systems we agree. We would wish
to encourage the widest possible membership in the
belief that political barriers between peoples should
be broken down and that the Organization
should
develop into a truly representative
world organization. It is with these considerations
in mind that my
delegation
has decided to support both the. draft
resolutions before us.

69. It was also suggested that, because the Korean
question was to be considered
by the General
Assembly,
it was inappropriate
for the Security
Council to deal with the application
for membership by South Korea now. But surely the precise
point of our proceedings here is to make recommendations
to the General Assembly.
It would
certainly have been quite in order for the Council
to have made a recommendation
about South Korea
to that body.

75. Mr. AL-KHUDHAIRY
(Iraq): Mr. President, it
is with great pleasure and satisfaction that my delegation sees you presiding over our meetings this
month. We are assured that your wisdom and long
experience will be of invaluable help in our deliberations. I wish to assure you of the firm co-operation
of the delegation of Iraq.

70. Furthermore,
we have actually heard suggestions that South Korean membership
in the United
Nations would somehow impede the reunification
of
Korea. This is a remarkable argument. It is the more
paradoxical in that it was used in meetings which
gave favourable consideration
to applications
for
membership
from the two Viet-Nams,
which have
openly pledged themselves to reunification.
Surely
those using this argument cannot really be suggesting
that when a Government is ready, as is South Korea,
to take on the obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations, this is a bad thing which somehow
will make it less co-operative,
less flexible, less
diligent in its search for a peaceful solution.

76. It is also opportune at this stage to express
our appreciation
to and admiration
for Mr. Plaja
of Italy, who so ably fulfilled the difficult task of the
President of the Council during the month of July.
His untiring efforts, as well as those of his delegation,
deserve special note.
77. My delegation participated
in sponsoring the
two draft resolutions that are before us-on the application for admission to the United Nations of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam.
Our desire and strong wish to
see the two Vietnamese States as full-fledged Members of the United Nations is only in keeping with
the policies and positions which my Government
has held since the early years when the valiant
people of Viet-Nam
commenced
their relentless
struggle against foreign occupation and the forces of
imperialism and their lackeys.

71. It seems to me that reason was stretched to
considerable lengths to justify what was an act of
discrimination.
Accordingly, before voting takes place,
I wish to emphasize once again that, although my
delegation
will support the two admissions
for
membership
still before us, the affirmative
votes
which I shall cast should in no way be considered
as condoning the decision taken by the Council at
our last meeting [183&h meeting] not even to consider
the application of the Republic of Korea.

78. The Vietnamese
people have achieved their
inalienable
right to self-determination
and independence after a long and courageous struggle, which
has been admired and recognized by both foes and
friends. The only logical, rightful, just and unavoidable
conclusion to such an heroic but bloody struggle
is for the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam to occupy their rightful
place among us as Members of the United Nations.

72. I now turn to the two draft resolutions introduced so elegantly and eloquently by the representative of Guyana. We have noted that in their
applications
for membership,
both the Provisional
Revolutionary
Government of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
and the Government
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam accept the obligations contained
9

79. The long, hard but victorious struggle of the
Vietnamese people is-but a living proof and testament
of the unconquerable
spirit, determination
and aspirations of all peoples which are fighting for their
inalienable
right to self-determination
and independence from the yoke of foreign ocupation and subjugation by a foreign Power.

Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of VietNam to membership in the United Nations and considers that these draft resolutions should be adopted
by the Security Council. The right to become Members of the United Nations was won by the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam in a long and arduous struggle for their
liberty and independence, a struggle for the restoration and consolidation of peace in Indo-China.

80. Support for the admission of the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
to the United Nations has been overwhelmingly expressed both inside this chamber today
and outside. World public opinion on this issue has
been made clear. Support for the people of Viet-Nam
has been unanimous among all peace-loving peoples.
The recognition
of the two Vietnamese
Republics
and the establishment
of diplomatic
relations with
them by the majority of the Members of the United
Nations is another proof. In this context, my delegation finds incomprehensible
the attempts that are
being made to sabotage their admission. We cannot
accept the manceuvres and subterfuge practised by
some members of the Council to tie the admission of
the two Vietnamese States with and to make them
conditional on the admission of other parties.

85. The removal of a hotbed of tension in IndoChina has had a beneficial effect on the international
situation in general and on the situation in SouthEast Asia in particular.
It has created favourable
conditions for the further development of the process
of improvement
in international
affairs.
86. The Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam have won broad international recognition.
Their foreign policy is one of
strengthening
peace and international
security, of
developing friendship and good neighbourly relations
with all countries and of deepening comprehensive
international
co-operation
on the basis of mutual
respect; independence,
equality, mutual benefit and
peaceful coexistence. This consistent foreign policy
is totally in accord with the demands made by the
Charter of the United Nations.

81. The age of “package deals” in the conduct of
the Council’s business in relation to the admission of
new members has passed and is outmoded.
We
strongly believe that every admission
must be
considered and voted on separately and on its own
merits, that there should be no linkage with unrelated
issues. We have had enough of the tyranny of the
minority. We reject such manceuvres and all attempts
to impede the rightful admission of the two Vietnamese States to the United Nations.

87. In applying for membership
in the United
Nations, the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the
Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
have stated that
they are prepared to assume the obligations contained
in the Charter and have solemnly pledged to fulfil
those obligations.
There can be no doubt that the
admission of those two States to membership in the
United Nations will make a significant contribution
to enhancing the effectiveness and authority of the
United Nations and will also represent a step forward
in ensuring its genuine universality.
It will enable it
fully to enjoy the great political and vital experience
won by the Vietnamese people.

82. The Government
and people of Iraq therefore
look forward to seeing the Republic of South VietNam and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
as
Members of the United Nations, and we strongly
urge the Council unanimously
to recommend to the
General Assembly the admission of the two Vietnamese States.

88. The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR considers that the attempts to link the question of the
admission to the United Nations of the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam with another issue which is not at all
germane to the admission to the United Nations of
those two sovereign States are completely unfounded
and specious.

83. Mr. KUDRYAVTSEV
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist Republic)
(interpretation
from Russian):
As we have already had the opportunity
to state at
the meeting of the Security Council held on 6 August
[ibid.] and in the Security Council Committee
on
the Admission of New Members, the delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR decisively supports the applications
of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic Republic’
of Viet-Nam
for admission
to
membership
in the United Nations and will consequently vote in favour of the draft resolutions on
the admission
of those two sovereign States to
membership in the United Nations.

89. The admission of the Republic of South VietNam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
to
the United Nations at the present time is something
which has won over-all international
support. This is
particularly
borne out by the declaration
of the
Co-ordinating
Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries of 7 August which, in connexion
with the
application of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and
that of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
for
membership in the United Nations, stated that “the

84. The Byelorussian
RSS, together with other
States, has sponsored the draft resolutions recommending the admission of the Republic of South
10

Co-ordinating
Committee
whole-heartedly
supports
these candidatures, which it considers as being fully
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and as representing an action on behalf of... friendship and co-operation among all peoples” [S/12793].

95. The historic significance of the victory of the
people of Viet-Nam, who for 30 years waged a heroic
war against all foreign invaders, lies in the fact
that it has proved once again, against superhuman
odds and at the price of the greatest possible sacrifice,
that a people, however small, cannot be defeated
by any Power whatever when it resolves to defend
to the end its right to independence
and liberty.
It lies in the further fact that its victory constitutes
one of the greatest defeats of the forces of colonialism,
imperialism
and aggression. It is, therefore, a great
contribution
to the whole international
community,
to the United Nations and to the living spirit of
the Charter, as at one and the same time it liquidated a hotbed of war and the most dangerous international tension created by the attempts to subjugate
the Vietnamese
people, and constituted
another
major advance towards the democratization
of international relations.

90. The admission to the United Nations of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
will be fully in accordance
with the further development of that most important
and irreversible positive process on the international
scene, an important example of which has been the
culmination
of the third conclusive
stage of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe
and the adoption at a high level of important political
documents destined to play an important part in the
strengthening
of international
peace, security and
co-operation on the basis of the fundamental principles
of peaceful coexistence for which, with great conviction and great consistency,
the founder of the
Soviet State, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, fought and for
which the Soviet people continue to fight today.

96. Our colleagues and friends, Mr. Nguyen Van
Luu of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and
Mr. Dinh Ba Thi of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
have in their recent statements, especially before the
Co-ordinating
Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries on 7 August [ibid.], repeatedly underlined the
role that the solidarity and active and direct support
and assitance of all democratic,
peace-loving
and
progressive forces of the world played in their
struggle, which, indeed, was a common one. They
stressed particularly,
among other things,
the
support of the non-aligned countries. As our VicePremier and Foreign Secretary, Mr. Milo5 MiniC,
stated recently in the Yugoslav Parliament, the victory
of the liberation movements of Viet-Nam
is, at the
same time, the victory of the policy of non-alignment,
and of far-sightedness
in the attitude of the nonaligned countries.

91. Speaking about the results of that Conference,
the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of
the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid
Ilyich Brezhnev, has stated “This is a victory of
reason. All have gained: the countries of the East
and the West; the peoples of the socialist and the
capitalist States; those who are parties to alliances
and those who are neutral, both great and small.
This is a gain for all who cherish peace and security
on our earth”.
92. The admission to membership
in the United
Nations of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
will mark an
important
contribution
to the further deepening,
broadening and strengthening of international detente,
endowing it with real, concrete meaning. It will
serve the cause of the further development
of
peaceful, fruitful and mutually beneficial co-operation
among all States, irrespective of their social systems.

97. That the peoples of socialist and non-aligned
Yugoslavia should always have felt so particularly
close to the struggle of the people of Viet-Nam
is
quite natural, as we too waged our liberation war and
accomplished
our revolution
by fiercely defending
our independence against foreign invaders, as well
as resisting all pressures and attempts to deny us
the right to decide our own destiny.

93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
94. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia):
Sir, may I congratulate you on assuming the position of President of
the Security Council for this month, a task that you
are fulfilling
with your customary
fairness. My
delegation wishes to participate in the debate on the
applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and
of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam for admission to membership in the United Nations in order
to lend our unqualified
and full support to the
legitimate desire and request of the two Vietnamese
States to be admitted to the United Nations and to
take their rightful place in the comity of nations,
just as the Yugoslav peoples and Government
supported their indomitable
struggle from the very
beginning.

98. The Security Council has before it the applications of the two Vietnamese States, whose inclusion in the agenda it adopted by the overwhelming
majority of 14 votes in favour, none against, with
one abstention.
I shall not refer now to the circumstances
and the merits of the votes taken
subsequent to the votes I have just referred to.
99. Their applications
having been made in due
form, the two Governments
of the two sovereign
States accepting the rights, privileges and duties of
membership
under the Charter and having just
emerged from the war in which they defended the
most sacred principles of the Charter, there can be
11

no legitimate, just reason for the Council not to act
promptly and favourably-not
to recommend to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session their admission to the United Nations. Furthermore,
the representatives of the two Vietnamese States have jointly
and repeatedly stated that, having waged a long
struggle and undergone great sacrifices to secure
peace, national independence
and social progress,
the Vietnamese people wishes to join all other peoples throughout the world in the struggle for peace,
independence,
freedom and social progress, and
for the development
of friendly relations with all
nations, including the United States of America. All
these wishes are in keeping with the objectives and
aims of the United Nations, as contained in Chapter I
of the Charter.

comments in the press here on the Helsinki
Conference on Security and Co-operation
in Europe,
where the only interesting feature was whether and to
what extent it was a success or a defeat of this or
that big country, while the total reality of over
30 European States being there-perhaps
wanting to
achieve something themselves-and
considering it a
success or not has totally evaporated in the wellknown “power vacuum”.
103. It goes without saying that, even if the Security Council were prevented from making a positive
recommendation
now, the people of Viet-Nam cannot
for long be deprived of their rights in the United
Nations. They have, with overwhelming international
support, won far more difficult struggles, and they
will have support for the necessary efforts here, as
the rearguard action to prevent them from having their
rights fulfilled here does not really have any historical
promise. We all remember how detrimental
to the
United Nations and the whole fabric of international
relations and how ultimately
futile was the policy
of denying the People’s Republic of China its rightful seat. It did not much benefit its protagonists
either, as no policy turned towards the past can do
so. The new realities in the world are perhaps best
seen in that it was impossible
to make the war
against Viet-Nam
a local, regional affair concealed
from the eyes and support of the whole world.
Equally, no people in the world supported the war
against Viet-Nam
and, in the end, no people really
permitted having colonial wars waged in its name.

100. But now the Security Council seems to be
faced with a sudden and arbitrary obstacle in an
attempt at achieving a so-called “package-deal”,
in conditioning
the admission of two Viet-Nams upon
the admission of South Korea-a
condition which
would be totally inadmissible
in law, and which
would be completely indefensible politically.
Sufftce
it to say that there are still 50,000 foreign troops
in South Korea, and that the Government
of North
Korea is firmly opposed to the admission of South
Korea to the Unied Nations-indeed,
to any Korean
admission unless it is as one country. Finally, the
United Nations has never admitted one part of a
divided country, and, in the case of the two Germanys, admission was made possible only when both
parts, jointly, wanted it.

104. What we should like here to commend the
representatives of the two Viet-Nams for is that their
principled
firmness is combined
with a dignified,
indeed noble, restraint and totally constructive attitude. After the victory, they insist upon being ready
to co-operate with all, to have good, friendly relations
with all. This also proves once again that it is the
small ones’ that are now restrained and responsible
in their victory; it is the small ones that are really
mindful of the interests of others, that are not
selfish, but charitable
in victory and capable of
setting an example for all.

101. It is indeed not logical, on the ground of universality, to erect obstacles to the admission of two
fully qualified
States, thus depriving
the United
Nations of the membership
of two new deserving
States, by tying it in with a clearly impossible,
irrelevant and unjust condition, as seems to be the
intention
in this case. And it would be really
unjustified
to go on further denying them their
rightful place in the community
of nations, when,
following many decades of colonialism and 30 years
of war, they have finally succeeded in becoming
independent, sovereign and peace-loving participants
in international
relations.

105. We do hope that those who would wish to
prevent the Security Council from making the only
right decision would reconsider now.

102. Even by the cold logic of the balance of power,
such an attitude would not be easy to understand,
as the Republic of South Viet-Nam is already a full
member of the group of non-aligned countries and the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, so soon after the
victory, has already applied for full membership
among the non-aligned countries. We hope that we
shall not have to be faced again with that particular
distorted vision according to which only the big ones
really exist on the map of the world, the world
being just a chessboard where everything that happens
is relevant only to the “weakening”
of the one or the
“strengthening”
of the other of the big ones. The
latest example of such a distorted vision were some

106. The declaration of the Co-ordinating Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries on the matter [ibid.],
adopted at its meeting on 7 August, speaks best of
the widest support that the Republic of South VietNam and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
enjoy and will continue to enjoy-a
support that
can only grow.
107. The presence of the two Vietnamese
delegations of observers,
together
representing
the
liberated people of Viet-Nam in the United Nations,
is in itself a very special event in the history of the
12

United Nations. It is my delegation’s fervent hope
that the General Assembly at its thirtieth
regular
session will be able to admit them to the United
Nations. It will certainly give them the overwhelming
support which they and indeed the United Nations
as a’whole deserve.
108. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list
of speakers is that of the representative
of the
German Democratic
Republic. I invite him to take
a place at the Security Council table and to make
his statement.
109. Mr. NEUGEBAUER
(German
Democratic
Republic):
Mr. President
and members
of the
Security Council, I thank you for giving me the
opportunity to speak before the highest organ of the
United Nations. Permit me, Mr. President, to express
to you the congratulations
of my delegation on the
assumption of your high and responsible office. You
are the ,representative
of a country with which the
German
Democratic
Republic
maintains
friendly
relations, which, especially in the recent past, have
developed for the benefit of both sides.
110. It is a special privilege and satisfaction for me
to congratulate most cordially the Observer for the
Democratic.
Republic
of Viet-Nam,
our friend
M. Nguyen Van Luu, and the Observer for the
Republic of South Viet-Nam,
Mr. Dinh Ba Thi, on
the beginning of their work at the United Nations.
The most friendly welcome extended here in the
United Nations to the Observers for the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
has demonstrated
in a convincing
way
the solidarity with the just cause of the Vietnamese
people.
111. When in recent years this high body considered
the applications of sovereign and independent States
for membership in the United Nations, the Security
Council was guided by the intention
further to
increase the universality of the Organization,
to act
in harmony with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and thus to strengthen international
peace and security and to promote and develop equal
co-operation
between all States. The applications
submitted by the Governments
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam are fully in accordance with the Charter.
Both States pursue a policy of peace and they are
fully prepared and in a position to fulfil the obligations resulting from membership in the United Nations.

recent times, as has vividly been demonstrated
by
the solemn signing at Helsinki of the Final Act of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe
by the leading representatives of 35 European Stat&,
the United States and Canada. This process of
detente is also activating, to an important degree, the
work of the United Nations.
114. I am speaking here as the representative of a
State which in the course of this process was itself
admitted as a Member of the United Nations only a
relatively short time ago. The relevant decision of the
Security Council and the-admission
of the German
Democratic Republic by the General Assembly were,
as is recognized by everybody today, of importance
for strengthening peace on the European continent,
for the further implementation
of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
also for increasing the effectiveness of the United
Nations. May I in this connexion express my conviction that it will be no less important
when the
voice of the Vietnamese people, which has victoriously emerged from three decades of heroic struggle
for peace, national independence,
democracy and
social progress, can also equally be heard for the
good of the noble cause of the Organization.
We
therefore share the view of many representatives
of States that the admission of the Republic
of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
to the United Nations would contribute
towards improving
co-operation
and political relations, in particular between the Asian States.
115. The admission of the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
would at the same time be-and this aspect is of farreaching importance
for all the activities
of the
United Nations-a
symbol of the recognition of the
political
realities which have arisen in Viet-Nam.
By complying with the application now before it, the
Security Council, charged with the high responsibility
of maintaining
international
peace and security, will
fulfil its task and at the same time respond to an
urgent demand of international
public opinion.

112. There is no doubt that the admission of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
as Members
of the United
Nations will serve to strengthen international
peace
and security and also to increase the universality
and authority of the Organization.

116. The Government
and people of the German
Democratic Republic are linked by strong bonds of
friendship with the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam.
During all the
years of struggle the German Democratic Republic,
like the other States of the socialist community,
stood in firm solidarity by the side of the fraternal
Vietnamese people and gave active and full support
to its just struggle. With great pleasure, the Govemment and people of my country have welcomed the
historic victory of the patriots of South Viet-Nam
over aggression, the establishment
of the people’s
power and the re-establishment
of peace in the
south of the country.

113. The process of international
detente has made
extraordinary progress in past years and above all in

117. The victory of the South Vietnamese patriots
has opened up to all the people of South Viet-Nam

bright perspectives of peace, freedom, democracy and
social progress. It is also an important contribution
towards strengthening peace and security in SouthEast Asia and in the world. On that occasion, the
First Secretary of the Central Committee
of the
Socialist Unity Party of Germany, Erich IIonecker,
conveyed the cordial congratulations
and fraternal
greetings of the people of the German Democratic
Republic to the leading representatives of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam. The German Democratic Republic will
not reduce its solidarity with the Vietnamese people,
which can now dedicate its forces to construction
in peace, and welcomes the applications
of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
for admission to the United
Nations. We are satisfied to see that in this way the
German Democratic Republic shares the view of the
overwhelming
majority of States also in this high
body.

has to be avoided, all the more so because it would
by no means help towards a solution of what is
generally called the Korean question but would essentially be in the way of it. The key to the strengthening
of peaee on the Korean peninsula is, now as before,
the implementation
of the relevant decision adopted
by the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session’
the dissolution
of the so-called United
Nations
Command in Korea and the withdrawal of foreign
troops stationed in South Korea. If attempts are now
made to establish artificial links between this problem
and the applications
submitted by the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam, it will only render a solution more difficult
and counteract fulfilment
of the General Assembly
decision.
120. Any opposition
to the two applications
for
membership from the two sovereign States would run
counter to the realistic aspirations of the peoples
and States to equal co-operation
in the United
Nations. Such an attitude would not be understood
by the international
public and would certainly be a
burden on constructive
co-operation
in the United
Nations,
which is necessary and called for the
historic lessons from the developments
in IndoChina especially show that today peoples of the
world can successfully maintain their independence,
thanks also to a stronger United Nations, and that
nobody is able to halt this process or to reverse it.
My delegation is firmly convinced that sooner or
later all members of the Security Council will take
into account realities and act according to the spirit
and letter of the Charter.

118. My delegation considers it inadmissible
arbitrarily to connect consideration of the present applications by the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
with other
questions. The Charter of the United Nations clearly
stipulates how applications for membership are to be
considered, so it can only be called discrimination
against the Vietnamese people when the applications
of two sovereign States are linked with a completely
different question. It is also absurd to link a problem
which% controversial in the United Nations with the
admission to the United Nations of two sovereign
States. As far as the so-called Korea question is
concerned, the viewpoint of the German Democratic
Republic
is clear and well known. The German
Democratic
Republic highly appreciates the efforts
aimed at peace and security and at the conclusion
of a peace agreement undertaken
by the Korean
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
with which it is
fraternally linked.

The meeting

rose at 1.10 p.m.

Notes
’ Admission of a State to the United Nations (Charter, Art. 4),
Advisory Opinion: I.C.J. Reports l%S, p. 57.
z United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 935.
’ See OfJicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 30, p. 24, item 41.

119. We have always taken the view that any interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

82-6 1202-November

1983-2,200
