General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

158

2. Calls upon the parties to co-operate fully with
the investigatory body and, to this effect, to appoint
their representatives thereto forthwith;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices through his Special Representative in Cyprus, to support the establishment of the
investigatory body.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/173.

Disappeared persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 93 in particular articles 3, 5, 9,
10 and 11 concerning, inter alia, the right to life, liberty
and security of person, freedom from torture, freedom
from arbitrary arrest and detention, and the right to
a fair and public trial, and the provisions of articles 6,
7, 9 and 10 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 94 which define and establish safeguards for certain of these rights,
Deeply concerned by reports from various parts of
the world relating to enforced or involuntary disappearances of persons as a result of excesses on the part
of law enforcement or security authorities or similar
organizations, often while such persons are subject to
detention or imprisonment, as well as of unlawful actions or widespread violence,
Concerned also at reports of difficulties in obtaining
reliable information from competent authorities as to
the circumstances of such persons, including reports
of the persistent refusal of such authorities or organizations to acknowledge that they hold such persons in
their custody or otherwise to account for them,
Mindful of the danger to the life, liberty and physical
security of such persons arising from the persistent
failure of these authorities or organizations to acknowledge that such persons are held in custody or otherwise to account for them,
Deeply moved by the anguish and sorrow which
such circumstances cause to the relatives of disappeared persons, especially to spouses, children and
parents,
l. Calls upon Governments:
(a) In the event of reports of enforced or involuntary disappearances, to devote appropriate resources to searching for such persons and to undertake
speedy and impartial investigations;
( b) To ensure that law enforcement and security
authorities or organizations are fully accountable, especially in law, in the discharge of their duties, such
accountability to include legal responsibility for unjustifiable excesses which might lead to enforced or
involuntary disappearances and to other violations of
human rights;
(c) To ensure that the human rights of all persons,
including those subjected to any form of detention and
imprisonment, are fully respected;
(d) To co-operate with other Governments, relevant United Nations organs, specialized agencies, intergovernmental organizations and humanitarian bodies
in a common effort to search for, locate or account
for such persons in the event of reports of enforced
or involuntary disappearances;
93 Resolution 217 A (ill).
94 Resolution 2200 A (XXI),

annex.

2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider the question of disappeared persons with a
view to making appropriate recommendations;
3. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices in cases of enforced or involuntary
disappearances of persons, drawing, as appropriate,
upon the relevant experience of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of other humanitarian
organizations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the concerns expressed in the present resolution to the attention of all Governments, regional and interregional
organizations and specialized agencies for the purpose
of conveying on an urgent basis the need for disinterested humanitarian action to respond to the situation
of persons who have disappeared.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33 /17 4.

Establishment of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 124 of 16 December 1976 and 32/118 of 16 December 1977 and taking
note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/
15 of 5 May 1978 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 13 (XXXIV) of 6 March 1978, 95
1. Decides to establish a voluntary fund, called the
United Nations Trust Fund for Chile, administered in
accordance with the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations by the Secretary-General with the
advice of a Board of Trustees, composed of a chairman and four members with wide experience of the
situation in Chile, to be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral with due regard to equitable geographical
distribution and in consultation with their Governments, to serve for a three-year term, to receive contributions and distribute, through established channels
of assistance, humanitarian, legal and financial aid to
persons whose human rights have been violated by
detention or imprisonment in Chile, to those forced
to leave the country and to relatives of persons in the
above-mentioned categories;
2. Adopts the arrangements for the management
of the Fund set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Authorizes the Board of Trustees to promote
and solicit contributions and pledges;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to put into immediate effect the provisions of the present resolution
and to give the Board of Trustees all the assistance it
may require;
5. Appeals to Member States to respond favourably
to requests for contributions to the Fund.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
ANNEX
Arrangements for the management of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile
1. The Secretary-General shall apply the arrangements set
forth below for the management of the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile.
95 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cozmcil, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
