Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committ~

of Portugal fails to implempnt (---;enPral AssPmhly reso ·
lution 1514 (XV);
10. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the specialized agencies concerned
and other international relief organizations to increase
their assistance to the refugees from the Territories
under Portuguese administration and to the people who
have suffered from military operations;
11. Requests the Security Council to con?ider putting into effect against Portugal the appropriate measures laid down in the Charter, for the purpose of
carrying out its resolutions concerning the Territories
under Portuguese domination;
12. Decides to include the question of the Territories
under Portuguese administration in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-first session.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2108 (XX). Speaal training programme for
Territories under Portuguese administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1808 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 and 1973 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
by which it established a special trainin~ P:ogramme
for the indigenous people of the Terntones under
Portuguese administration,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in accordance with paragraph 9 of
resolution 1973 (XVIII) ,38
Noting with deep regret that, notwithstanding paragraph 10 of resolution 1808 (XVII) and paragraph 8
of resolution 1973 (XVIII), the (',overnment of Portugal has not co-operated in the implementation of the
special training programme,
Noting iuith satisfaction that several Member States
have extended offers of scholarships to students from
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Noting that only a few applicants from Territories
under Portuguese administration have the necessary
qualifications to enable them to enter institutions of
higher education,
Noting further that many of the scholarships offered
by Member States are for higher education only and,
consequently, are not accessible to most applicants from
Territories under Portuguese administration, whose
qualifications cannot meet the requirements set for the
use of such scholarships,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropriate measures with a view to making the benefits
of the special training programme available to as many
indigenous inhabitants nf the Territories under Portuguese administration as possible;
2. Invites the United Nations programmes of technical assistance and the specialized agencies to continue
to co-operate in the implementation of the special
training programme mentioned above, by offering every
possible assistance and such facilities and resources
as they may be able to provide to the recipients and
the Governments participating in the programme;
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States
which have extended offers of scholarships to students
from Territories 1mder Portuguese administration ;
38 Ibid., agenda item 71, documents A/5783 and Add.1, am!
A/6076 and Add.1 and 2.

6S

4. Tnvites the Member States which have offered
scholarships, and those which plan to do so, to consider
ofTeri11g in the first place scholarships for secondary
<'duration nnd for vocationnl and technical training;
5. Requests Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of any scholarships offered and of awards made
and utilized;
6. Further requests Member States to facilitate the
travel of students from Territories under Portuguese
administration who are seeking to avail themselves of
the educational opportunities offered ;
7. Reiterates its request to the Government of Portugal to co-operate in the implementation of the special
training programme for inhabitants of Territories under
its administration ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2109 (XX). Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it dissolved the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and,
inter a1ia, requested the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information
transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance
with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
and to take it fullv into account in examining the
situation with regard to the implementation of the
Drclaration,
Noting the procedures suggested by the SecretaryGeneral89 and adopted by the Special Committee
whereby the latest information transmitted by Administering Members is taken into account by the Committee in its consideration of the Territories concerned
and is reflected in the relevant chapters of the Committee's reports on each Territory,
Having studied those chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,•0
Having also examined the reports of the SecretaryGf'neral on the said information. 41
l. Approves the reports and the procedures adopted
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
for the discharge of its functions under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII);
~- Fxpresses its regret that not all Member States
having responsihilities for the administration of Non3 9 Jbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter II, appendix I.
40 Ibid., chapter II; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 ( A/6000/Rev.1), chapter XXVI.
4 1 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items 68 and
72, documents A/5843 and A/6038.
