S/PV.9050

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9050th meeting

Tuesday, 31 May 2022, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Eckersely

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36566 (E)
*2236566*

S/PV.9050

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Angola, Benin, Chad,
Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Finland, the Gambia, Guinea, Japan, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Seychelles, Slovakia, South Africa,
Sweden, Switzerland, Togo and Tunisia to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2022/62, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Angola, Benin, Brazil,
Chad, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Finland, France, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Seychelles,
Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo,
Tunisia and the United States of America.

31/05/2022

In that regard, urgent attention is required to
combat the menace, which is detrimental to the
development of coastal economies in the region and
risks compounding the multifaceted challenges facing
the region, including a surge in terrorism, a return of
coup d’états, a deepening of climate change and the
worsening impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
It is for those reasons, and mindful of the fact that
maritime piracy is one of the most pressing concerns on
the African continent, that Ghana and Norway jointly
initiated a draft resolution to refocus global attention
and garner the necessary support to help address the
situation in the Gulf of Guinea.
The draft resolution builds on existing frameworks,
including resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) and
existing comprehensive regional frameworks, notably,
the Yaoundé Code of Conduct. Its operative core focuses
on the need to criminalize and prosecute acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea, as well as some measures
to further enhance and support national, regional and
international efforts to deal with the situation.
The draft resolution requests the Secretary-General
to report on current efforts, including assessing the
possible links between piracy and armed robbery at sea
in the Gulf of Guinea and terrorism in West Africa,
as well as to provide recommendations for enhanced
efforts and support for national and regional responses.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): On behalf of Norway and
my own country, Ghana, the co-penholders of the draft
resolution on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea,
contained in document S/2022/62, I wish to thank
your delegation, Madam President, for convening this
meeting under the agenda item entitled peace and
security in Africa.

It is pertinent to underline that the negotiations
commenced in early January with three rounds of
formal negotiations, after which multiple bilateral
engagements were held with delegations to address
their respective concerns. Throughout the process,
the co-penholders diligently engaged all delegations
in an open and transparent manner to ensure that we
had a good balance of the views of all members as an
outcome. After the conclusion of negotiations in late
January, 10 Council members and an overwhelming
number of non-Council members co-sponsored the
draft resolution, for which we are grateful.

As members of the Security Council are aware, it
has been 10 years since the Security Council adopted
resolution 2039 (2012), on maritime piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. Despite the global nature
of the threats, the region remains a global hotspot for
maritime piracy. The region recorded 130 maritime
kidnappings out of the 135 global incidents reported in
2020, in addition to the 40 kidnapped crew recorded
globally in the first quarter of 2021.

However, the adoption of the draft resolution was
deferred due to the last-minute objections raised by a
delegation regarding the third preambular paragraph of
the draft resolution, which relates to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). True
to our desire from the beginning until now to ensure
that the concerns of all delegations are considered and
out of respect for the negotiation process and the many
delegations that co-sponsored the draft resolution, we

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.

2/6

22-36566

31/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

re-engaged with the concerned delegation to find text
that ensured that the language in the draft resolution
was acceptable to all.
After that long-haul process of re-engaging with
delegations on the issue, we are pleased that delegations
have been able to show flexibility and compromise,
leading to a draft resolution that enjoys the consensus
support of all delegations. The compromise reached
has enabled us to maintain the agreed language on
UNCLOS in the third preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution, which is the most recently agreed language
of December 2021, while at the same time linking it
to other agreed language in what was originally the
eighteenth preambular paragraph of the text.
The repositioning of what was originally the
eighteenth preambular paragraph as the third preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution underscores the point
that has always been made — that the provisions of the
draft resolution apply only with respect to the situation
in the Gulf of Guinea.
In conclusion, I wish to remind the Council that the
countries of the region cannot afford to have the already
difficult situation they confront to be compounded by
the activities of pirates. Any link between the pirates
at sea and terrorist activities on land would have a
devastating impact on the region. The fate of the draft
resolution lies in our hands collectively.
On behalf of Ghana and Norway, in our capacity
as co-penholders, as well as the Member States of the
region, I thank all delegations and look forward to their
support in adopting this much-awaited draft resolution.
The draft resolution is critical and will do much to help
galvanize global support against piracy and strengthen
regional and national measures in combatting the
menace of piracy and other crimes at sea in the region.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): In recent
years, maritime security issues in the Gulf of Guinea
have become acute, with rampant piracy, foreign ships
being hijacked and crew members are being kidnapped
frequently. That has seriously threatened the security
and stability of coastal countries, affected people’s
lives and greatly affected international shipping and
trade and the regional economy.
China attaches great importance to maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea and, to the best of its
ability and through bilateral and multilateral channels,
has provided support to the countries of the region in

S/PV.9050

order to enhance their capacity to maintain maritime
security. We support increased attention and investment
by the international community with respect to
that issue.
China supported the original intent of Ghana
and Norway in submitting the draft resolution on
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea (S/2022/62)
and participated constructively throughout the relevant
consultations. Based on respect for the sovereignty and
leadership of coastal countries, we advocate helping the
countries of the region to strengthen their anti-piracy
capacity in order to eliminate the root causes of piracy.
During the consultations on the draft resolution,
there was one question that aroused the interest of
Security Council members — the relationship between
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) and international law.
The answer to that question is self-evident. The
Convention is not the entirety of international law. The
eighth preambular paragraph of the Convention clearly
stipulates that matters not regulated by the Convention
continue to be governed by the rules and principles
of general international law. That shows clearly that
the Convention itself recognizes that its scope of
application is limited. It does not, and cannot possibly,
regulate all maritime issues.
The Convention was established in 1982, when not
all issues related to the law of the sea could be foreseen.
With human activities increasing in the ocean, the
international community needs to develop new rules
for the law of the sea to fill that gap. The ongoing
negotiations on the marine biodiversity agreement
within the framework of the United Nations clearly
demonstrates that the law of the sea is still undergoing
dynamic development.
The relationship between UNCLOS and
international law should not be a contentious issue and,
even if it were, it should be discussed and clarified
by the General Assembly rather than the Security
Council. However, since that issue was mentioned in
the consultations and some members seemed to have
different views on it, China finds it necessary to state
its position for the record.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

22-365663/6

S/PV.9050

Peace and security in Africa

31/05/2022

In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): We were pleased to
support the adoption of resolution 2634 (2022), on
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea,
which will contribute to addressing the challenge
in the region that affects the safety and security of
international navigation there.

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2634 (2022).

We feel that the resolution provides a sound
framework for national efforts, cooperation through
regional and subregional organizations and the support
of the international community. We believe that it
advances the wider objectives of enhancing maritime
security internationally that were endorsed through the
presidential statement issued under India’s presidency
of the Security Council last year (S/PRST/2021/15).

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me start by thanking
all Security Council members for their constructive
engagement over the past months towards reaching an
agreement on resolution 2634 (2022). In particular I
want to thank our co-penholder, Ghana, for its excellent
cooperation every step of the way. Our thanks also
extend to the other two African members of the Security
Council and regional countries for their support since
the start of the process.
We have just adopted unanimously the first Council
resolution on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
in 10 years. At this difficult moment for the world, the
resolution addresses an issue that is important for the
relevant African regions themselves and beyond.
Every day, more than 1,000 boats and ships crisscross the waters of the Gulf of Guinea. Their safety
is crucial for the development and economic welfare
of dozens of countries in West, Central and Southern
Africa. According to a recent United Nations study,
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea costs coastal States at least
$2 billion a year. Even with the encouraging progress
being made, with the help of renewed efforts from
countries like Nigeria, the Gulf of Guinea remains the
world’s most dangerous place for ships and seafarers.
That is why resolution 2634 (2022) is so important.
It aims to increase security for ships and sailors in
the Gulf and at the same time safeguard the economic
potential of countries in the region. The resolution also
reaffirms that UNCLOS sets out the legal framework
for all ocean activities globally.
Next year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct. Resolution 2634 (2022)
will hopefully help make a strong push towards fully
addressing the threat and cost of piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea.
4/6

The recognition of the international legal framework
through the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea is important in the context of traditional and
non-traditional security challenges in the maritime
domain, including piracy and armed robbery at sea.
India has been engaged with the countries of the region
on maritime matters and would be glad to contribute
further to their efforts to strengthen maritime security,
in due cooperation with them, as well as to assist with
regional initiatives.
I would like to note that India is not a party to the
2005 Protocol to the Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation, as it diverges from the reality pertaining
to India in the nuclear context. However, we feel that
the overall objectives of resolution 2634 (2022) and
its contribution to addressing maritime security are
an important matter of wider concern globally that
deserves our support.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): First of all, we
would like to thank Ghana and Norway for their sterling
efforts to secure an agreement on resolution 2634 (2022).
We welcome its strong focus on tackling the scourge
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, which is an important
step forward. The resolution also rightly highlights the
primacy of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, which has made a significant contribution
to global peace, prosperity and security by providing a
consistent and clear legal framework for all activities in
the oceans and seas.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, let me thank
the co-penholders of resolution 2634 (2022), Ghana and
Norway, for their hard work during the negotiations.
Brazil recognizes that both delegations made intense
22-36566

31/05/2022

Peace and security in Africa

efforts in trying to achieve a balanced and meaningful
text on such a pressing issue. We are pleased to have
joined as co-sponsors and support this process, which
comes 10 years after the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 2039 (2012), also on this issue. It is also
gratifying to note that resolution 2634 (2022) was
adopted by consensus, highlighting that, with open and
frank negotiations, the Security Council can still fulfil
its Charter-mandated responsibilities.
Brazil has been paying increased attention to the
international security implications of piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. As a member of the
Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic,
it is our priority to strengthen the ongoing counterpiracy efforts in the region. The States of the Gulf of
Guinea bear the leadership and primary responsibility
to counter piracy and armed robbery in the region.
Nonetheless, modalities for regional cooperation and
naval capacity-building remain key in supporting their
efforts to address that complex challenge.
We are pleased to see those elements reflected in
the resolution. We also wish once again to highlight the
centrality of the Yaoundé Architecture for maritime
security in countering piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which brings together key regional actors such as the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission.
In addition to the impacts on the security of
seafarers and fishers, piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea continue to cause financial hardship for
the whole region, mainly due to disruptions to shipping,
trade, transportation and Government revenues. The
costs of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea shift resources that could otherwise be used in
the development of the region. There is therefore a clear
interdependence between maritime security, the rule of
law and the development of coastal regions.
On that note, we regret that such issues were not
taken up by the co-facilitators of the political declaration
of the second United Nations Ocean Conference,
despite the proposals presented by Brazil and the Group
of 77 and China in that regard. We are convinced that
a new report by the Secretary-General will be key in
reassessing the situation of the Gulf of Guinea. We
expect it to examine thoroughly the underlying causes
of piracy and armed robbery in the region, as well as

S/PV.9050

any possible and potential linkages with terrorism in
West and Central Africa and the Sahel.
As this year marks the fortieth anniversary of the
adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS), Brazil would like to reaffirm
its full commitment to the objectives, purposes and
principles enshrined in the Convention. Often described
as the constitution of the seas, it remains clear to us that
UNCLOS sets out the legal framework within which all
activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out.
That includes countering piracy and armed robbery
at sea.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States
of America.
The United States was pleased to co-sponsor
resolution 2634 (2022), on maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea, the adoption of which marks 10 years
since the Security Council last adopted a resolution
on this concerning issue (resolution 2039 (2012)).
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is essential to
maintaining an Atlantic that provides for the safety and
prosperity of Atlantic nations and those who depend
on its waters for their livelihoods. The United States
is committed to the international navigation, security
and sustainable development of the Gulf of Guinea
and countries in the region, and indeed of the entire
Atlantic Ocean basin.
In practice, that means working with partners in
the region to hold accountable the perpetrators and
facilitators of piracy and armed robbery at sea and
criminal networks. It also means addressing other
related destabilizing and illicit activities in the Gulf of
Guinea. Those crimes have far-reaching consequences
for the security, governance and livelihoods of Gulf
of Guinea nations. It is estimated that the direct and
indirect costs of maritime crime in the Gulf of Guinea
amount to more than $1 billion annually. We have all
seen the impact of piracy on the free flow of commerce;
however, let us not forget the human cost of maritime
piracy attacks and hostage-taking.
The good news is that, through the collaborative
efforts of many nations, the frequency of such incidents
dramatically decreased in 2022. In just one example
of what we can do together, in April a United States
and West African team led by Cabo Verde, working
in coordination with international law enforcement
and maritime centres, seized approximately 6,000

22-365665/6

S/PV.9050

Peace and security in Africa

31/05/2022

kilograms of suspected cocaine, with an estimated
street value of more than $350 million.

on maritime security and further operationalize the
Yaoundé Architecture.

Despite progress, we cannot let our guard down.
We are therefore proud to stand with Ghana, Norway
and many other countries today in bringing attention to,
and integrated action around, these shared challenges.
In that spirit, the United States welcomes the progress
made by States bordering the Gulf of Guinea in their
implementation of the Yaoundé Architecture on
maritime security.

Finally, we want to recognize the importance of
resolution 2634 (2022) in its request for a report to
examine the root causes and potential linkages between
piracy and armed robbery with terrorism in West and
Central Africa, as well as in the Sahel. As we mark
the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct,
we welcome today’s vote to strengthen and support
that work.

The United States also commends the efforts of
regional and subregional organizations, namely, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and their
partners, in their coordination to enhance cooperation

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

6/6

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

22-36566
