S/PV.8212

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8212th meeting

Thursday, 22 March 2018, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-07992 (E)
*1807992*

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Nigeria to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mohammed
Bila, representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission;
and Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser,
Adelphi.
Ms. Nagarajan is joining via video teleconference
from Abuja.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods, I wish to encourage all participants,
both members and non-members of the Council, to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less. Note
507 also encourages briefers to be succinct and to focus
on key issues. Briefers are further encouraged to limit
their initial remarks to the agreed time limits.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, who
is joining via video teleconference from Monrovia, and
I now give her the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I wish to begin
by thanking the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands
and Ambassador Van Oosterom for having convened
this briefing and for the really dynamic presidency of
the Security Council this month. Let me also say that
I wish to congratulate the Security Council, because I
am here in Monrovia as we come to the closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia tomorrow. This is
really an exciting moment, although there are a lot of
concerns about how we will continue to build on the
gains of peace and to ensure that there is sustainable
development. But the Government and the President of
Liberia were very, very appreciative of the support of
the United Nations and wished me to convey that to
the Council.
2/25

22/03/2018

I welcome this opportunity to brief the Council
on the situation in the Lake Chad basin. Since the last
such briefing, in September 2017 (see S/PV.8047),
considerable progress has been made in the fight
against Boko Haram. The Multinational Joint Task
Force operations have contributed to the liberation
of hostages and led to many territorial gains. The
Secretary-General commends the Governments of
the region for their sustained efforts and increased
coordination, which have been crucial. It is now key
that we stabilize the areas that have been reclaimed
and that we seize the opportunity to really promote
sustainable development.
Unfortunately, Boko Haram continues to carry out
raids, abductions and suicide bombings, as demonstrated
last month by the horrific abduction of 110 schoolgirls
in north-east Nigeria’s Yobe state. Today, though,
we are very grateful and relieved that most of those
girls — 105 — have been returned to their families.
The United Nations is supporting the African Union
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission in developing a
stabilization, recovery and resilience strategy for the
region, in line with resolution 2349 (2017). The strategy,
we hope, will be launched next month in N’Djamena. In
parallel, the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral for Central Africa and for West Africa and
the Sahel continue their efforts, in close partnership
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, to address the root causes of the crisis.
Violations of human rights continue to fuel
insecurity in the Lake Chad basin. Investments and
strengthening community justice mechanisms will
be essential to promoting reconciliation, ensuring
accountability and sustaining peace. It is also critical
for counter-terrorism activities and initiatives aimed at
preventing violent extremism to integrate the human
rights and the gender dimensions. We welcome the
recruitment of the three African Union-Lake Chad
Basin Commission human rights officers as part of
the civilian component of the Multinational Joint Task
Force. The appointment of a gender advisor for the Force
is, however, needed urgently to enhance the protection
of women and girls and ensure their participation in
peace and development processes.
Too many girls and women across the region
continue to experience sexual and gender-based
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

violence and other violations of their rights. Boko
Haram has abducted more than 4,000 women and girls.
Those who are able to return often face stigmatization
by their communities. Over the past several years, the
group’s use of women and girls to carry out suicide
attacks has increased dramatically. One reason may
be the lack of women in the security sector who can
check other women at checkpoints. Clearly, women’s
participation in efforts to promote gender equality are
critical elements of our response.
Boko Haram, sadly and horrifically, used children
in 135 suicide attacks in 2017, representing a fivefold
increase from 2016. The international community must
do more to respond to the plight of children affected by
the upheaval in the region, including through support
for the return of children to their communities and a
more concerted effort on reintegation and rehabilitation.
The humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad
basin remains complex and dire, with 10.7 million
people in need of life-saving assistance and 2.3 million
people — including 1.5 million children — forcibly
displaced from their homes. We thank the Governments
of Cameroon and Nigeria for their continued
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in the framework
of the tripartite agreement, and we encourage all the
affected States to fully implement the 2016 Abuja
Action Statement.
Humanitarian assistance has scaled up considerably
and reached more than 6 million people in 2017. Food
security has improved in the north-east of Nigeria,
where famine was averted last year. But that progress
is still very fragile. As of today, 4.5 million people are
severely food insecure across the Lake Chad basin, and
that number is expected to rise to 5.8 million by June.
The scale-up of assistance has taken place in an
extremely volatile environment. On 1 March, three aid
workers were killed in the town of Rann, in Borno state,
following an attack by suspected Boko Haram insurgent.
Three others are still missing, and humanitarian aid has
temporarily been suspended. An estimated $1.6 billion
will be required to assist 7.8 million people in four
countries. I call on Member States to ensure that the
humanitarian appeal is well funded and that the pledges
are disbursed promptly. The experience of the last
appeal was successful. It was very much appreciated, it
came in time and it has been well disbursed.

S/PV. 8212

I would also like to highlight the importance of
strengthening the Safe Schools initiative, as well as
communications infrastructure, so that people can
call for assistance when needed. This was a major
gap in the recent abduction of the 110 girls in Yobe
state. The crisis has resulted in massive destruction of
basic infrastructure, health and educational facilities,
commercial buildings, private houses and agricultural
assets. Along with the impacts of violent extremism,
underdevelopment, demographic shifts and climate
change, we can see another powerful example of
a complex, multidimensional situation that really
requires an integrated approach to addressing the
humanitarian and development challenges that will link
to sustainable peace.
The United Nations continues to support the affected
Governments in creating livelihoods, strengthening
institutions, building community resilience and taking
other steps to address the root causes. National and
local non-governmental organizations and faith-based
organizations still have an invaluable role to play in
prevention and reintegration efforts.
Restoring the Lake Chad ecosystem is going to
be essential. It would improve livelihoods for millions
of people, reduce local tensions and foster regional
integration and development. Last month’s international
conference on Lake Chad in Abuja was successful,
and the adoption of the Abjua declaration reaffirmed
the region’s commitment to increasing cooperation to
address the socioeconomic impact of climate change
and instability in the Sahel, West Africa and the Lake
Chad region.
Finally, the Security Council’s visit to the region
over a year ago should not be underestimated, and the
adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) really created a
momentum that must be maintained. The visit by the
African Union Peace and Security Council in July
2017 further highlighted the challenges faced by the
Multinational Joint Task Force. Sustained international,
financial and technical support for the Force remains
crucial to protecting the fragile progress made in the
fight against Boko Haram. The joint ECCAS-ECOWAS
summit on Boko Haram — the first to be held in the first
half of 2018 — will be another important undertaking.
We must continue to address these complex challenges,
in close cooperation with the affected countries and all
relevant subregional organizations, in line resolution
2349 (2017).

18-079923/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

We should also recognize that security measures
and military operations have proven limits. There
will be no sustaining peace without sustainable
development, and development gains will always be
at risk without lasting peace. I hope that we can work
together to end this crisis, which has caused immense
suffering and continues to have serious consequences
well beyond the borders.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bila.
Mr. Bila: My name is Mohammed Bila. I am
a remote sensing expert in the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, in N’Djamena. I have been working in
the Komadugu-Yobe basin in Nigeria since 1990 as a
hydrologist at the Federal Ministry of Water Resources
in Abuja. I have been in the service of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission since April 2002.
My briefing today is going to focus on climate
variability and its impact on the vulnerability of the
Lake Chad basin, and on what the United Nations can
do to reduce the general vulnerability of the region.
To help in understanding the situation, I will share
my experience from a community that survives on
cultivating the lake floor and then on four communities
that used to depend on the shoreline of the Lake
Chad but are now 10 kilometres away from the lake
and depend on sharing the river Komadugu-Yobe for
their livelihood.
The years 1983 and 1984 proved to be the driest
in Borno in recent history. The minor tributaries of
Lake Chad — the rivers Yobe, Yedseram and the El
Beid — were dry and the level of Lake Chad fell three
metres below the critical level for the pumping station
at Kirinowa. Consequently, the South Chad Irrigation
Project (SCIP) could not irrigate any land from 1984
to 1986. The lake floor became a refuge and offered
an opportunity to farm workers from the South Chad
Irrigation Project to cultivate beans and maize. In 1985,
there were 25,000 people living in 49 villages along the
western portion of Lake Chad in Nigeria. In 2010, the
population in the central part of the north basin was
estimated to be 56,421, living in 387 villages on the lake
floor. Lake-floor cultivation of crops using the residual
soil moisture, which began around 1985 or 1986, is one
of the methods of adaptation to drought and deprivation
for the communities around Lake Chad.
4/25

22/03/2018

One of the villages located near the border tripoint
marker between the Niger, Nigeria and Chad is Kaukiri.
In 2010, there was an estimated population of 1,425
of largely lake-floor farmers of beans and maize in
the village. The local produce market brings together
farmers, livestock herders and traders from all three
countries. In July 2010, when I was on a mission, the
traditional chief reported that for the previous three
years, the usual recession moisture farming could not
take place because the Komadugu-Yobe river did not
bring water to the farmlands around Kaukiri. There
was no evidence that those three years of failure in
agriculture and loss of livelihood for all island villages
around Kaukiri were noticed or supported by local
authorities or local community-based organizations.
As of today, no authority can detect if a similar
disaster is occurring because there is only one waterlevel measurement station in the whole 25,000 square
kilometres of Lake Chad’s old shoreline, located in
Bol, Chad. In general, the environmental monitoring
network in the Lake Chad basin is inadequate, sparse
and poorly funded and operated.
Malam Fatori and Kaniram, in Nigeria, and Bosso
and Mamouri, in the Niger, are riparian settlements of the
Komadugu-Yobe river, which forms the border between
the Niger and Nigeria. Prior to the Sahel droughts,
all four settlements were located on the Lake Chad
shoreline, but the shrinking of Lake Chad has reduced
the communities to competing for the seasonal flow of
the Komadugu-Yobe river for dry-season agriculture.
The competition for the river has led to claims and
counterclaims of river diversion by the communities
on both sides of the border, and the loss of livelihoods
may have led to the build-up of social tension among
young people prior to the outbreak of the insurgency
in 2012. While the Niger-Nigerian mixed commission
has established a mechanism for consultations on the
development of new water abstraction at the national
level to prevent a further build-up of social tension,
similar cross-border cooperation in local water
governance could help with conflict management and
the reduction of social tension among young people.
Those examples are two of the possibly many
incidences that occur across the Lake Chad basin region
that are not noticed on the national level because our
national water-governance mechanism is not structured
to capture such information or respond to it. Equally, at
the regional and global levels, climate variability and
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8212

its impact on the loss of livelihood were not noticed due
to deficiencies at the lower levels of water governance.

the water level to supplement the lack of information at
the national and regional levels.

An obvious solution to the poor water management
that has led to the loss of livelihoods and the rising
tensions is to restructure the water governance
mechanism to operate in a participatory manner at the
local level, with input from resource user groups. Usergroup capacities should include resource monitoring
and reporting as a concurrent activity associated with
resource exploitation.

National and local-level information and assessment
could be aggregated annually by the United Nations
country teams and then integrated in the reporting of
the regular briefings delivered by the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). Global-level early warning could be issued
by the Security Council as the need arises to serve as
a basis for measures integrating climate adaptation,
cooperation in water governance, conflict prevention
and management, enhancing livelihood resilience and
global security. I have three recommendations for the
Security Council.

At the regional level, the solution must acknowledge
the link between local environmental degradation
and the recurrent Sahel drought. The environmental
challenges facing the Lake Chad basin are connected
to the challenges of climate change faced by the Sahel
region of Africa. The Sahel is increasingly facing
extreme variability of climate resulting in frequent
droughts, short-duration, high-intensity rainfall,
desertification, water scarcity, land degradation and
ultimately, food insecurity. Consequently, addressing
the climatic root causes of local challenges through
risk assessment and management will require a similar
solution at the Sahel regional level.
Future threats linked to climate risks will continue
to exist in the Lake Chad basin and other regions of
the world currently facing fragility related to climate
risks. The Security Council is unique in its position not
only to stop current conflicts, but also to prevent future
conflict through climate diplomacy, based on early
warning and risk assessment reports by other United
Nations agencies in the field.
Over the past two weeks, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission has participated in an integrated joint
mission with the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations, researchers and development partners
coordinated by the United Nations Development
Programme to the Lac region of the Republic of Chad.
During the mission, we were informed that in the Lac
region, there are 120 polders that could be developed
for year-round agriculture. We saw how women’s
community-based organizations are using the polders
for vegetable gardens, and we heard the young people’s
request for dams to be built as a management mechanism
to exploit more of those polders. Such communitybased organizations could be created around each
polder or resource user group and provided with the
requisite training and equipment to monitor and report

First, a participatory system of local water
governance should be introduced into the Lake Chad
basin as a priority. Secondly, climate-security risk
assessment and reporting from the conflict affected
zones of the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin should be
included in the regular briefings given by UNOWAS
and UNOCA to the Security Council. Thirdly, in
view of the projection of continuing global warming
within conflict-affected regions, climate-security risk
assessment and reporting from the local, national and
regional levels should be aggregated and presented
to the Security Council to serve as early warning for
conflict-prevention advice to United Nations Members
and for integrating climate adaptation, cooperation in
water governance, conflict prevention and management,
enhancing livelihood resilience and the global security
of the planet.
The President: I thank Mr. Bila for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nagarajan.
Ms. Nagarajan: I thank the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for inviting me to participate in this
briefing as its presides over the Council this month.
I also thank my fellow briefers, Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Mr. Mohammed Bila
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
This year marks 15 years since the start of the
violence we identify with armed groups in Lake Chad
region. I will focus my briefing on current conflict
dynamics, potential trajectories and the need to prevent
the root causes of future conflicts. I was born and lived
in Maiduguri. I have been working on conflict analysis,
human rights, peacebuilding and protection for the

18-079925/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

past 12 years. I will talk about the region as a whole,
but given my background I will draw a great deal on
Nigeria. I will talk about four sets of dynamics.
The first revolves around environmental and climate
factors. The problem is not the alleged shrinking of Lake
Chad, but rather, as just presented by my colleague,
Mohammed Bila, increased variability. Lake Chad has
fluctuated throughout history. Communities adapt to the
changes, although, recently, coping mechanisms have
been tested. The issue is rather that of the governance of
and access to natural resources, the impact of insecurity
and increased climate variability. Farmers with whom
I spoke complained of the impacts of changing lake
levels and increased rainfall variability, and said that
that causes their inability to plant properly, lower or no
crop yields, and insects that do not die because there is
no rain. Pastoralists have had to change grazing routes.
Fishermen talk of changing amounts of fish in water
bodies. We are seeing, above all, decreased resilience
owing to conflict and climate.
In December 2017, one Nigerian farmer told me
how he used to farm by relying on the rainy season,
the lake or a stream for irrigation in any given year.
He said that if any one of them were insufficient in any
given year, that was okay, as all three disasters would
not occur at the same time. However, he said that now,
owing to the crisis, every avenue to develop oneself
economically has been destroyed. One does not have the
money, and even if one did and failed — which is likely
because of the lack of rainfall, security restrictions and
Boko Haram — one cannot do the others. Virtually all
economic activities have collapsed.
Secondly, we also see tensions among and within
occupational groups. The conflict among and within
the groups of farmers, pastoralists, fishermen and
hunters has been exacerbated by a decrease in arable
land. Planting crops on grazing routes and areas,
changing movements of pastoralists, changing rainfall
patterns affecting crop yields and cattle health, military
restrictions, security concerns and an insufficiency
of land and water result in an increase of population
density owing to displacement. Moreover the conflict
has led to increased ethnic and social tensions because
of the economic impact in all four countries.
Thirdly, firewood collection by civilians and the
cutting down of trees by the military are increasing
deforestation. That, as well as agricultural burning of the
vaster region, has not only a current impact on protection
6/25

22/03/2018

and security, but also entails future ramifications
related to soil degradation, desertification, agricultural
livelihoods and the availability of wood for smoking
fish. There have been no clear empirical links made
between those changes and recruitment into armed
opposition groups, but those impacts on livelihoods and
increasing inequality are natural incentives to join such
groups, while they are happening in the same space.
There may well be a link.
The second dynamic that I will talk about is the
gendered nature of violence. Men and older boys
are often the first to flee insecure areas. They are
deliberately targeted, killed and forcibly recruited by
armed groups. They are viewed with suspicion, arrested
and detained by security agencies, and they are involved
in fighting, thereby leaving women of all ages, as well as
girls, younger boys and older men, struggling to cope.
At the same time, with the increasing level of crime
directed against women and girls, from their abduction
from schools, which we have seen in international
headlines to their use as human detonative explosives
or so-called suicide bombers. We also see higher levels
of early and forced marriage either to fighters or due to
familial pressures owing to a lack of resources, sexual
exploitation, abuse and violence, including by those
who are supposed to protect and not exploit them, and
survival sex.
People with disabilities are also disproportionately
affected. They are unable to escape violence and
struggle to cope when they are displaced. Unknown
numbers of people have also acquired disabilities
because of the violence. Their experiences have led
many to struggle with their trauma. What does that
mean for the long-term when many men are missing,
thereby leaving the women to cope without them; when
many women have suffered violence and trauma; and
when all children and young people have either taken
part in or experienced violence?
The third dynamic that I will talk about concerns
tensions among internally displaced persons (IDPs),
refugees, returnees and host communities. The people
of the region have been extraordinarily generous in
sheltering and assisting those displaced, which began
long before the humanitarian community showed
up. With time, that dynamic has given rise to some
tensions. For example, together with Mohammed Bila,
I was in Baga Sola in Chad two weeks ago. There,
Nigerian fishermen feel discriminated against with
regard to access to information and services as they
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

cannot speak the local languages. Those tensions are
unfortunately exacerbated by humanitarian assistance
as it is seen as benefiting only IDPs despite the violence
affecting everyone.
The fourth dynamic concerns governance and
providing security. The region has long suffered from
weak Government and certain State services or their
absence, which has been worsened by the conflict.
There is also dissatisfaction with community leaders.
Before the crisis, they were viewed at times as
politicized and corrupt, and they are now increasingly
seen as diverting aid for themselves and their families.
Moreover, we know that corruption and inequality are
root causes of conflict, and people believe that those
have worsened. Providing security is also problematic.
Military action or inaction has caused harm to civilians
through, first, failure to protect communities from
violence; secondly, failure to prevent collateral damage
during operations; and, thirdly, the direct targeting of
civilians with human rights abuses.
I do not underestimate the scale of challenges
facing the militaries of the region, and we have seen
some positive developments. For example, in Nigeria
a national policy on civilian protection is currently
awaiting President Buhari’s signature, and the
military is trying to further institutionalize civilian
protection and harm mitigation into their training.
However, civilian harm continues, thereby increasing
unhappiness and frustration with the State. There are
also issues concerning community militias originally
set up to protect civilian populations. In Nigeria,
there are increasing concerns about the yan gora, or
Civilian Joint Task Force, in particular. People say
that they intimidate, settle scores, trade drugs, extort,
steal, divert aid and sexually harass, exploit and abuse.
People are worried that that increasing politicization,
electoral mobilization, levels of criminality and the
number gangs will lead to a new conflict phase.
Although we hope that peace will return soon, I
will now outline for the Council three ways in which
the conflict might further develop.
First, the group headed by Shekau may be defeated,
but the group headed by Abu Al-Barnawi may grow
stronger and more difficult to combat because avoiding
civilian harm means that it might be able to retain its
own fighters and also ensure more strategic relations
with the local populations.

S/PV. 8212

The second scenario is that community militias,
owing to incomplete and ineffective processes of
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration, form the next phase of the conflict,
whereby engaging in criminality escalates into
sustained violence against civilian populations and,
perhaps, the State.
The third scenario is that intercommunal tensions,
coupled with reprisal attacks and decreased access
to resources, as people are living in increasingly
crowded spaces, lead to the formation of identitybased community militias, thereby resulting in clashes
and violence. Let us also remember the upcoming
elections to be held in Cameroon in October and in
Nigeria in February 2019. It is important that political
constestations do not affect and are not affected by
those unknowns.
What are therefore the pathways to peace? First of
all, the crisis is not over. Unfortunately, humanitarian
needs continue. Funding and support for humanitarian
action are essential. We must also pay attention to
current conflict dynamics and trajectories.
The Lake Chad region needs to be on the Security
Council’s agenda. The Council needs more systematic
reports that are conflict-, climate- and gender-sensitive
from the Secretariat, including on root causes and
conflict drivers, as well as more regular situational
briefings to ensure that the Council is attuned to
changing conflict dynamics in a volatile region.
Secondly, we need proper analysis on which to
base policy and programme decisions. There may be
humanitarian needs assessments that are sufficient for
the humanitarian community, but proper integrated
analysis that links conflict, climate, gender and social
inclusion is lacking. That does not mean we should do
nothing while awaiting the analysis, but we must ensure
that inspections are meaningful, do no harm and are
responsive to the situation.
That brings me to my third and final point. The
United Nations, donors and affected States must ensure
that every cypher, naira, euro, pound and dollar spent in
the region from now on is context-sensitive and covers
climate, conflict, gender and social inclusion and
that the impact of interventions against those factors
is monitored. For example, a livelihoods programme
must look at future rainfall trajectories to see which
crops would remain viable in future. If it supports the
polder system in Chad, it must consider who will and

18-079927/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

will not have access to the increased areas of fertile
land that would bring about and how that would play
into existing tensions. Otherwise, interventions will
not lead to sustainable change and improvement in the
lives of the people in the Lake Chad basin region.
Even worse than a bad situation is hope for change
only for the optimism to turn to ashes. A few weeks ago,
I met a young former member of the Jamaah Ansharusy
Syariah. She joined the group to make society better.
She told me that she thought society would have
improved while she was away but when she returned,
she saw that society had become worse. Looking back
15 to 20 years ago, we can see the genesis of where we
are today. For most people, circumstances have greatly
deteriorated. The question is: Did the previous situation
lead to the current conflict and crisis? Is the current
situation is worse than the previous one and, if so, what
does that mean for the future?
I urge the members of the Security Council to take
action now so as to prevent the current conflict dynamics
from becoming the root causes of future conflicts.
The President: I thank Ms. Nagarajan for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
you, Sir, and your delegation for organizing today’s
briefing and for giving us the opportunity to discuss
the situation in the Lake Chad basin one year after we
in the Council visited the region and adopted resolution
2349 (2017), which was unique in its comprehensive
approach, integrating development, human rights
and security.
I would also like to thank our briefers today for their
reflections on the humanitarian and security situations
and for their suggestions on the next steps to address
the root causes of the conflict. They have already made
a number of concrete proposals and I hope that careful
note of them has been taken by the Secretariat. We look
forward to discussing some of those ideas later with
other Member States.
The security situation in the Lake Chad basin
continues to be of great concern. On 2 March, the
Council condemned the attack on humanitarian workers
in Rann and another in Dapchi, in which a large number
of schoolgirls were abducted.
8/25

22/03/2018

The humanitarian crisis remains as dire as when we
visited the region a year ago. The number of people in
need of humanitarian assistance remains at 10.7 million,
and 5.8 million people are now experiencing severe
food insecurity. We call upon donors to maintain the
momentum of the response, including by fulfilling the
financial requirement of $1.6 billion for 2018. We call
on all parties to the conflict to grant safe, timely and
unimpeded access to humanitarian organizations, in
line with international humanitarian law.
Based on the humanitarian and security situations,
it is clear that the international community and the
Security Council must remain fully engaged in the
crisis. On 21 March, the United Kingdom opened a
diplomatic office in Chad to facilitate efforts to stabilize
the region and address the root causes of insecurity.
We welcome the steps taken by the Governments
of the region through the Multinational Joint Task
Force to address the terrorist threat. I welcome the
presence of the representative of Nigeria at the table.
I take this opportunity to acknowledge his country’s
determination and leadership in fighting terrorism and
to salute the partnership that the United Kingdom and
Nigeria have formed on this and other vital issues.
Although the military approach has an important
role to play in stabilizing the region, the solution to
the crisis cannot be solely military. As recognized in
resolution 2349 (2017), to achieve sustainable peace
it is vital that the root causes of regional instability,
including poverty, climate change, inequality and
violent extremism, be understood and addressed.
We recognize the ongoing efforts of the countries
of the region, both individually and jointly, through
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to achieve that
aim. We must ensure that Governments of the region
demonstrate strong leadership, in particular on the
demobilization, deradicalization and reintegration of
former combatants. The international community and
we in the United Nations must support those efforts
with robust strategies on prevention and a sustaining
peace approach.
The Deputy Secretary-General has shown great
leadership in bringing together the diffuse activities
of many United Nations development agencies in the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, linked
to wider security efforts. We must apply those lessons
and that approach to the Lake Chad basin region.
Special, political missions, in particular the United
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) must work to ensure that their efforts
are coherent and that regional strategies are mutually
supported. I fully agree with the representative of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, who stated that a
comprehensive analysis should be included in the future
briefings of UNOCA and UNOWAS to the Council.
The United Nations strategy must be based on accurate
information so that future crises can be predicted
and the Council, the wider United Nations family
and Governments of the region can take preventive
action in line with the Secretary-General’s own focus
on prevention.
On this World Water Day, let us remember that
climate and ecological changes are a major root cause
of the conflict. If we want to build sustainable peace
and promote sustainable development, we must support
efforts to build livelihoods that are resistant to climate
change, including through adequate risk assessments
and risk-management strategies. It is also vital that the
United Nations and Governments of the region take the
particular concerns of women and children into account
in stabilization, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding
efforts, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). The
United Nations could support it through a stronger,
more consistent in-country presence.
As the representative of the United Kingdom stated
when we adopted resolution 2349 (2017), “[w]e will fail
the people of the region if we do not respond to what we
saw” (S/PV.7911, p.5). When we travelled to the region,
we saw the root causes and the serious consequences of
the conflict and we must respond. The Lake Chad basin
is a region that requires a sustaining peace approach
and we would hope that the Secretary-General will be
able to demonstrate the support of the United Nations
by visiting the region, as set out in resolution 2349
(2017).
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): As an observer State of
the African Union, Kazakhstan commends the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for selecting a very timely and
critical issue for consideration during its presidency of
the Security Council this month. We look forward to a
discussion that results in greater awareness and action.
We also thank our briefers, Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed; the representative of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, Mr. Bila; and Senior
Conflict Adviser at Adelphi, Ms. Chitra Nagarajan,

S/PV. 8212

for their updates. We also welcome the delegation of
Nigeria to the Chamber today.
The humanitarian situation across the Lake Chad
region is presently one of most severe in the world.
This year approximately 10.7 million people are in
need of relief assistance and persistent insecurity and
violence continue to drive displacements in higher
proportions. In addition, approximately 4.5 million
people are currently food insecure. We therefore call
on the international community to increase its support
for humanitarian assistance in the affected countries.
Sustained humanitarian efforts must be accompanied
and reinforced by support for recovery and increased
development efforts.
The worsening ecological situation in the region
also has a deep impact on its socioeconomic prospects.
It is estimated that 40 million people depend on Lake
Chad for crop and livestock farming, fishing and trade.
Over the past 60 years, the size of Lake Chad has
decreased by 95 per cent as a result of the consequences
of an extended drought and climate change, affecting
both the ecosystems and the economy of the region.
Consequently, unemployed youth fall prey to the
extremist group Boko Haram.
Along with the efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission (LCBC) to address security issues,
it is urgent that international partners and donors
support projects such the Inter Basin Water Transfer,
aimed at restoring Lake Chad. Such a measure
would foster not only regional integration but also
development. We commend the Government of Nigeria
and the Commission for hosting the international
conference on saving Lake Chad, held in Abuja last
month. We emphasize the importance of the United
Nations continuing to carry out risk assessments of
climate-related security challenges, when appropriate,
and to highlight the need to implement the relevant
Security Council documents to mitigate the surge.
On the security front, we strongly condemn the
attacks on the civilian population by Boko Haram
insurgents, especially the abduction of children,
women and girls for sexual exploitation and for the
purpose of suicide bombing. Commendable results
have been achieved by the Multinational Joint Task
Force in reducing the operational capacities and the
geographical reach of Boko Haram. Likewise, it is
critical to continue to strengthen the partnership among
regional countries through the Joint Steering Committee

18-079929/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

of the LCBC and the African Union with a view to also
mobilizing support for the urgent operational needs of
the Task Force.
However, United Nations support and engagement
in regional issues are vital. We note the efforts of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
for West Africa and the Sahel, as well as for Central
Africa, to enhance coordination and the support of
regional partners, with a focus on joint support for the
LCBC and on combating Boko Haram in addition to
other areas of cooperation.
We would like to stress the importance of
strengthening the nexus between security and
development as the bedrock of the stabilization,
reconciliation and development of the Lake Chad
region. We also firmly believe that the United Nations
and regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States, should develop
a single and comprehensive operational strategy that
addresses the root causes of the crisis. Such a strategy
should be implemented in close cooperation with the
affected countries. We therefore welcome the holding
of the first regional stabilization conference in the
Lake Chad Basin region as an initial step towards
that purpose.
As proved time and again, in conflict situations a
regional approach is one of the most effective ways to
move forward. We therefore commend the measures of
the United Nations and the African Union, together with
other international organizations and Governments,
to introduce peace initiatives in the Lake Chad basin
region. That in turn requires a synthesis between
bottom-up and top-down strategies to bring about a
true and lasting transformation.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Amina Mohammed,
Deputy Secretary-General, and Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
as well as Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, for their significant
briefings on the most recent developments in the Lake
Chad basin region. I would also like to commend the
Kingdom of Netherlands for the choice of today’s
topic, which draws our attention to the various
challenges faced by the Lake Chad basin and their
direct and indirect consequences for the countries
of the region. In my statement, I will focus on three
10/25

22/03/2018

challenges, namely, security and humanitarian and
environmental challenges.
First, with regard to terrorism and security
challenges, the countries of the Lake Chad basin — in
particular Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria — have
been targeted by terrorist attacks, including those of
Boko Haram and what is known as Da’esh. Such attacks
have led to the deaths of unarmed civilians and other
innocent people, which is a great source of concern.
We need to step up regional and international efforts to
combat that dangerous phenomenon, and to cut off the
sources of financing to those terrorist groups.
We welcome the efforts of the Multinational
Joint Task Force to combat the extremist terrorist
groups and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. In that regard, it is important to mention
the two presidential statements adopted by the Security
Council in January 2017 (S/PRST/2017/2) and July 2017
(S/PRST/2017/10), which emphasize the importance of
fighting transnational threats that undermine peace
and security. The presidential statements also recall
the importance of implementing the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and of strengthening
good governance and the rule of law.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation in certain
countries of the region is considered the second
worst humanitarian crisis that has been recorded,
with approximately 10.8 million people who require
immediate humanitarian aid. Approximately 2.4 million
people, including women and children, have been
internally displaced. It is therefore essential to deal with
the causes of the suffering and to pool international
efforts and the work of regional organizations to
strengthen the stability of the region and its people,
along with those responsible for terrorist acts to be held
accountable in accordance with resolution 2349 (2017),
on the situation in the Lake Chad basin, adopted on
31 March 2017.
During their visit to the Lake Chad basin, the
members of the Security Council had an opportunity
to see the scope of the humanitarian disaster in some
countries of the region. The Council should benefit
from the visit and periodically review the very serious
humanitarian situation facing those countries before it
deteriorates even further. It would then be even more
difficult to contain it at the international level, let alone
at the regional level.
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Thirdly, with regard to environmental challenges
facing the region, resolution 2349 (2017) also emphasizes
the need to address the root causes of climate challenge
in the region and to increase international participation
in order to reduce the negative effects of climate and
environmental changes, including the scarcity of water,
drought, desertification, land degradation and food
insecurity. In that regard, we note the need to reassess
risks and define new and serious strategies in order to
assist the Governments of the region. The Governments
concerned and the United Nations must extensively
assess climate risks, contain their impact and minimize
adverse effects of climate and environmental changes,
so as to ensure stability in the region and to ease the
humanitarian suffering of its people.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the
need for the Security Council to continue to examine
humanitarian suffering in some countries of Lake Chad
basin, with a view to improving the living conditions of
the peoples facing humanitarian, security and climate
challenges and minimize their risks. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of the Republic of Nigeria to
address those challenges.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin
by thanking Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her briefing and her leadership. I am
happy to note that Ambassador Skoog is with Amina
in Monrovia to celebrate this important moment in the
history of the country and to discuss how to support the
priorities of the new Government in his capacity as the
Peacebuilding Commission Chair for Liberia. Let me
also thank Mr. Mohammed Bila of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Ms. Chitra Nagarajan for sharing their
important perspectives from the ground this morning.
It is with a deep sigh of relief that we welcome
the safe return of more than 100 of the girls captured
by Boko Haram in the Nigerian town of Dapchi. I
reiterate our strong demand for the immediate and
unconditional release of all remaining missing girls.
Rehabilitation opportunities for children and their
mothers, including the sensitization of communities to
avoid stigmatization and to facilitate return, continue
to be of the utmost importance in our ongoing efforts to
address the situation.
National, regional and international efforts
to mitigate the consequences of the Boko Haram
insurgency and to step up humanitarian action in 2017
meant that we could successfully avert the immediate

S/PV. 8212

risk of famine. In that connection, we recognize the
important efforts by the Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. However, one
year after our visit to the region and the adoption of
resolution 2349 (2017), the situation remains one of
the most fragile in the world. Continued international
support and attention to this complex crisis is crucial.
Vast development needs in the region persist.
Chronic poverty, the lack of economic opportunities and
violations of human rights are all factors of instability.
We need a continued focus on sustainable and inclusive
growth, as well as on the empowerment of women.
Effective partnerships spanning the humanitarian,
reconstruction and development nexus that combine
short- and long-term responses are needed to support
sustainable peace. In order to address the structural
causes of the crisis, complementarity and cooperation
must be sought with a multitude of actors, including
national Governments, regional organizations and
international financial institutions.
As part of the efforts to implement resolution 2349
(2017), Sweden is actively supporting the organization
of the Lake Chad governors’ forum on peacebuilding,
prevention, stabilization and regional cooperation, due
to take place in Maiduguri in May. The forum should
contribute to the process of developing a regional
stabilization strategy. Those efforts will also support
coherence, coordination and cross-border collaboration
by creating a forum for recurrent dialogue among
governors from affected States and by conducting
consultations with communities — including religious
leaders and women representatives — on the challenges
facing people living in the Lake Chad basin region.
In the light of today’s focus on root causes, I wish
to highlight two points in particular.
First, the negative impacts of climate change on
the stability and security of the Lake Chad basin region
have been clearly recognized by the Council — in
resolution 2349 (2017) and in the January presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/3) on the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
Climate change constitutes both a direct challenge and
a threat multiplier, contributing to polarization and
conflict between groups by worsening existing fragility
factors, such as scarce resources, marginalization and
the disruption of livelihoods.

18-0799211/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

As we have heard today, the Security Council has
repeatedly emphasized the need for adequate capacity
for risk assessments by the United Nations in that
regard. We need to find ways to bring together existing
information from relevant United Nations organs,
including at the country level, and involve research
institutions to provide forward-looking analysis for
United Nations decision-making bodies, including for
the Security Council. We invite the Secretary-General
to take forward those Council requests forward. We
stand ready to support any efforts in that regard.
Conflict prevention efforts would be more effective if
the climate and environmental stress put on societies
is properly understood and addressed. Implementing
the sustaining peace agenda and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development is, of course, a central part of
those efforts.
Secondly, engaging all relevant actors, not least
at the local level, in an inclusive dialogue on root
causes is crucial. Community engagement is also a
prerequisite for effective early-warning systems. In
particular, women’s full and equal representation and
effective participation is critical in reconstruction and
stabilization efforts, as they are often disproportionately
affected by the crisis and play multiple roles in society.
With greater influence for women in the design and
implementation of policies and programmes, these will
be better adapted to realities on the ground, thereby
creating better conditions for long-term stability
and peace.
Finally, we look forward to continuing to engage
in discussions on the implementation of resolution
2349 (2017), including within the regular reporting by
UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa. We encourage the Secretary-General
to undertake a joint visit to the region with the World
Bank, the African Union and the African Development
Bank, as was encouraged in the resolution. I also agree
with the United Kingdom that proposals put forward
this morning by the briefers should be considered and
taken forward. The Peacebuilding Commission could
also be well placed in this regard, while drawing on
its unique membership and a mandate to address root
causes and take regional approaches. Continuous
international attention to the Lake Chad basin region
will be needed in order to find ways to address the
multiple and interdependent challenges in a coherent
manner, in the short-term as well as the long-term.
12/25

22/03/2018

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to the presidency of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for the timely convening of this meeting
on this special occasion as we celebrate World Water
Day, a vital element for the well-being of human
beings and the promotion of their economic and social
development. We are also grateful to Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila and Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan for their briefings.
Peru continues to be particularly concerned about
the crisis in the Lake Chad basin, which affects more
than 17 million people in Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad
and the Niger. Approximately 11 million people are in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. We must also
condemn and confront the terrorist violence of Boko
Haram and Da’esh, and prevent the occurrence of major
conflicts by addressing their root causes. That requires
the timely promotion of socioeconomic development
and the mitigation of the effects of climate change and
environmental change. These effects involve water
scarcity, which in turn has created chronic drought,
desertification, land degradation, extreme poverty and
food insecurity in the Lake Chad region. The situation
highlights the interrelationship between security,
development and human rights.
Building sustainable peace requires a coherent
and comprehensive response, with a broad,
multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approach. The
United Nations system has the capacity to contribute to
more effective responses through its relevant agencies,
funds and programmes. The Security Council, the
main body responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, can and should benefit from a
better understanding of the factors behind the crisis
and conflict and the tools needed to address them. That
should be done through timely situation analysis and
development, risk assessments and risk-management
strategies, as well as early-warning analysis and
coordinated early-response mechanisms and the
creation of integrated strategies aimed at preventing
a recurrence of conflict. We welcome the efforts
in that regard of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States.
We encourage them to increase their support to the
Governments of the States of the Lake Chad region
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

around a holistic regional strategy designed to address
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism.
That strategy should go beyond an urgent short-term
military response and focus on long-term sustainable
development focused on ensuring human dignity.
That includes eradicating poverty and vulnerability to
the negative effects of climate change. It also means
creating jobs, especially for young people, and access to
education, and strengthening Government institutions.
In that context, we welcome the 2018 Humanitarian
Response Plan for north-eastern Nigeria.
In conclusion, we would like to point out the
importance of ensuring that UNOWAS and UNOCA
reports include special sections on the problems in Lake
Chad and on their joint work. We would also like to
stress the importance of adopting a gender perspective
in investigations and data collection, with a view to
proposing specific policies and programmes aimed at
sustaining peace in the Lake Chad region.

S/PV. 8212

First, the international community must firmly
support Africa in its fight against the terrorist threats.
Counter-terrorism in Africa is an integral part of the
global counter-terrorism effort. The international
community must uphold common counter-terrorism
standards and support Africa’s anti-terrorism efforts.
The United Nations must provide tangible assistance
to African countries in their anti-terrorism capacitybuilding so that their counter-terrorism efforts are more
effective. China commends the fact that the countries
of the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel have assumed
ownership of the issue and have been working jointly
for peace by actively combating regional terrorist
threats. While maintaining respect for the sovereignty
and wishes of host countries, the United Nations and
the international community should provide targeted
assistance to countries of the region in areas such
as technology, training, equipment, logistics and
financial support.

In recent years we have seen African countries
standing united and making concerted efforts to
strengthen themselves, finding African solutions to
African issues and developing more robust collective
security mechanisms for the region. They have thereby
not only strongly defended Africa’s peace and security
but have also contributed significantly to international
peace and security. China applauds those efforts.

Secondly, we should give Africa effective assistance
in addressing the root causes of conflict. The continent’s
hotspot issues are a mass of intertwined national,
ethnic, religious and social issues. African countries
have two big jobs to do — maintaining peace and
security, on the one hand, and promoting revitalization
and development, on the other, and to do that they must
address both the root causes and the symptoms. While
it is important to resolve the ongoing peace and security
challenges, it is even more important to address their
root causes from a long-term perspective. This means
in particular that support and assistance should be
provided to African countries, including those in the
Lake Chad basin, in their efforts to reduce poverty
and increase employment, with the aim of improving
economic and social development levels, delivering a
tangible peace dividend to their peoples, and rooting
out breeding grounds of conflict and extremism.

Meanwhile, Africa continues to face challenges
to peace and security. In certain regions, including
the Lake Chad basin, terrorist and violent extremist
activities are still rampant. Transnational organized
crimes such as drug smuggling and human trafficking
continue to endanger the safety of the African people.
As a result, the countries affected are suffering the
effects of sluggish economic growth, along with
persistent serious unemployment, poverty and refugee
issues. It is therefore imperative that the international
community take concrete measures to help Africa build
its capacity to ensure peace and security.

Thirdly, the unique role of regional organizations
should be actively brought to bear. The African Union
(AU) and other regional and subregional organizations
in Africa have an intimate knowledge of regional
and national realities and have long been mediating
complex regional hotspot issues, leveraging their
unique geographic, historical and cultural advantages.
It is therefore important to ensure that the international
community fully respects African countries’ ownership
in resolving their own security concerns, deepens
coordination with countries in the Lake Chad basin
and regional and subregional organizations such as

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, China commends the initiative you have
taken as President of the Security Council to convene
today’s open meeting. We thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
and Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser
of Adelphi, for their briefings.

18-0799213/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

the AU, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission, and
enhances cooperation with them in areas such as
conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict reconstruction.
China and Africa are a community with a shared
future, as well as a community of shared interests
and win-win cooperation Strengthening solidarity
and cooperation with African countries remains a key
foundation of China’s foreign policy. As a good friend,
brother and partner of the continent, China will continue
to act on the principles of sincerity, practical results,
affinity and good faith that guide China’s Africa policy,
as well as on the values of friendship, justice and shared
interests, both articulated by President Xi Jinping, and
it will firmly support Africa’s peace and development
efforts. In September, China will host a Beijing summit
forum on China-Africa cooperation, focusing on China
and Africa’s joint efforts to build the Belt and Road
Initiative and on the China-Africa Community of a
Shared Future. We will work hard to ensure that the
Belt and Road Initiative is aligned with the development
strategies of African countries, the AU’s Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, so
as to create greater benefits for the peoples of Africa
and bring peace, stability and development to the
African continent as soon as possible.
Last but not least, I would like to stress that as
always, China will continue to stand together with all
the developing countries of Africa. We will always be
sincere friends and reliable partners of Africa.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Netherlands for taking
the initiative to organize this vital debate on the
relationship between water and peace and security in
the Lake Chad region, which is a very high priority
for France. I warmly thank Amina Mohammed, the
Deputy Secretary-General; Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission; and
Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, the representative of Adelphi, for
their very important and enlightening briefings. I am
also pleased to welcome the representative of Nigeria.
The development of the Lake Chad region
requires first and foremost a focus on security, which
is an essential, if not sufficient, prerequisite for
development. France therefore actively supports the
efforts of the countries of the Lake Chad basin region,
united in the Multinational Joint Task Force against
14/25

22/03/2018

Boko Haram. Their joint efforts have made it possible
to gain ground and to record major gains against that
terrorist organization.
Nevertheless, the terrorist threat continues to loom
over the countries of the region and their peoples, as
shown by the tragic toll taken by the many attacks
carried out during recent months against both civilians
and security forces. We were deeply shocked by the
kidnapping of 110 schoolgirls in Dapchi last month, but
were pleased to hear this week that a large number of
them had been released. We also condemn yesterday’s
attack on Nigerian soldiers in the Birnin Guari region.
But these, unfortunately, are but a few examples.
We also denounce in the strongest terms the grave
human rights violations committed against children,
particularly their recruitment as child soldiers and their
use as human bombs, which could constitute crimes
under the Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Faced with the persistent, ever-changing terrorist
scourge, the support of the international community
is more needed than ever and must continue. Such
support includes certain responsibilities. Under no
circumstances can the fight against terrorism be
accompanied by human rights violations. The activities
of the Multinational Joint Task Force must respect the
relevant provisions of international law. We welcome
the efforts of the countries of the region to bring
former terrorist fighters to trial and to take measures to
promote their reintegration. The rule of law is essential
for reconciliation and for the demobilization of people
who in many cases had joined terrorist groups without
any real ideological motivation.
We are aware that the response to the crisis in the
Lake Chad Basin region cannot focus only on security.
In order to ensure a lasting solution, we must continue
our efforts to address the root causes of the crisis
through an integrated response. That was the key lesson
learned from the Security Council mission to the area
a year ago, and it is this integrated approach, which
encompasses security, development and human rights,
that is enshrined in resolution 2349 (2017), adopted last
March, and in the January statement by the President of
the Security Council (S/PRST/2018/3).
Today the Lake Chad region faces major challenges.
The surface of the lake has decreased by half since the
1950s, and its fertile environment attracts neighbouring
peoples and subjects the area to strong demographic
pressure. The situation is worsening, which is having
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

lasting impacts on local economic activities such as
agriculture and fishing.
Food insecurity, competition for water, and social
tensions threaten both host communities and displaced
persons and could lead to heightened regional conflicts.
As today is World Water Day, I wish to stress the
importance of water resources to the security and
stability of the Lake Chad region. Water should never be
a source of division but, rather, a factor for cooperation
between States. This is one of the major challenges
facing our generation.
Against that backdrop, France will continue its
efforts to strengthen local governance tools, including
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, as well as its
development assistance projects, through the French
Development Agency in particular.
Lastly, I would like to recall that our efforts to
stabilize the region must also focus on humanitarian
challenges and the protection of civilians.
First, the major humanitarian emergency that the
region continues to face must lead us to strengthen
our efforts to support the countries on the front line
of the fight against terrorism and that are hosting a
considerable number of internally displaced persons
and refugees. The severity of the humanitarian
crisis that the countries of the Lake Chad Basin are
experiencing today requires the mobilization of all
stakeholders, in particular through support for the
humanitarian response plan for the region recently
launched by the United Nations. France has taken
concrete steps to that end. It provided €14.5 million in
humanitarian assistance in 2017 and contributed to the
implementation of the Lake Chad Initiative, aimed at
empowering displaced persons and refugees, for a total
contribution by France of more than €36 million.
Secondly, the fight against terrorism must be
accompanied by a continued requirement to protect
civilians. We must ensure the ongoing safety of
peoples from Boko Haram and support the voluntary
and lasting return of displaced persons and refugees
where security conditions allow it possible. The issue
of refugee and displaced women must also be met with
specific and immediate responses, and women should
be fully consulted to that end.
I would like to close by recalling the need to break
down the barriers between the issues of sustainable
development, governance, human rights, and peace and

S/PV. 8212

security. Environmental deterioration and in particular
the increasingly scant water resources in the Lake Chad
region illustrate with particular clarity the imperative
need for a comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention, which lies at the heart of the reform strategy
of the Secretary-General and which we fully support.
Conflict prevention is one of the major challenges of
our time, and its importance will only increase in the
years to come.
In this regard, in accordance with resolution 2349
(2017) and the January presidential statement on West
Africa and the Sahel (S/PRST/2018/3), we encourage
the adoption by Governments and the United Nations
system of appropriate risk assessment and management
strategies so as to respond to the destabilizing factors
linked to environmental deterioration, desertification
and climate change.
In the Lake Chad region, we must urgently move
from words to action. Commitments must translate
into specific actions; rest assured of France’s resolute
commitment to that end.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start
by thanking the presidency of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for having organized this important
briefing on the situation in the Lake Chad basin,
building on what the Security Council did last year.
I wish to express appreciation to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for her comprehensive
briefing and for her leadership and commitment in
addressing the multifaceted challenges facing the Lake
Chad basin in a comprehensive and holistic manner.
Let me also thank Mr. Mohammed Bila and Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan for their remarks.
I wish also to acknowledge the presence here
today of the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, our
colleague, whose country has been doing so much to
fight Boko Haram terrorism.
It has been a year since the Security Council’s visit
to the Lake Chad basin and the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2349 (2017). We want to believe that the issue
of peace and security there, as well as the humanitarian
and socioeconomic problems facing the region, are now
attracting greater international attention. Momentum
appears to have been created, as the Deputy SecretaryGeneral said earlier.
We appreciate the progress made in the fight against
Boko Haram, which continues to pose a major threat to

18-0799215/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

peace and security in the region. In this regard, it is
important to recognize the efforts of the countries of the
region, through their participation in the Multinational
Joint Task Force. Unfortunately, the Joint Task Force is
not receiving the necessary international support it so
richly deserves. The withdrawal of the Chadian troops
from the Joint Task Force in the Niger and its impact
cannot be taken lightly. We note the decision taken at
the latest African Union Summit to request that the
African Union Commission work closely with partners
to continue mobilizing additional support for the Joint
Task Force on the basis of the need expressed by the
countries of the region. It is absolutely important that
the pledges already made by partners in support of the
Joint Force be fulfilled.
The cooperation and coordination of efforts
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
subregional organizations of the Economic Community
of West African States and the Economic Community
of Central African States is very critical in addressing
the challenges of the region. The visit by the African
Union Peace and Security Council to the Lake Chad
basin in July 2017 and the holding of the first regional
stabilization conference for the Lake Chad basin region
in November last year are encouraging developments
in that regard.
We believe that a security and military response, as
well as development interventions aimed at addressing
the root causes of conflict and tackling poverty by
overcoming the unemployment problem, must be
strengthened. In that connection, widespread food
insecurity, forced displacement, climate change and
chronic vulnerability and susceptibility to epidemics
that are affecting the people of the region cannot be
addressed without enhanced and sustained engagement
and support on the part of the international community.
Accordingly, we support the 2018 United Nations
humanitarian response plan for north-east Nigeria,
launched last month, which covers peacebuilding
and ensures efforts that contribute to longer-term
development measures.
The effects of climate change and its impact on
the Lake Chad basin, including the degradation of
ecosystems, pose serious challenges to the efforts
in addressing the root causes of the conflicts in the
basin. The populations in the area highly depend on
agriculture, animal husbandry and fishing, which are
tied to the life and very existence of the lake. That
climate change is wreaking havoc in many areas of
16/25

22/03/2018

the world is increasingly becoming self-evident, but
nowhere is that so empirically more demonstrable than
in the Lake Chad basin. On top of that, the Boko Haram
threat continues unabated. Therefore, the consolidation
of peace and the progressive stabilization of the region
to allow economic activities in the joint border areas
of the countries are essential and need to be supported.
The enhanced and sustained support of the United
Nations system in a coherent and coordinated manner
will continue to be critical in assisting countries of the
region to overcome those challenges.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would also
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed,
Mr. Bila and Ms. Nagarajan for their briefings today.
One year after the Security Council’s mission to the
region and its adoption of resolution 2349 (2017), the
presentations are an important reminder that much
work remains to be done to address the continuing
terrorist threat and the escalating humanitarian crisis
in the Lake Chad basin.
One year later, we can point to some progress in
the humanitarian response and efforts to deliver help
to those in the greatest need. But the terror of Boko
Haram and its offshoot Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS)-West Africa continues to devastate
communities, families and lives throughout the region.
Their brutality, hatred and inhumanity will spread
terror, prolong the humanitarian crisis and displace
millions until they are destroyed. We express our deep
condolences to the victims of the horrific terrorist
attacks in north-east Nigeria and across the Lake Chad
region, including the attack and tragic kidnapping of
over 100 school girls in Dapchi and the abduction and
killing of humanitarian aid workers in Raan.
We are encouraged by the return of a significant
number of the girls to Dapchi yesterday, but are
horrified to hear of those killed during their captivity.
We call for the return of all those abducted across the
region and accountability for the perpetrators. As the
United States has told the Governments of the Lake
Chad region many times, we are their partner in the
fight and we will continue to support their efforts to
defeat those terrorist groups.
We commend Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon, the Niger
and Benin for stepping up to counter that threat through
the Multinational Joint Task Force. We thank Nigeria
for the leadership role it has played in the response
and we urge those nations to stay focused on the task,
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

even while they face other pressing security priorities.
Governments must also focus on a smooth transition
between military forces and civilian protection forces
to ensure that populations are protected even after
troops move on. Regional leaders must redouble efforts
to secure territory to allow the displaced to return
safely to their communities, restart their livelihoods
and rebuild their lives.
The latest abductions in Dapchi and Raan show the
need for robust protection to end the appeal of abductions
and extortion and the cycle of rape, forced marriage,
brainwashing and suicide bombings. Nigeria’s recently
launched demobilization, disassociation, reintegration
and reconciliation strategy and the action plan for
preventing and countering violent extremism are very
positive steps, as are other similar regional efforts. The
United States will continue supporting that critical
work and we encourage partners to do so as well.
As our briefers and Council colleagues have
described here today, success will not depend on
military effectiveness on the battlefield alone. It also
requires improvements to the economy and governance
off the battlefield. The region cannot simply restore
north-east Nigeria and the broader Lake Chad basin
to what they were before the destruction caused by
Boko Haram and ISIS-West Africa. They must build
a better future there. Governments must work with
civic leaders and a wide range of community leaders to
create the social, economic and political infrastructure
to support lasting peace. That progress must include
transparent and credible investigations of human
rights violations and abuses, as well as mechanisms to
hold those responsible accountable for their actions.
Impunity only fuels terrorist recruitment. We therefore
reiterate the call in resolution 2349 (2017) for all
regional security forces to conduct operations in line
with international human rights and humanitarian law
and for Governments to take appropriate action to
secure justice and accountability. Those efforts deepen
people’s trust in their Governments and strengthen
security efforts.
The staggering size and toll of the region’s
continuing humanitarian crisis require a dynamic and
comprehensive response that helps respond to urgent
needs, while looking ahead to the future. The response
must lay the groundwork for durable solutions for the
more than 10 million people throughout the region
needing humanitarian assistance, the 4.5 million facing
severe food insecurity and the many still at risk of

S/PV. 8212

famine, as well as the 2 million displaced. A successful
response depends on access to the communities in need
throughout the regions. We reiterate calls on regional
Governments to do all they can to help humanitarian
partners secure that access. Regional Governments
should also do more to bolster grassroots support for the
international humanitarian response by reinstituting
responsive governance in the region and reassuring the
region’s people that they have a future in their home
communities.
The United States is committed to supporting our
Lake Chad partners in their efforts to defeat the terrorists,
address the root causes of violent extremism, provide
life-saving assistance to those in need, create a secure
environment so that the displaced can voluntarily and
safely return home and rebuild communities ravaged by
conflict. Our bilateral security assistance provides vital
support to our Lake Chad basin partners in the fight
against Boko Haram and ISIS-West Africa, as well as
to help those who have been victims of those terrorist
groups. The United States is also the single-largest
humanitarian donor to the international humanitarian
response. On 6 March, the United States announced
more than $128 million in additional humanitarian
assistance for the Lake Chad region, bringing the total
to over $655 million since 2017, and over $1 billion
since 2015.
The United States is also helping regional partners
rebuild devastated communities. To help establish
civilian security, the United States trained civilian
law enforcement actors, provides personal protective
equipment to police and rebuilds police barracks
and stations. Throughout the region, when security
conditions allow, we fund education, health and
agriculture projects in a holistic effort to kick-start
local economies, help establish effective governance
and service delivery and foster respect for human rights
and accountability for violations and abuses. With our
fellow Council members, we stand with the people
and the partner Governments of the Lake Chad basin
committed to this effort.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire would like to thank Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General, for her
briefing. Our thanks also go to Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
and Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser of
Adelphi, for their information and suggestions.

18-0799217/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

In putting the issue of the Lake Chad basin on
the agenda for today’s meeting, the presidency has
encouraged the international community to consider
this complex and multidimensional crisis with the
aim of investigating its underlying and interdependent
causes, for which we thank you, Sir. The fact is that
beyond the security crisis in the region, there are several
other interrelated factors, such as socioeconomic
and environmentally related poverty, affecting the
populations living in the Lake Chad basin. In this
case, the problem is one of increasingly scarce natural
and economic resources, a lack of jobs and sources
of income, especially for young people, and issues of
governance and administrative decentralization. In
considering these factors as the main causes of the
crisis, the Security Council addressed the situation
comprehensively in resolution 2349 (2017). While
welcoming the efforts of the Governments concerned,
the Council has also urged them to effectively implement
programmes aimed at building and sustaining peace, as
well as tackling the root causes of the crisis.
My country believes that the key priorities are
ensuring equitable access for the people of the region
to resources and services, together with sustainable
economic growth. We therefore commend the Security
Council’s determination to work to restore an atmosphere
of peace in the region with a view to enabling those
priorities to be implemented. The Secretary-General’s
report contained in document S/2017/764 has given us
some insight into the actions being taken to deal with
the threat posed to the region by the terrorist group
Boko Haram in particular.
My delegation is pleased with the success of the
Multinational Joint Task Force’s operations, despite the
fact that Boko Haram is still active and dangerous. In that
regard, we welcome the recommendations made at the
second meeting of the Joint Steering Committee of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and the African Union,
held from 18 to 20 December of last year, particularly
concerning the importance of speeding up the process
for making additional support available through the
use of funds from international partners in order to
meet the urgent Joint Task Force’s operational needs.
The humanitarian aspect of the crisis in the region also
remains worrying and will require the Governments of
the region and the international community to synergize
their efforts to provide assistance to the populations
in distress.
18/25

22/03/2018

Côte d’Ivoire appreciates the Secretary-General’s
determination and commitment to support the countries
of the region in their efforts to end the ongoing violence
and mitigate the people’s suffering. We continue to
believe that only greater cooperation at the regional
and international levels will enable lasting solutions
to the crisis to be found while taking into account the
specifics of the individual countries concerned. In that
regard, my delegation backs the Secretary-General’s
willingness to commit the United Nations and its
partners to advancing the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel in order to
comprehensively address the relevant security and
development issues, including in the Lake Chad basin.
It is also important to continue and strengthen the
coordination of the United Nations and African Union
efforts, as well as the cooperation between the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in
order to address the challenges in the region of the Lake
Chad basin.
One of the biggest challenges in the region continues
to be the collective commitment to initiating genuinely
dynamic development in the area of the Lake Chad
basin. While that certainly means a greater commitment
to combating the terrorist groups, it also depends on
devising a strategy for finding a solution to the shrinking
of Lake Chad, the epicenter of every socioeconomic
activity for the peoples of the area. Considering the
drastic drop in the lake’s depth and area, it will be
crucial to speed up the quest for innovative ways to
restore it. In that regard, we welcome the conclusions
and recommendations of the international conference
held in Abuja from 25 to 28 February on the theme of
saving Lake Chad to revitalize the basin’s ecosystem
for sustainable livelihood, security and development.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to affirm
its commitment, together with the other members of
the Council, to contributing to resolving the current
crisis in the Lake Chad basin, once again emphasizing
the importance of strengthening the coordination
mechanisms for the relevant subregional and regional
organizations in order to ensure that their joint actions
are effective.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her informative briefing on the situation
in the region of the Lake Chad basin. We also listened to
the other briefers’ reports on the subject with interest.
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

For our part, we want to emphasize that the topic
of today’s meeting appears to be “Peace and security
in Africa”. It would therefore be logical to assume that
we in the Security Council, in accordance with our
mandate under the Charter of the United Nations and
in the context of our consideration of the situation in
the Lake Chad Basin region, will focus directly on the
deplorable security situation.
We are not arguing with the fact that there is a
whole range of diverse problems that are undoubtedly
exacerbating the overall situation in the region. The
climate and habitat naturally have a serious impact on
people’s lives. However, there are other, more suitable,
forums for discussing these issues — the Second
Committee of the General Assembly, and the Economic
and Social Council. There is no need to disrupt the
existing division of responsibilities and overload the
Security Council’s agenda. Any erosion of its mandate,
and the consequent diminution of its effectiveness,
must be guarded against.
By the way, we warned that this was potentially an
issue when we voted on resolution 2349 (2017) last year,
and we were not the only ones. We were not listened to
at the time and, unfortunately, the resolution did not
include the elements that would have helped to make
it an effective tool for international efforts to assist
the countries of the Lake Chad basin, particularly in
the area of counter-terrorism. I would like to stress
that what we are talking about is fighting terrorism,
not some conflict or other. In the relevant Security
Council resolution, Boko Haram is classified as a
terrorist organization.
So where are we today, a year after the adoption
of resolution 2349 (2017)? So far, Boko Haram still
seems to feel entirely untrammelled. It has continued
to commit terrorist acts and kidnap schoolgirls in the
region, with regard to which the Council very recently
issued another presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/3).
Thank heaven that today we were informed that a large
number of them have been released. Yet we were also
shocked by the news of the possible tragic fate of the
rest. We are grateful to the Nigerian authorities for their
counter-terrorism efforts in this regard.
Boko Haram’s terrorist activity is a real threat to
the States of the region. It undermines people’s settled
lives, forces them to move to less dangerous areas
and interferes with normal commercial and economic
activity. Only when this challenge to an entire region

S/PV. 8212

is eliminated will it be possible to make significant
progress in resolving other pressing problems and to
undertake thorough efforts to prevent natural disasters
and do away with their consequences.
In this regard, I cannot help recalling the disastrous
extent of the destabilization in the region after the
collapse of the Libyan State. Far from normalizing
things in Libya, which we were discussing only
yesterday (see S/PV.8211), it has continued to have
a negative impact on the regional situation. I am not
saying that in order to irritate anyone on the Council.
It is a warning against undertaking such destructive
regional ventures in future. After 2011, terrorism
spread across the Sahel-Sahara region and West and
Central Africa like a cancer and, despite every effort,
it has continued to threaten the stability of countries
in that part of Africa and even beyond its borders.
Unfortunately, we will be forced to wrestle with the
consequences of the externally inflicted crisis in Libya,
which include uncontrolled and illegal flows of arms
and migrants and the spread of radical ideologies, for a
long time to come.
In that regard, we consider it important to continue
to provide all possible assistance to countries that are
fighting terrorists in strengthening their own national
potential and encouraging the development of solid
regional cooperation. In this area, what is needed is
cohesion, not competition, and a good example of
that is the activities of the Multinational Joint Task
Force of the States of the Lake Chad basin, which are
doing a great deal to curtail Boko Haram’s activities.
We understand that security efforts should go hand in
hand with advancing policies aimed at strengthening
the institutions of State power and socioeconomic
development. We note the efforts in that regard of the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
holding of a first conference on stabilizing the situation
in the countries of the region. Efforts to find answers
to the current problems based on the notion of African
solutions to African problems can only be welcomed.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Russia, as before, will continue to provide assistance
to the States of the region both through international
institutions and bilateral channels, without making our
help conditional on any politically loaded demands.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for the

18-0799219/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

information that she has provided us with today. We also
express our gratitude for the briefings by Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser of Adelphi, and
by Mr. Mohammed Bila, representative of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission. We would like to highlight
the Commission’s work in developing mechanisms to
address the crisis in the region, including its root causes.
Bolivia is concerned about the continuing threat
posed by Boko Haram to security in the Lake Chad
basin, exacerbating the humanitarian crisis in the
region. This terrorist group’s terrible attacks on
civilians, including assassinations, kidnappings, the use
of children as suicide bombers, sexual violence against
women and the recruitment of children, underscore the
continuing importance of coordinating efforts to deal
with its extreme violence. We recognize that the tireless
efforts of Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Cameroon have
enabled us to make encouraging progress in reducing
the terrorist group’s fighting capacity, but we must
continue to counter the terrorist acts that threaten
peace and security in the region. We therefore consider
that the international community’s support is crucially
important to the Multinational Joint Task Force and the
countries of the region that are combating terrorism on
behalf of us all.
The region is currently facing a grave humanitarian
crisis, with more than 10 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance. That reality must make us
focus our attention and commitment on uniting the
efforts of the States of the Lake Chad basin and regional
and subregional organizations, with a short-term focus
on combating food insecurity, addressing the basic
needs of internally displaced persons, refugees and
those most vulnerable, such as children and women,
and improving the general population’s quality of life
by providing access to basic services. We therefore
encourage donor countries to honour their pledges
made at the 2017 Oslo Humanitarian Conference on
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region and make it possible
for those needs to be met.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia recognizes the
importance of developing a joint regional strategy that
takes into account the underlying causes of the crisis
in the region as well as initiatives to combat the threat
posed by Boko Haram. We note that the Governments of
the countries concerned are facing complex challenges
in implementing programmes addressing the root
causes of the crisis, primarily because a large part of
their resources are earmarked for the security sector.
20/25

22/03/2018

It will be crucial to work to reduce poverty and social,
political, economic and gender-based inequalities, and
to increase countries’ ability to provide basic services,
education and infrastructure. We must also consider
the adverse consequences of climate change and
ecological changes. In that context, water shortages,
desertification and drought are increasing instability in
the region.
As we said in last year’s meeting on preventive
diplomacy and transboundary waters (see S/PV.7959),
during Bolivia’s June presidency of the Security
Council, a high percentage of the world’s freshwater
sources are shared by two or more States. Water quality,
use and scarcity can often generate conflicts or the
conditions for potential conflicts. But States that share
this life-sustaining resource must translate those ties
into opportunities to cooperate effectively so that they
can work inclusively to share their knowledge in order
to foster consensus and identify more efficient and
cooperative water-management policies. In that regard,
it is essential that the various bodies of the United
Nations, based on their respective mandates, redouble
their efforts to jointly address that issue together with
the parties concerned.
In conclusion, we believe that it will be crucial
to provide continued coordination and support to the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Economic Community of Central
African States in encouraging them to redouble their
efforts and in working together with them.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank today’s briefers, Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila and
Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, for their very comprehensive
statements. I also thank the President for convening
today’s meeting to discuss the situation in the Lake
Chad basin region.
Poland has been closely following the political
and security situation in this region, which is facing
a dreadful humanitarian crisis, with about 11 million
people in need of immediate assistance and more
than 2 million dealing with internal displacement,
particularly women and children. We believe that the
Security Council should remain thoroughly engaged
and monitor the situation carefully.
We support the full implementation of resolution
2349 (2017). We firmly condemn all terrorist attacks,
violations of international humanitarian law and human
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

rights abuses by Boko Haram and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham in the region, including those
involving killings and other violence against civilians,
especially women and children. In that regard, we
appreciate the Multinational Joint Task Force counterterrorism operations aimed at ending the Boko Haram
insurgency. However, there remains much to be done
in that regard, since a number of terrorist attacks have
shown that the group remains a significant threat,
especially in north-eastern Nigeria.
In order to end the terrorist threat in the Lake
Chad basin region, the United Nations, together with
the countries concerned, must address the root causes
of the violence and instability there, which originate
in the social and economic hardships endured by
marginalized communities. If we do not tackle these
issues, we will not be able to strengthen prevention and
ensure that the conflicts can be sustainably resolved.
Only by empowering the region’s marginalized
populations, including women, children and other
communities that suffer from discrimination, can we
effectively counter the spread of violent extremism. At
this stage, humanitarian assistance alone is not enough
to ensure stable and sustainable livelihoods for the
people affected. Long-term development assistance
must address the vulnerabilities of the region, including
food insecurity and climate change.
Climate change is a global threat facing all of
us today. It hinders access to resources and causes
extreme weather events, disasters, food insecurity
and water shortages. All of those factors can lead
to the escalation of local and regional conflicts
and increases in migration. Poland recognizes the
devastating consequences that climate change and
ecological degradation, among other factors, are having
on the stability of the region, and we are aware of the
importance of increased international engagement in
addressing these problems.
As we celebrate World Water Day and the launch
of the International Decade for Action: Water for
sustainable development (2018-2028), we would like
to stress the important role of water in the peace and
security agenda. We must address the adverse effects that
water, or the lack of it, can produce and the challenges
it can pose, and pay more attention to the importance
of adequate risk assessment and management. While
concentrating on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace, we should not forget Sustainable Development
Goal 6, as we have already seen several water-related

S/PV. 8212

crises. We therefore welcome regional initiatives
aimed at improving the situation in the Lake Chad
basin, revitalizing local ecosystems and supporting
sustainable livelihoods.
As President of the twenty-fourth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Poland
will continue to lead climate negotiations in the spirit
of the Paris Climate Change Agreement, ensuring the
equal participation of all countries and inclusive and
transparent negotiations, while bearing in mind that
resolving climate-security issues is in the interest
of countries vulnerable to climate change. Effective
adaptation to and mitigation of climate change can also
be perceived as conflict-prevention tools that can make
a significant contribution to building resilience among
the countries affected.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I sincerely thank you, Sir, for including
today’s very important issue in your programme of
work, enabling us to discuss the situation in the Lake
Chad basin region for the first time this year and give
greater visibility to a serious crisis that has received
very little media attention.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila, representative of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, and Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser at Adelphi, for
their briefings, which underscored the severity of
the situation in the Lake Chad basin region and
its relationship to peace and security in Africa, in
particular in Central and West Africa. The violent
activities of the armed terrorist group Boko Haram
in north-eastern Nigeria affect Nigeria’s neighbours
in the Lake Chad basin — Cameroon, Chad and
the Niger — with devastating implications for food
security and livelihoods. Boko Haram’s acts of
terrorism have killed more than 15,000 people in the
region, led to the displacement of another 2.5 million
in those four countries and hindered access to land
and farming activities, which in turn has resulted
in enormous humanitarian deprivation in a region
already plagued by food insecurity, poverty and
environmental degradation.
The emergence of terrorist groups such as Boko
Haram and other non-State actors that operate outside
the law, undermining States’ sovereignty and exploiting
their vulnerabilities, is both a cause and effect of the

18-0799221/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

factors I just mentioned. This situation is particularly
apparent on our continent and we commend the Council
for the initiatives it has already undertaken to address it.
However, we must remain vigilant and take preventive
and proactive measures to explore all of the variables
that play a role in the peace and security equation in
the region.
The Lake Chad basin is facing a complex
humanitarian situation in north-eastern Nigeria, the
far northern region of Cameroon, western Chad and
south-eastern Niger. In the areas of those countries
that are worst affected, conflict and displacement
are compounding the other structural factors that
undermine people’s livelihoods, exacerbate food
insecurity and poverty and reduce access to basic social
services such as water, sanitation, health and education.
There is no need to cite all the statistics, but according
to several reports, about 11 million people are extremely
vulnerable and in need of humanitarian assistance.
As many representatives underscored at the
international conference on saving Lake Chad to
revitalize the basin’s ecosystem for sustainable
livelihood, security and development — held from
26 to 28 February in Abuja — Lake Chad, part of
the common heritage of humankind, is testament to
the fact that global warming is closely linked to food
insecurity and instability. Climate change, exacerbated
by inefficient management of water resources over the
years, has shrunk the surface of Lake Chad by 90 per
cent in the past 40 years. The fact that the lake has dried
up and now contains only 10 per cent of its previously
normal volume of water, added to the resulting acute
food shortage, has created many security and peace
crises in the region.
The Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2349 (2017) in March of last year testified to its resolute
and firm decision to support regional efforts to combat
the Boko Haram terrorist movement, resolve the
humanitarian crisis and eliminate the root causes of the
particularly difficult situation in which the Lake Chad
basin finds itself. The dual security and humanitarian
crisis there is putting us to the test in adopting a truly
integrated and comprehensive approach to the region’s
multidimensional challenges. The problems facing the
region, which range from terrorism, the illegal trade
in arms and the trafficking and abduction of people
to food insecurity, climate change and environmental
degradation, cannot be solved in isolation from
one another.
22/25

22/03/2018

Equatorial Guinea would like to commend
the praiseworthy efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the African Union and, in particular,
the Multinational Joint Task Force, which have made
significant progress in their struggle to recover
territory captured by Boko Haram, and which have
thereby shown that African regional and subregional
organizations can play a very active role in such
contexts. The supranational structures of the Joint Task
Force’s configuration and the Group of Five for the
Sahel have also been instrumental in regional efforts to
eradicate violence in the area. A coordinated regional
approach to the crisis is fundamental to achieving the
results we want.
However, the security gains must be accompanied
by support for development, with a focus on emergency
assistance with food production — in agriculture,
livestock and fisheries — while addressing the factors
creating instability in the region. Meeting immediate
needs will pave the way for the medium- and long-term
activities that can help to improve the resilience of
the population.
I would like to conclude by underscoring and
expressing our appreciation for the great determination
of the Governments of Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon and
the Niger to combat Boko Haram.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Netherlands.
With its adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) on the
Lake Chad basin a year ago, the Council recognized
that security, development and human rights are
interlinked. It also recognized that such links are vital
to achieving an effective and comprehensive approach
to stabilization, reconciliation and counter-terrorism.
However, we must also strengthen preventive action.
The current crisis in the Lake Chad basin is the
result of our collective inaction in addressing the root
causes of the problem 15 years ago. Let me highlight
that fact by focusing on three root causes about which
we are particularly concerned in this context. The first
is water and climate change; the second, socioeconomic
challenges; and the third is a lack of inclusion and
empowerment of women.
With regard to the first of these, water and climate,
Secretary-General Guterres has said that water, peace
and security are inextricably linked. He is absolutely
right. As others have said, today is World Water Day.
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

That is another reason that I want to highlight the
example of the availability of water and the challenges
posed by the increased variability of the climate
around Lake Chad. Those two factors have real effects
on livelihoods, farming, fishing and food security,
as Mr. Bila so eloquently said earlier today. Building
resilience, with a view to preventing further tensions,
requires investment in sustainable, integrated water
management, all while taking into account the effects
of climate change.
This month, the High-level Panel on Water, of
which the Prime Minister of the Netherlands is an
active member, presented its report, Making Every
Drop Count. I would like to highlight some of its
recommendations. We should address, first, the adverse
impacts and challenges that water can cause; secondly,
the need for adequate risk assessment and management
solutions; thirdly, water-related root causes; and
fourthly, we should take pre-emptive action. Those
recommendations are crucial to both water scarcity and
climate change.
The second root cause that we want to highlight is
the lack of socioeconomic opportunities, which makes
the population vulnerable to recruitment by violent
extremists, as Ms. Nagarajan made clear earlier. The
region itself has risen to address that challenge, and
we commend it for that. The Multinational Joint Task
Force, which brings together Benin, Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria, has pushed back Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. I pay
tribute to their efforts, and I welcome the presence
of our colleagues from those countries with us today.
However, more must be done to address the underlying
factors that drive people towards violent extremism. The
recent joint United Nations mission is a good first step
in developing conflict-sensitive programming across
the United Nations system to improve socioeconomic
opportunities. We call on the United Nations to
strengthen that approach and to improve reporting on
such efforts to the Security Council.
That brings me to the third root cause that I would
like to address, the lack of inclusion and empowerment
of women. Women and girls in the Lake Chad region
are disproportionately affected as targets of terrorism
and by lost livelihoods. As Ms. Nagarajan made clear,
in such challenging situations, the most vulnerable
become even more vulnerable. But women are also
strong actors in building resilience and in advancing
sustainable development in the region. We need an

S/PV. 8212

integrated response that ensures the full inclusion and
participation of women and girls as stewards of their
own futures.
Let me continue with the following call to action.
To ensure a more integrated long-term approach to
sustaining peace in the Lake Chad region, we are asking
the United Nations for the following efforts. First, we
need integrated risk assessment, conflict analysis and
early warning. Secondly, we need more capacity for
joint risk assessments and management by all United
Nations organizations. Thirdly, we need to take climate
change into account. Fourthly, we need to ensure
conflict-, gender- and climate-sensitive planning and
programming, such as stabilization plans that take into
account the availability of resources around Lake Chad.
Fifthly, we need comprehensive evaluations and reports
in order to thoroughly analyse the many risks to peace
and security and their effects on other programmes in
the region. The upcoming report of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel will provide a
good opportunity for putting that into practice. Lastly,
we need to apply the lessons of the Lake Chad basin and
the need for preventive action to other regions.
In conclusion, with its adoption of resolution 2349
(2017) the Security Council showed its ability to call
for early action in the Lake Chad region. However,
the Lake Chad basin is not unique. The root causes
of conflict are visible in many places in the world.
We want resolution 2349 (2017) to be the rule, not
an exception, so that the Council can take preventive
action for future generations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to once again encourage all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): Allow me at
the outset, on behalf of the Governments of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, to thank the presidency
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands for organizing this
important briefing. It is illustrative of the positive
disposition of the Netherlands, and indeed that of the
Security Council, towards resolving the myriad of
challenges confronting the Lake Chad region.

18-0799223/25

S/PV.8212

Peace and security in Africa

Our special appreciation goes to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for her remarks. We
thank Mr. Bila and Ms. Nagarajan for their briefings.
We also thank all the memebrs of the Council for
their statements.
The Boko Haram insurgency has negatively
impacted virtually every facet of human endeavour,
including the economy, the polity and the lives and
livelihoods of people across the Lake Chad region. The
insurgency has been met with resolve and resilience by
the Multinational Joint Task Force, among others, and
as a result we have continued to witness the emergence
of rescued survivors and victims who were hitherto
under the brutal oppression of Boko Haram. Indeed,
three days ago we celebrated the release of 105 out of
110 abducted Dapchi schoolgirls. Nigeria is committed
to rescuing the remaining victims, as well as those who
were abducted earlier.
May I seize this opportunity to reiterate the
commitment of our Governments to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, in recognition of the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
national jurisdiction. This conviction underlies our
Governments’ resolve to take all measures necessary to
protect civilians in the battle against the terrorist group
Boko Haram and its ilk.
That progress notwithstanding, we are aware
of other challenges in the region, including climate,
ecological and environmental changes, particularly
the shrinking of Lake Chad. Averting the latter will
require dedicated international intervention to recharge
the lake. The lake is very dear to our hearts, as it is a
source of livelihood to over 45 million people living
in the region. It is one of the oldest lakes in Africa and
is shared by Cameroon, the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria.
The people living in the region depend on Lake
Chad for agriculture, fisheries, livestock production
and, indeed, their economic well-being. Unfortunately,
today all that is history due to the drying up of the lake.
This has resulted in dire consequences for our peoples.
Fish varieties are long gone, leaving the fishermen
jobless; farmers and herdsmen struggle over the little
water that is left; herdsmen traverse long distances in
search of greener pastures, resulting in conflicts; and
our young people are joining terrorist groups because
of difficult economic conditions. The net effect of all
these has been instability in the subregion. We therefore
24/25

22/03/2018

reiterate our call for rededicated international action,
increased global attention and active engagement with
the countries of the Lake Chad region to accelerate
recovery efforts and to address the root causes of
terrorism , in accordance with resolution 2349 (2017)
and the recent presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3
on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, adopted by the Security Council on 30 January.
This will require strong United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, in conflict prevention
and management. The United Nations should continue
to take primary leadership in the maintenance of
international peace and security by providing, in
a predictable and sustainable manner, adequate
funding and other enablers to regional initiatives and
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council. In this regard, we call for the expeditious
disbursement of the $458 million for humanitarian
purposes, announced at the 2017 Oslo conference.
On our part, the Governments of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission, with the support of UNESCO, the
African Development Bank, the European Union, the
World Bank and the Governments of Germany, China,
Canada, Japan, the Netherlands, Hungary, France, Italy,
the United Kingdom and the United States of America
organized the International Conference on Saving the
Lake Chad in Abuja, from 26 to 28 February.
The Conference, held under the theme “Saving
the Lake Chad to revitalize the Basin’s ecosystem for
sustainable livelihood, security and development”,
sought, among other things, to create global awareness
on the socioeconomic and environmental challenges
arising from the shrinkage of the Lake Chad, threats
to livelihoods, including insecurity, and others. It also
discussed and developed consensus on the different
options for restoring the lake, including the interbasin
water transfer project from the Ubangi River in Central
Africa to Lake Chad.
We are pleased to inform the Council that the
Conference adopted a road map for the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference that
should lead to the restoration of the lake, fishing and
irrigated farming as a way of alleviating poverty,
strengthening climate resilience in the basin, creating
employment, leading to reduction of terrorist activities
and increasing the revenue of the population and that
18-07992

22/03/2018

Peace and security in Africa

of the Lake Chad basin countries. We look forward to
enjoying the support of the international community in
implementing this well thought-out road map.
We wish to also affirm our commitment to
addressing the complex and multifaceted challenges
facing the region by tackling the root causes of
the crises in a holistic manner. In that context, our
respective Governments have developed programmes,
such as the Buhari Plan of Nigeria; the Renaissance
Programme of the Niger; the Recovery Road Map and
the Special Youth Triennial Programme of Cameroon;
Vision 2030: the Chad We Want of Chad; and the Lake
Chad Development and Climate Resilience Action Plan
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
As has been stated by many others, the special
attention and support of the international community
are also required to alleviate the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons in the region, particularly
women and children.
As we continue on this journey towards our goal,
we wish to use this medium to solicit the Council’s

S/PV. 8212

continued collaboration and support. We must treat
the issues of Lake Chad with the urgency they deserve
and show the needed political commitment to reviving
the Lake. Together, let us share the mission of rescuing
Lake Chad with renewed vigour, determination and
international collaboration, as our inaction or delay
will continue to accelerate the deteriorating standard of
living of millions of our people, with dire consequences
for our continent.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our pledge to restore
Lake Chad to its former glory. Recognizing that our
efforts will be more productive with international
support, we call for the full implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2349 (2017), and for our
international partners — technical and financial — to
remain unwavering in their support.
The President: Let me once again express our
appreciation to our briefers, Mr. Bila and Ms. Nagarajan.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

18-0799225/25
