S/2006/62

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 January 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 30 January 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 19 January
2006, which I received from the Secretary-General of the Council of the European
Union (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-22812 (E) 310106

*0622812*

S/2006/62

Annex
Letter dated 19 January 2006 from the Secretary-General
of the Council of the European Union addressed to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
Three years ago, the European Union launched its Police Mission to Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a follow-on to the International Police Task Force. This was
welcomed by the Security Council, notably in the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33). The Council expressed
its intention to keep the implementation of the Peace Agreement, and the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina under review and invited the European Union to keep it
regularly informed, as appropriate, on the activities of the European Union Police
Mission.
I am happy to say that, up to now, the European Union Police Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made considerable advances in developing sustainable
policing arrangements under the ownership of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Some of the
achievements of the Mission to date include:
• The State Investigation and Protection Agency, which is being transformed
into an operational police agency with enhanced and executive powers to fight
major and organized crime, is now starting to find its feet as an institution;
• Solid development of other State-level institutions, in cooperation with the
European Commission, including, notably, the Ministry of Security and the
State Border Service.
Coherence and coordination will be ensured with other international actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region. The European Union Special
Representative will have a leading role in ensuring coordination in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The follow-on mission was launched on 1 January 2006. It will have a duration
of two years. The European Union Police Mission will include approximately 170
police officers, mainly seconded from member States of the European Union.
Brigadier-General Vincenzo Coppola (Italy) has been appointed as Head of Mission.
As requested by the Security Council at the launch of the European Union
Police Mission in 2002, we will continue to keep the Security Council updated on
the progress of the new phase of the Mission.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2
