A /76/PV.90

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

90th plenary meeting

Thursday, 30 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
High-level meeting of the General Assembly on
improving global road safety
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Improving global road safety
Draft resolution (A/76/L.70)
The President: I declare open the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on improving global
road safety. This meeting is being held in accordance
with resolution 75/308, of 21 July 2021, and takes
place under agenda item 13, entitled “Improving global
road safety”.
Statement by the President
The President: I would like to begin by observing
a moment of silence for all those who are killed or
seriously injured on roads all over the world.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
moment of silence.
The President: The statistics on road safety are
both daunting and disturbing. Nearly 1.3 million lives
are claimed by road traffic accidents every year. As
much as 3 per cent of annual gross domestic product
is lost in some countries owing to road accidents. And
road traffic injuries are the leading cause of death
among children and young adults aged between 15
and 29 years of age. That trend can change. That trend
must change. Today’s high-level meeting on improving

global road safety is one step towards doing exactly that.
Under the theme “The 2030 horizon for road safety:
securing a decade of action and delivery”, we can build
the political will and deliver the concrete actions that
help to save lives. As we begin our deliberations, I have
five core messages.
First, no deaths on our streets are acceptable. For
far too long we have accepted far too many deaths. We
have allowed the huge range of crucial benefits that
arise from safe transport systems to pass us by. Enough
is enough. Road safety falls under the umbrella of the
universal right to health, which is a fundamental right
of every human being, wherever they are and whatever
their circumstances. Safety is paramount.
Secondly, the Global Plan for the Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2021-2030 is key to reducing deaths and
boosting development. The Plan calls for a fundamental
shift in how we approach mobility. It makes the best
use of our investments in safe transport systems and
aims to halve preventable deaths by 2030. The safe
systems approach recognizes that road transport is a
complex system with interconnecting elements that
reinforce each other. Safety must therefore be front
and centre in determining how we organize, design and
build mobility systems. All partners and stakeholders
involved in building safe transport systems must be
engaged in crafting road safety strategies.
Thirdly, this high-level meeting could mark a
critical juncture in addressing the issue of global road
safety. Governments need to endorse the Global Plan for
the Decade of Action for Road Safety and urgently act

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40688 (E)

*2240688*

A/76/PV.90

on its recommendations, including by setting national
and subnational reduction targets, outlining detailed
plans of action, employing a whole-of-Government
approach, ensuring sustainable financing and putting
in place gender-sensitive and non-discriminatory
policies and practices. Above all, the implementation
of the Global Plan is crucial and should be guided by
evidence-based practices.
Fourthly, transformative leadership and good
governance are key. In order to make that work, road
safety must be a political priority at the highest levels of
Government. Governments must lead and facilitate each
country’s respective road safety strategy. They must
set up and maintain broad and inclusive coordination
mechanisms in order to ensure that all ministries and
partners are fully involved in building safe transport
systems. Governments are key to providing legal
frameworks and funding. Long-term, sustainable
investment is also needed to leverage the existing
investments in wider areas of the transport sector.
Fifthly and finally, everyone has a role to play. The
safe systems approach calls on everyone involved to
share the responsibility for road safety and take part in
the design of road safety policies. We must include young
people, who are affected disproportionately by road
safety incidents. We must adopt a gender perspective in
all policymaking, including by ensuring that women’s
voices and perspectives are heard in designing policies
that provide safe, inclusive and secure mobility. We
must take into account the views of those in vulnerable
situations, such as persons with disabilities and older
persons. From urban planners to engineers, and
academia to civil society, everyone has an important
role to play. We must ensure that all stakeholders accept
their responsibilities and that mechanisms are put in
place to support them. That includes all those involved
in designing and maintaining our roads, manufacturing
our vehicles and administering our safety programmes.
The role of the private sector is crucial.
Today’s high-level meeting on improving global
road safety is a key opportunity and platform for us
to make the changes that are needed to strengthen
the political will, scale up investment and draw on
the lessons learned in order to accelerate action in
implementing the Global Plan for the Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2021-2030. As the tragic toll of
incidents on our roads rises, the time is now for action
from Governments, societies and communities. Safe
mobility systems offer the promise of a safer, healthier
2/27

30/06/2022

and better future for everyone, everywhere. Let us seize
that opportunity.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking members for their presence
here today to promote road safety — one of the many
critical challenges facing our world. I would also
like to commend my Special Envoy for Road Safety,
Mr. Jean Todt, and thank him for his leadership and
tireless commitment.
Road accidents are a rampant silent epidemic.
Today’s meeting is a vital opportunity to improve the
situation, take concrete action and work towards lasting
change. Every year, 1.3 million people die on our roads,
and 50 million more are seriously injured. Today road
accidents are the leading cause of death worldwide
among young people aged between 5 and 29 years.
Nine out of 10 victims live in low- or middle-income
countries. The tragedy is all the more unacceptable
given that many of those deaths are entirely preventable.
(spoke in English)
Road fatalities are closely linked to poor
infrastructure, unplanned urbanization, lax social
protection and health-care systems, limited road safety
literacy and persistent inequalities, both within and
between countries. At the same time, unsafe roads are a
key obstacle to development. Traffic accidents can push
entire families into poverty through either the loss of a
breadwinner or the costs associated with lost income
and prolonged medical care. Developing countries
lose between 2 and 5 per cent of their gross domestic
product every year owing to road accidents.
Safer roads promote sustainable development.
Our goals are clear — to cut road traffic deaths and
injuries by half by 2030 and to promote sustainable
mobility, with safety at its core. I count on members to
attract attention and raise awareness and to foster more
inclusive collaboration and closer coordination across
sectors and stakeholders. We need more ambitious and
urgent action if we are to reduce the biggest risks, such
as speeding; driving under the influence of alcohol
or any psychoactive substance or drug; failing to use
seatbelts, helmets and child restraints; unsafe road
infrastructure and vehicles; poor pedestrian safety; and
the inadequate enforcement of traffic laws.
22-40688

30/06/2022

We need increased financing for sustainable and
safe infrastructure, as well as investments in cleaner
mobility and greener urban planning, especially in lowand middle-income countries. And we need to adopt a
more holistic approach to road safety. That means better
integrating road safety into national policies, from
education, health and transport to climate mitigation,
land-use planning and disaster response.
I encourage all Member States to accede to
the United Nations road safety conventions and to
implement whole-of-society action plans, while taking
a strong prevention approach. I urge all donors to
scale up their much-needed financial and technical
contributions through the United Nations Road Safety
Fund. Every one of us has a role to play in making roads
safer for everyone, everywhere. Together we can save
lives, support development and steer our world towards
safer roads, leaving no one behind.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Before proceeding further, as announced in my
letter circulated on 29 June, it is proposed that the
opening segment of this meeting also feature a statement
by Mr. Stewart Simonson, Assistant Director-General
of the World Health Organization and the DirectorGeneral’s Special Representative for United Nations
Reform, on behalf of the Director-General of the World
Health Organization.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to decide
that the opening segment of its high-level meeting on
improving global road safety, held pursuant to resolution
75/308, will feature a statement by Mr. Stewart
Simonson, Assistant Director-General of the World
Health Organization and the Director-General’s Special
Representative for United Nations Reform, on behalf of
the Director-General of the World Health Organization?
It was so decided (decision 76/570 A).
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Stewart
Simonson, Assistant Director-General of the World
Health Organization and the Director-General’s Special
Representative for United Nations Reform, to make a
statement on behalf of the Director-General of the
World Health Organization.
Mr. Simonson (World Health Organization): I am
honoured to deliver these remarks on behalf of Dr.
Tedros Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World
Health Organization.

A/76/PV.90

The transport systems we use every day open the
world to us. But they are far too dangerous, polluting
and wasteful. Every year, nearly 1.3 million people die
in road traffic accidents — that is about 3,500 lives lost
every single day. Road traffic crashes are the leading
cause of death among children and young people. The
increasing motorization of transport systems brings with
it the risk of death, injury, greenhouse-gas emissions,
air pollution and fossil-fuel reliance. Pedestrians and
cyclists, who are often the most disadvantaged members
of society, are on the roads alongside high-speed traffic,
which substantially increases the risk of road traffic
crashes. That is too high a price to pay for mobility.
Putting safety at the core of our transport systems
is an urgent moral imperative. The Global Plan for the
Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030, which
was launched last year by Dr. Ghebreyesus, calls for
a comprehensive, balanced and achievable approach to
improving the safety of roads by putting safety at the
heart of transport, the environment, urban planning
and development policies. The Plan promotes safe
walking, cycling and public transport. It calls for action
on managing speed and emphasizes the importance of
road infrastructure design, vehicle safety standards and
legislation as key elements of a safe-system framework
to prevent deaths and injuries.
The health sector plays a critical role in preventing
deaths and long-term disabilities. The Global Plan draws
attention to the need to strengthen post-crash response,
including emergency trauma care and rehabilitation
services. It also calls for a just response for victims
and their families. The Plan will indeed drive the
implementation of the second United Nations Decade
of Action for Road Safety. In that regard, a 50 per cent
reduction in road traffic deaths and injuries by 2030 is
an ambitious but achievable target. In fact, a reduction
of just 7 per cent each year over the next decade will
result in a more than 50 per cent reduction overall. It is
important for policymakers to be ever mindful that safe
mobility is fundamentally a human right.
Today’s high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on global road safety is important and timely. We need
Presidents, Prime Ministers, mayors and ministers
to lead the effort by ensuring coordination across all
sectors in order to make roads safe. Improving the design
of urban environments and transport systems in order
to protect and promote health and well-being requires
an integrated multisectoral approach, guided by policy

22-406883/27

A/76/PV.90

frameworks, so that human and environmental health
go hand in hand.
The World Health Organization encourages civil
society, academia and the private sector to do their part
to make our roads safe. As the group most affected by
road traffic crashes, young people should be engaged in
meaningful ways in planning the future of their mobility.
The World Health Organization encourages leaders to
be inspired by the Global Plan as a foundation for their
own national safety policies and programmes. Safe,
affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems
are well within reach. The discussions held over the next
two days will be instrumental in promoting whole-ofGovernment action around a shared vision of the future
of mobility and its links with human and planetary
health. That is particularly important as we recover and
rebuild from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for his leadership in bringing to a successful
conclusion the substantive, forward-looking and
action-oriented draft political declaration (A/76/L.70)
and for convening this high-level meeting. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy for Road Safety, Mr. Jean Todt, for their
leadership and vision.
Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to
all the members of the Assembly for their dedication
and commitment to road safety. The World Health
Organization, having been mandated by the General
Assembly to lead the United Nations system’s effort on
road safety, looks forward to working with all members
in order to make safe roads a reality in every country
on Earth.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Jean
Todt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Road Safety.
Mr. Todt: It is a real honour to open this first-ever
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on global
road safety. The fact that we have managed to make
this meeting happen indicates that road safety has been
recognized as an urgent global issue that requires our
combined effort. During the first Decade of Action for
Road Safety, which began in 2010, we gained much
experience of how to address this urgent, life-saving
issue. But even today, road traffic crashes represent
a leading cause of death and injury around the world,
killing more than 1.3 million people and injuring as
many as 50 million more each year, with 90 per cent
4/27

30/06/2022

of those casualties occurring in developing countries.
Only by combining efforts everywhere can that growing
destruction on our roads be resolved.
As we attend the panels and events over the next
two days, we must keep fresh in mind the theme of
securing a decade of action and delivery. Action and
delivery are indeed needed. The world is uniting to
attack the invisible, pervasive threat of road accidents.
The increase in funding for road safety in recent years
is encouraging but not enough. We also now have many
more partners, including through the Global Plan for
the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030, the
United Nations road safety conventions, the United
Nations Road Safety Fund, the World Bank Global
Road Safety Facility, the Global Status Report on Road
Safety and many others. But we need to do more.
Before I became involved in road safety more
than a decade ago, I had a long career in motor racing.
Success in racing is easy to measure — when someone
wins, they have done their job; when someone does not
win, they have not. Unfortunately, measuring success
in road safety is not as simple. It is not so easy to know
whose life we have saved. It might even include some
of us here today. What is certain is that we all know of
someone who lost their life in a road crash. We need to
have faith that, through the steady application of work
towards our goal, we will see a drop in the horrifying
number of road traffic fatalities and injuries.
Even if we have made progress in certain countries,
there is still an unacceptable discrepancy between what
is happening in the developed world as compared to
the developing world. Over the past 45 years, Europe
has added three times more vehicles but had five times
fewer victims. In the developing world, however, both
the number of vehicles and the number of victims are
growing. Africa, for instance, with only 2 per cent of
vehicles globally, has the highest road-crash fatality
rate in the world. Some of the solutions are simple,
such as reducing speed and wearing a helmet or a
seat belt. Others are more complicated. For example,
building busy roadways away from schools reduces
fatalities dramatically. But for a solution like that to be
effective, we need to be involved early in the city and
road planning stages. It requires the participation of
everyone. That is why we are now working as hard as
we can, during our second Decade of Action for Road
Safety, which ends in 2030, to combine our efforts in
the battle for road safety goals with those that seek to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. In that
22-40688

30/06/2022

way, we can also achieve many of our global targets on
climate change, gender, cities, education, child health
and human rights.
History has proven that, if the world works together
in that way, we can achieve the seemingly impossible.
Only a century and a half ago, the average global life
expectancy at birth was around 32 years. Today, thanks
mostly to medical science, it is 73 years — that is a
more than 50 per cent increase in life expectancy. We
are aiming to achieve 50 per cent fewer deaths on the
road. We have much less time to achieve that, but we
already have many of the solutions. By working together
to apply a systematic approach across all our modes of
transport, we can achieve that goal.
The Assembly can count on my commitment to
delivering on our objective together. I wish members an
excellent two days of events ahead, here in New York.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the opening segment of the high-level meeting. I wish
to thank the Secretary-General for taking the time to be
with us this morning. The Secretary-General will now
be leaving due to his other commitments.
The Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/76/L.70, entitled “Political declaration of
the high-level meeting on improving global road safety”.
In that connection, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): The present
oral statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly. The present
statement will also be distributed to Member States.
Under the terms of paragraph 18 of draft resolution
A/76/L.70, the General Assembly would
“[d]ecide to convene a high-level meeting on
improving global road safety in 2026 in New York,
[…] the scope and modalities of which shall be
decided no later than at the eightieth session of the
General Assembly”.
The adoption of the draft resolution would not
entail any budgetary implications with regard to the
programme budget. Upon a decision on the format,
scope and modalities of the high-level meeting,
the Secretary-General would assess the budgetary
implications and advise the Assembly in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General

A/76/PV.90

Assembly. Furthermore, in accordance with established
practice, the date of the high-level meeting would be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
The statement I just read out will be made available
in The Journal of the United Nations under the
e-statements link for the meeting.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/76/L.70. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/76/L.70?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/294).

A/76/L.70

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank you, Mr. President, for your personal
efforts to ensure the adoption of the political declaration
on improving global road safety (resolution 76/294). We
are also grateful to the Chef de Cabinet of your Office,
Ambassador Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur, and the World
Health Organization’s office at the United Nations in
New York for their outstanding contribution to the
preparation of this positive document.
Russia supports the political declaration and
welcomes its adoption by the General Assembly. The
text underpins a number of principles that are essential
to the implementation of the second Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2021-2030, including the right to
health, the system-wide cross-sectoral approach to road
safety, with the involvement of all sectors of society,
the importance of planning and the establishment
of specific goals. The document contains important
mandates, including to undertake a midterm review in
2026 of the implementation of the second Decade of
Action, and to strengthen the specialized work of the
World Health Organization.
At the same time, we regret that the Assembly was
unable to adopt a more comprehensive text, which was
prepared under the mandate of the President of the
Assembly following a six-month open process. The
document therefore fails to fully reflect a number of

22-406885/27

A/76/PV.90

important topics, including, inter alia, advocacy and
education, a focus on vulnerable road users, speed
limits, funding, advanced technology, research,
standardization, the role of public transport, assistance
to victims of road traffic accidents, contributions by
the private sector and the United Nations road safety
partnership, the consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and others.
Anyone who wishes to do so can verify those
shortcomings by consulting the United Nations website,
which includes the original version of the document
that was submitted via silence procedure on 24 May.
The responsibility for those shortcomings lies with a
group of countries that absurdly blocked the text based
on political motives that were unrelated to the topic of
the meeting, in violation of the established practice and
with no respect for the work carried out by other States.
The result is that road safety has been undermined,
especially in developing countries. We condemn that
destructive and senseless action, which will not go
unnoticed. Nevertheless, we welcome the adoption
of the political declaration, which marks significant
progress on the matter.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I take this opportunity to once again extend my
sincere appreciation to all Member States for their
constructive engagement and support during this
process, which enabled agreement on a concise and
action-oriented political declaration, as mandated
by resolution 75/308. I would also like to express my
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Gbolié Désiré
Wulfran Ipo, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Dmitry Chumakov, Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations, for their work. I also thank my Chef de
Cabinet, Ambassador Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur, who ably
facilitated the second phase of the intergovernmental
negotiations and successfully completed the work on a
final political declaration.
Before we begin with the list of speakers for the
plenary segment, I would like to remind delegations
that, as set out in resolution 75/308, statements will be
limited to three minutes for individual delegations and
five minutes for statements made on behalf of a group
of States.
6/27

30/06/2022

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. François
Bausch, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Mobility and Public Works of Luxembourg.
Mr. Bausch (Luxembourg): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on improving global road
safety, and for your efforts that enabled us to adopt
the political declaration by consensus this morning
(resolution 76/294). Despite all the other crises we
are facing today, including climate change, poverty,
hunger, health crises such as the global pandemic, as
well as geopolitical crises and wars, there is one crisis
people tend to forget, and that is road safety.
Every day, people are dying on our streets. What
crime are they committing? None. They merely want to
get from A to B. In some countries, road safety fatalities
are the most common cause of death, especially among
young people. That is a disaster. That is unacceptable.
The vast majority of road deaths worldwide occur in
so-called low- and middle-income countries. We had a
similar situation in Europe in the mid-seventies, when
road deaths increased dramatically. The problems were
very much the same in every country. Most of the
fatalities were the result of people driving at high speeds
or drinking and driving. Speeding was the main reason
for road fatalities, and it still is. Despite all our efforts
to build safer roads, and despite all the innovation in
vehicle safety, speeding is the major problem when it
comes to road safety.
If we think about road infrastructure today, we see
it mainly as infrastructure for cars. But, in fact, roads
should be multimodal corridors that are secure for every
mode of transport, including for pedestrians, cyclists
and motorists. That is especially true in urban areas,
where the most vulnerable infrastructure users are
present. We have to slow down the traffic in those areas.
We must give back our cities to the people, pedestrians,
cyclists and all other users of slow mobility.
We need to reorganize the public space in our cities.
We have to create cities for people. It is important to raise
awareness of the fact that public space is for everyone.
One of the most alarming new tendencies concerning
road safety is distraction. A mobile phone, a tablet, a
navigation device — all those items can cause drivers
to be inattentive. Texting while driving is as dangerous
as drinking and driving. If we are to reduce road deaths
and fatalities, we need a holistic action plan and strong
political will.
22-40688

30/06/2022

In order to achieve the target set by the United
Nations for the Decades of Action for Road Safety,
Luxembourg has put in place action plans concerning
road safety. The two plans, for 2014-2018 and 20192023, respectively, comprise a total of 57 specific
measures to reduce road fatalities. They include a
mix of preventive and educational measures, but also
enforcement measures. Through those programmes, we
have managed to reduce our road fatalities over the past
10 years by almost 50 per cent. Luxembourg now has 38
road deaths per million inhabitants each year, which is
the European average.
We still have a lot to do and a lot of work ahead
of us. That is why our main goal is to achieve Vision
Zero, that is, zero deaths and zero injuries. To do so
will take time, political perseverance and, of course,
money. Therefore, when I first heard about the plans to
introduce the United Nations Road Safety Fund, it was
absolutely clear to me that Luxembourg would need to be
a part of it. All the necessary measures to improve road
safety — from training and testing to driver education
and raising awareness of road safety, as well as efficient
enforcement and improving infrastructure — all have
a price. In order to help countries develop their own
road safety programmes and fight the daily disasters on
our roads, that new Fund is of paramount importance.
I would therefore like to thank all those involved in
making it happen, and hope that it will save many lives
in the years to come.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Wee Ka Siong, Minister of Transport
of Malaysia.
Mr. Siong (Malaysia): Allow me to speak briefly
about Malaysia’s efforts to improve road safety.
In line with our commitments under the second
United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety 20212030 and the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, the
Government of Malaysia, in collaboration with regional
state governments, industry partners, non-governmental
agencies and other road safety partners, is working hard
to ensure that road safety is entrenched as part of the
norms of our daily life and upheld as the utmost priority
in everyone’s travel routine.
In Malaysia, the fatalities of motorcycle users
contribute to more than half — to be exact, 64 per
cent — of the total annual fatalities from road crashes.
Tackling the safety aspects of motorcycle use has
therefore become paramount in achieving the target of

A/76/PV.90

reducing road fatalities by 50 per cent by the year 2030.
The high number of users and an almost equal number
of motorcycles as compared to other motor vehicles on
the road pose a huge challenge for us in formulating
effective safety policies for motorcyclists.
We pay serious attention to the nine
recommendations put forward by the Academic Expert
Group of the Swedish Transport Administration in
its high-level report, especially those relating to safer
vehicles and the proliferation of safer technologies in
vehicle construction and infrastructure design. In that
regard, we are seriously looking into enhancing the
adoption of vehicle safety technologies by creating
demand for them and sustaining the supply chains of
production. We have seen a very positive impact on
vehicle manufacturers as a result of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) New Car Assessment
Programme, which aims to populate Malaysian roads
with safer cars day by day. We are also working towards
making it mandatory for an anti-lock braking system
to be installed in all new motorcycle models, initially
for those with an engine cylinder capacity of 150 and
above, in the next two years.
We have been participating in the International
Road Assessment Programme since 2016, and we are
now putting in place a more focus-driven programme for
motorcycle safety under the Malaysia Road Assessment
Programme, including by emphasizing dedicated
lanes for motorcycles on our newly constructed roads.
In addition, our Malaysian Institute of Road Safety
Research is also forging close partnerships with many
relevant organizations in the ASEAN region in order to
bring the community together around the common goal
of making road transport safer. Those partnerships can
lead to wider collaboration, the execution of road safety
improvement projects and exchanges of expertise,
knowledge and experience with a view to achieving
safer roads for all parties concerned.
All those efforts have been institutionalized in
the Malaysia Road Safety Plan 2022-2030, which was
developed by the Ministry of Transport and is supported
by all relevant stakeholders. The Plan was prepared in
line with the recommendations of the United Nations
in its resolution 74/299, which declared the period
2021-2030 as the second Decade of Action for Road
Safety. In addition, targets relating to road safety, as
described under Sustainable Development Goals 3.6
and 11.2, have also been adopted in the Plan, with the
main aim of achieving at least a 50 per cent reduction

22-406887/27

A/76/PV.90

in the number of fatalities caused by road crashes by
2030. The Plan encompasses 10 priority areas that have
been identified as being the most important in order to
significantly reduce the risk of death and serious injury
on Malaysian roads. In particular, two priority areas,
specifically those of safer motorcycle riding and safer
vehicles, will include key strategies and action items to
improve safety for riders and motorcycles in Malaysia.
In conclusion, we are pleased to note today’s
adoption by the General Assembly of the political
declaration of the high-level meeting on improving
global road safety (resolution 76/294), which reaffirms
our collective commitment to international cooperation
on road safety. Let us all work together to achieve the
ultimate safety goals in order to better our lives at both
the national and global levels.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alexis Guerrera, Minister of Transport
of Argentina.
Mr. Guerrera (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, and the President of the General Assembly,
Minister Abdulla Shahid, for having convened this
high-level meeting that is so important to safeguarding
the security and lives of our citizens.
In Argentina, we have done sterling work with
respect to road safety. The latest statistics show that
the number of fatalities caused by road accidents is
still 25 per cent below the pre-pandemic figures. That
has been made possible owing to the fact that we have
been working and cooperating, through our national
agencies, with the World Health Organization, the
Pan American Health Organization and Argentine
non-governmental organizations on concrete State
policies of oversight, awareness-raising and support,
including, for example, by launching communication
campaigns and preventing drink driving through 19
simultaneous control operations across the country’s
24 provinces.
The current statistics show a reduction in the number
of drink driving cases by half, which is an example of
what can be achieved when a public policy that seeks to
raise awareness is sustained over time. In that regard,
we monitor speeding, carry out operations to prevent
driving on the hard shoulder, work in conjunction
with other political ministerial portfolios to eradicate
underground street races, promote the mandatory use
of helmets for motorcyclists and monitor the use of seat
8/27

30/06/2022

belts in cars and on long-distance public transport, in
addition to child seat devices, inter alia.
We work in conjunction with local jurisdictions to
educate people, ensuring that teachers of all subjects
have an obligation to incorporate road safety into their
curriculums. Children who acquire knowledge from an
early age are proficient in replicating good practices,
and through them we are also reaching the rest of the
family. In order to also educate adults in an improved,
less violent and more inclusive road culture, we have
incorporated a module with a gender perspective
into the national driver’s licence. The process of
obtaining a licence therefore includes content that
helps banish stereotypes and ensure that women and
diverse segments of the population have access to the
same rights and opportunities when it comes to using
the road network. More than 190,000 people have
completed the training since its implementation, and a
programme is already being rolled out in the country’s
23 provincial capitals to provide low-income women
and women breadwinners with the tools to obtain their
first driver’s licence.
Receiving support at a time of grief is an acute need
for many families in the aftermath of a road accident,
and the State can make its resources available to help
alleviate their suffering. We therefore have a federal
network in place to assist victims of road accidents
and their relatives via a specific helpline — 149. The
service supports and advises people free of charge
once the emergency situation has passed, including by
providing psychological and legal assistance, advice on
social services, medical assistance and rehabilitation,
relocation and accommodation and economic support,
among other resources. The policies we are promoting
have already enabled us to prevent an average of five
deaths per day, as compared to the figures over the past
10 years, which means that an additional 1,825 people
per year are still with their loved ones.
Much remains to be done, and we are deeply pained
by every road victim. That is why we are still working to
further improve our country’s standards. Together with
provincial authorities, we are already implementing
a federal scoring system to ensure that citizens
throughout the country are treated equally before the
law and that their offences are not merely resolved by
financial means. In that regard, every licence will start
with 20 points, from which points will be deducted
for each offence committed by drivers, irrespective of
where in the country they do so. Thanks to that system,
22-40688

30/06/2022

dealing with offences is no longer merely an exercise
in collecting fines, and it will also enable the national
Government to rely on better statistics regarding
compliance with regulations in each of the country’s
local jurisdictions.
We are currently pushing for a zero-alcohol law,
which is already being discussed in the National
Congress, in order to eliminate any margin of tolerance
for the level of blood alcohol content with which a vehicle
can be driven throughout the country. Several regions
in Argentina already apply the law successfully, and
the statistics indicate that deaths and injuries from road
accidents have decreased as a result. Reports show that
alcohol is present in one in every four people who die
in road accidents, and the fact that we have the highest
margin of tolerance in the region tempts Argentine
drivers to speculate about the amount of alcohol they
can consume, which leads to endangering their lives
and those of their fellow citizens.
We are also pushing for a law that creates
classifications of criminal offences for road homicide
and road injuries, with prison sentences of between 8
and 25 years and lifelong disqualification from driving
for the most serious cases, such as those involving
fatalities during underground street races. We want
to toughen the sentences and raise awareness among
reckless drivers who put their lives and those of others
in danger.
All those actions are part of a clear vision that has
been set out by our President, which aligns Argentina
with the global objective of halving deaths and injuries
from road accidents by 2030. It is a commitment that
we as a State have assumed through of our National
Road Safety Agency, and one we have an obligation to
fulfil, because doing so means protecting the lives of
our citizens.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Audley Shaw, Minister of Transport
and Mining of Jamaica.
Mr. Shaw (Jamaica): Jamaica is pleased to
participate in the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on improving global road safety with a view
to tackling the plague of road crashes and fatalities. We
welcome the sincere efforts of this body.
Globally, road traffic crashes cause nearly 1.3 million
preventable deaths and an estimated 50 million injuries
each year, and they are the leading killer of children

A/76/PV.90

and young people worldwide. Jamaica has not been
spared the destructive effects of road crashes, as we
have observed a steady increase in fatality rates since
2012. Fatalities increased on average by 10 per cent
from 2012 to 2019. In 2021, 487 persons were killed on
our nation’s road network, representing a 12 per cent
increase as compared to 433 deaths in 2020. It has been
generally accepted that developing nations, despite
having fewer vehicles than developed countries, have a
larger portion of fatalities globally. The socioeconomic
impact on developing States is devastating.
In October 2021, as the keynote speaker at the
launching of the second Decade of Action for Road
Safety 2021-2030, Jamaica’s Prime Minister, the Most
Honourable Andrew Holness, announced the adoption
of the safe-systems approach, which remains core of
the second Decade of Action, thereby sending a clear
signal of Jamaica’s commitment to the United Nations
goal to halve road fatalities by 2030. We affirm our
commitment to the second Decade of Action in order
to prioritize and formulate policy that serves as a
blueprint for the development of national and local
plans and targets.
The United Nations estimates that 13 million
deaths and 500 million injuries during the next decade
will hinder sustainable development, particularly in
low- and middle-income countries. In order to help
reverse the tide of road crash deaths and injuries,
cooperation among multilateral agencies, developed
and developing countries, public-private partnerships
and non-governmental organizations will be required,
especially if we are to achieve the goal of reducing
road fatalities and injuries by 50 per cent. The work
of the United Nations Road Safety Fund is critical to
supporting that endeavour. The Fund leverages fiscal
and technical cooperation in order to fund strategic road
safety interventions that improve road infrastructure,
transport management, public education and postcrash care.
Jamaica is optimistic about the outcomes of the
high-level meeting on global road safety and its first
pledging event. We welcome the opportunities to
forge partnerships with a view to achieving the shared
goal of reducing road fatalities globally. We know we
can achieve the vision of zero lives being lost to road
crashes, as long as we all work together.

22-406889/27

A/76/PV.90

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Chanthol Sun, Minister of Public Works
and Transport of Cambodia.
Mr. Sun (Cambodia): Road accidents are a major
cause of death in Cambodia. Each day, an average of
five people are killed and 10 are injured on the roads in
Cambodia. According to a study by the United Nations
Development Programme, Cambodia incurs a loss of
approximately 2.5 to 3 per cent of its gross domestic
product (GDP) per year owing to road accidents.
The Royal Government of Cambodia established
the National Road Safety Committee, which is chaired
by the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Interior,
while the Minister of Public Works and Transport is
permanent vice-chair and the National Police Chief is
vice-chair. The permanent vice-chair is responsible for
establishing the road safety policy, and the National
Police Chief is in charge of enforcement. In addition,
subcommittees chaired by the governors of the provinces
have been established to implement the road safety
policy at the provincial level. The National Road Safety
Committee meets on a monthly basis to review the road
accident statistics and set action plans to combat those
accidents. The Royal Government of Cambodia adheres
to global road safety guidelines and regulations in order
to prevent and reduce road accidents.
According to our Road Crash and Victim
Information System’s annual report for 2010 to 2020,
the major causes of road accidents include speeding,
dangerous overtaking, not respecting the right of
way and drink driving. Flawed road designs and
technical vehicle malfunctions were also shown to be
contributors. We have worked very hard to strengthen
the enforcement of road traffic law and our national
policy on road safety and decade of action 2011-2020,
which I am pleased to report has resulted in nearly
5,000 lives being saved, which is a positive trend, albeit
still short of our objective of saving approximately
7,400 lives.
Following the declaration made at the third Global
Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, which was held
in Stockholm, as well as the establishment of the Global
Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030,
which was launched by the World Health Organization
and the United Nations regional commissions on
28 October 2021, Cambodia established its own decade
of action for 2021-2030, with the aim of reducing road
accidents by 50 per cent. We recently introduced a new
10/27

30/06/2022

mobile app that enables our traffic officers to deduct
points from drivers’ licences in real time at the point
of infraction. The introduction of cameras to capture
speeding and reckless driving on our national roads
has added to the continuing increase in awareness that
traffic violations will not be tolerated.
Our Prime Minister issued a statement to remind
our citizens that “today and tomorrow, we shall not
have road accidents”. Reducing road accidents is the
responsibility of all stakeholders. Governments cannot
do so alone. We need both the public and private sectors,
non-governmental organizations and the media to work
hand in hand with the Government in order to educate
road users about traffic law. In that regard, the National
Road Safety Committee has been working with various
chambers of commerce in Cambodia so that members
educate their employees about road traffic law. The
Committee has also adopted and adapted the best
practices of other countries on road safety.
Although road accidents cost us an average of 2.5
to 3 per cent of our GDP, which makes road safety a
major public health concern, the funding to fight the
problem has not been allocated adequately owing to
budgetary constraints. In that connection, I urge all
development partners to contribute to the cost of the
effective implementation of road safety programmes in
all Member States.
We truly appreciate the theme and concept of this
meeting, as well as the three panel discussions. Our
delegation looks forward to learning from this meeting
about the various mechanisms and technical support
available to reduce road accidents.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Aishath Nahula, Minister of Transport
and Civil Aviation of the Maldives.
Ms. Nahula (Maldives): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this high-level
meeting on improving global road safety, as part of the
second Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030.
I would also like to congratulate Member States and
all stakeholders on having successfully adopted an
action-oriented political declaration (resolution 76/294).
I am confident in our ability to generate the further
political will to make our roads safer. The Maldives
welcomes the establishment of the target to reduce the
number of road traffic deaths and injuries by at least
50 per cent by 2030. We are strongly encouraged by
members’ commitment in that regard.
22-40688

30/06/2022

Mobility plays a vital role in all aspects of our lives.
Safe and efficient road transport systems are critical
to our daily lives, as they improve access to food,
education, employment and health-care services. Every
year, approximately 1.3 million people lose their lives
in road traffic crashes, and as many as 50 million more
suffer non-fatal injuries. According to the World Health
Organization, more than 90 per cent of traffic-related
deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries like
the Maldives. Such overwhelming statistics make it
clear that, while road safety is a public-health issue,
it also has socioeconomic repercussions. Road traffic
injuries cause considerable economic losses among
individuals, their families and nations. They cost most
countries 3 per cent of their gross domestic product.
The Maldives notes with concern that road traffic
injuries are the leading cause of death among children
and young adults. That is true even in the Maldives.
Sadly, the victims who fall are mostly between the age
of 18 and 30. Typically, the accidents are the result of
reckless driving. Taking those facts into consideration,
the Maldives strongly supports the implementation
of a speed limit of 30 kilometres per hour on streets
where pedestrians and road traffic coexist. While speed
limits are crucial to making our roads safer, they also
encourage sustainable transport choices that could help
reduce harmful vehicle emissions that contribute to
climate change.
Climate change is this century’s defining threat.
It continues to pose a significant risk to small island
developing States like the Maldives. It represents the
gravest of threats to our survival and viability, including
through the loss of territory. We need to do more to
encourage safe and liveable urban communities, with
neighbourhoods that are designed to promote zerocarbon mobility, including by advocating walking
and cycling.

A/76/PV.90

Leadership and clear lines of institutional responsibility
and accountability are crucial. We must also engage
the private sector, civil society and academia. As we
push for the establishment of proactive measures and
action, we must face the harsh reality. The politics of a
nation should not stand in the way of policies that can
lead to safer communities. One small action can have a
lasting impact on someone’s life. A life could be saved
by abandoning reckless habits. It is time to roll up our
sleeves and get to work.
The Maldives will stand strong with fellow Member
States in leading initiatives to make our roads safer and
ensure prosperity, equal opportunity and economic
success for everyone around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Mahamoudou Zampaligre, Minister
of Transport, Urban Mobility and Road Safety of
Burkina Faso.
Mr. Zampaligre (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to express my appreciation
and gratitude to the United Nations for having involved
Burkina Faso in this high-level meeting. It gives us
the welcome opportunity to share our views on global
road safety based on our own experiences and those of
others, and on the role of the United Nations in that area.
Allow me to extend my warm greetings to you,
Mr. President, and to congratulate you on the distinction
with which you have presided over our work. May your
wisdom and vast experience enlighten and guide our
efforts so that we may fulfil the objectives we have set
for ourselves. For my part, I would like to assure you
of my delegation’s full support and close cooperation in
these endeavours.

Road safety plays an increasingly important role
in facilitating access to employment and education,
reducing poverty and inequities, as well as mitigating
the impact of climate change. It is indirectly linked to the
realization of several of the Sustainable Development
Goals. The Maldives supports the Global Plan for the
Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030, and urges
Member States to develop national plans and targets.

This high-level meeting is being held against
the backdrop of the uncertainty associated with the
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the acute international economic situation and the
growing threats to international peace and security.
The various challenges facing the world call on us all
to act and demand greater courage, effort, creativity
and solidarity. Alongside those well-known challenges,
there is an equally serious threat that endangers human
life and hinders sustainable development, that is, of
course, road safety.

Improving road safety is a shared responsibility.
Reducing the number of road accidents requires
concerted and collaborative action by several sectors.

At the beginning of this second Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2021-2030, road accidents still cause an
estimated 1.3 million deaths and more than 50 million

22-4068811/27

A/76/PV.90

serious injuries around the world each year. Ninety
per cent of road traffic deaths occur in low- and
middle-income countries, and more than 55 per cent
of them are among vulnerable road users, including
pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists.
In Burkina Faso, between 2019 and 2021, the
number of road accidents rose from 20,578 to 25,118,
representing an average increase of 15.13 per cent per
year. The number of injuries rose from 13,653 to 15,340,
while the number of deaths rose from 978 to 1,272 — an
average increase of 5.62 and 0.9 per cent, respectively,
per year. The socioeconomic consequences of road
accidents are huge. In particular, the economic cost is
estimated to be 3 per cent of gross domestic product,
which is the same as our official development assistance.
Road safety has therefore become a major concern
both for States and also for the United Nations. In that
regard, I should like to commend the numerous efforts
made by the United Nations system to support the steps
taken by States to address the following challenges:
elevating road safety to the status of a national priority;
encouraging Governments to develop and implement
policies to improve road safety; establishing standards
and developing technical guidance based on scientific
evidence; mobilizing stakeholders from the private
sector, academia and civil society to work effectively
towards improving road safety; and encouraging
Member States to periodically review and report on
the road safety initiatives they have undertaken and the
progress made.
There is no need to emphasize the urgency of
meeting those challenges, given that the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals partly depends
on it. Indeed, a road network that is safe, efficient and
meets the needs of all citizens helps facilitate equitable
access to education, health care and food. It also helps
connect all parts of a country and thereby promotes the
establishment of economic, social and environmental
links between urban, suburban and rural areas.
For its part, Burkina Faso would like to reaffirm
its readiness to continue the fruitful cooperation that
has always existed between our country and the United
Nations system, particularly with respect to improving
road safety. I would hope that today’s exchange will
enable us to strengthen that partnership and explore other
types of cooperation at the regional and international
levels. In any case, my country is present here today to
draw inspiration from the experience of other countries
that are more directly confronted with the issue, as well
12/27

30/06/2022

as to share our views on the implementation of road
safety initiatives.
We are therefore aware of the urgent need to
implement urgent and appropriate solutions. In that
regard, the Government of Burkina Faso has had a
national road safety policy in place since 2009, which
is built around four strategic approaches relating to
the institutional management of road safety, road user
training and awareness, the technical condition of
vehicles and the safety of road infrastructure. Despite
our commitment to improving road safety through the
implementation of a national road safety policy, we
have been faced with various difficulties, including
the lack of a sustainable financing mechanism for road
safety, poor data management on road traffic accidents,
a failure to implement regulatory texts and the absence
of regular road safety checks and penalties.
In order to meet those challenges, Burkina Faso
needs the support of its partners to help finance road
safety activities and build the technical capacities
of its National Road Safety Office. Moreover, the
Government of Burkina Faso intends to pursue the
reform efforts already under way and will spare no
effort to improve its approach to the issue on a daily
basis in order to fulfil its safety commitments for the
benefit of the population.
Finally, I would like to renew my deep gratitude
and the heartfelt compliments of my delegation for the
scrupulous organization of this meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Tomas Eneroth, Minister of
Infrastructure of Sweden.
Mr. Eneroth (Sweden): Each year, 1.3 million
people are killed in road traffic accidents. Road traffic
injuries are the most common cause of death among
young people globally. That is not acceptable. We must
inject a sense of urgency into our road safety ambitions.
In the past, road safety has been isolated from other
policy areas and treated almost as a separate process.
But now we have learned that more can be achieved if
we see road safety as part of a bigger picture, as part of
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and as
a way of building a safer and more sustainable society
for all.
When Sweden had the privilege of hosting the
third Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety
in Stockholm in 2020, it was my ambition that the
22-40688

30/06/2022

A/76/PV.90

Stockholm Declaration would provide us with the
opportunity to show our strong commitment both to
strengthening road safety and sharing our experiences
and, in doing so, to work together to achieve the global
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, not least with regard to
climate and gender equality.
In an increasingly polarized world, in which the
differences between countries are often in focus rather
than the common challenges, we need more multilateral
arenas for collaboration — not less. The countries of
the world need to come together around our common
challenges, as we are doing here in New York today,
because the global nature of the road-safety challenge
calls for international cooperation. Now is the time
to act. Reaching consensus on a political declaration
under the current circumstances shows the strong
political commitment of all of us. I especially want to
thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership in making
that possible.
Now is the time to come together in this second
Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030 in order to
make road traffic fatalities a thing of the past. Now is
the time to deliver on our promises to make safer, more
sustainable and more accessible transport systems
for ourselves and for the generations to come. Since
adopting Vision Zero in 1997, Sweden has come a long
way. We have seen significant reductions in the number
of road traffic fatalities, and I believe our success is
based on three approaches.
First, we design our transport system in a way that
takes human error into account. In a safe transport
system, mistakes can be made without it resulting in
someone being killed or seriously injured. Secondly,
with regard to stakeholder engagement, we design our
transport system in close collaboration with the private
sector, academia and civil society. Road safety is a
shared responsibility, and several perspectives must be
taken into account. Thirdly, we embrace technology
and innovation. Our vehicle manufacturers work
closely with others to innovate solutions for safer and
more sustainable vehicles.
Ms. Fatima
the Chair.

(Bangladesh),

Vice-Chair,

took

I recall that, 20 to 30 years ago, we thought the
green transition would not be possible. But now we
see the transport industry taking the lead in the green
transition and creating new jobs. The same attitude to

change must be applied to road safety. Together we can
achieve a 50 per cent reduction in fatalities on our roads
by 2030, and I offer my and Sweden’s full commitment
to making that happen. We will save lives and give hope
to the coming generations. It is time for action.
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to His Excellency Mr. Deligne Ascención Burgos,
Minister of Public Works and Communications of the
Dominican Republic.
Mr. Ascención Burgos (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): Recent decades have shown that
effective and comprehensive road safety strategies can
reduce the number of people killed or injured in road
traffic accidents. The vast majority of road accidents
worldwide take place in low- and middle-income
countries, disproportionately impacting the poorest.
They are the leading cause of death among young
people aged between 15 and 29 years, which means
they are at increased risk.
The Dominican Republic has a population of
approximately 10.5 million people — of which
80 per cent live in urban areas and 20 per cent in rural
areas, in a surface area of just over 48,000 square
kilometres — and a gross domestic product of just over
$80 billion dollars. However, the Dominican Republic is
among the highest-ranking countries in the world with
respect to the number of road traffic accidents and the
number of deaths they cause. Approximately 34.6 lives
per 100,000 inhabitants are lost each year on the roads
in the Dominican Republic. That means that more than
3,500 people die every year as a result of road traffic
accidents, which is more than the number of people who
died as a result of the coronavirus disease pandemic
in our country. For that reason, the Government of
the Dominican Republic has itself adopted the goal
enshrined in resolution 74/299, namely, to halve the
number of road traffic accidents in the decade 20212030. In order to achieve that, we have identified the
main causes that give rise to road accidents.
In 2021, the International Road Assessment
Programme was applied to the three main transport
arteries in the Dominican Republic, which were given a
star rating for their level of safety. Those three major road
arteries received one- and two-star ratings, indicating
a high probability of a traffic accident occurring
along them. We are therefore working on three key
pillars, as defined by the Government: first, the legal

22-4068813/27

A/76/PV.90

framework; secondly, enhancing our road and transport
infrastructure; and thirdly, improving education.
With regard to the first pillar, specifically, the
legal aspect, the National Institute of Transit and Land
Transportation of the Dominican Republic has been
developing a wide range of programmes centred around
inclusion, strengthening driver education in schools
and other initiatives aimed at reducing the number of
accidents involving motorcycles. Motorcycles account
for 50 per cent of all vehicles in the Dominican Republic.
In terms of road infrastructure, we are developing a
comprehensive programme to improve the condition
of our roads and creating new road infrastructure,
including a number of bypasses to prevent heavy
vehicles from driving through our city centres, as well
as enhancing interregional connections. We have also
rolled out a very successful road assistance programme,
led by my Ministry, which ensures that assistance is
provided to users of the main road corridors in the
Dominican Republic.
All of those actions taken and the investments made
by our Government are intended to reduce the number
of deaths resulting from road traffic accidents within
the time frame stipulated by resolution 74/299. The
Government of the Dominican Republic is therefore
working to fulfil the commitment to reducing deaths
and injuries by 50 per cent and to break free from the
situation in which we regrettably find ourselves.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. James Macharia, Cabinet Secretary for
Transport, Infrastructure, Housing and Public Works
of Kenya.
Mr. Macharia (Kenya): Road traffic injuries are
among the leading causes of death in Kenya. In 2021,
road traffic crashes caused 4,579 deaths on Kenyan
roads. In the two days over which we are holding this
high-level meeting, 25 Kenyans will die as a result of
preventable road accidents, while dozens more will
suffer life-altering injuries with long-lasting effects.
Every life matters, and I hope that the day will come
when we no longer need to discuss and address
this matter.
Kenya’s expanded road network has boosted
economic activity and transformed the lives of many
Kenyans. However, higher traffic volumes have also
resulted in an increase in the number of road accidents
and incidents. The Government of Kenya is committed
to promoting road safety, and we are implementing
14/27

30/06/2022

numerous initiatives to that end. They are aligned to
the United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety
2021-2030, the aim of which is to reduce the number
of road accidents, deaths and serious injuries by 50 per
cent between 2021 and 2030. One pillar that is key to
improving road safety is to make sure that we have
robust and timely data on road accidents and incidents.
In that regard, we have established a robust information
system that consolidates road transport data in order to
support the development of evidence-based policy and
facilitate robust monitoring and enforcement.
Road construction, design and maintenance play
an important role in road safety. All roads in Kenya
are subjected to design, construction and postconstruction safety audits. Proposed road maintenance
works also undergo road safety assessments in order
to ensure that they incorporate road safety features.
That process involves the identification of black spots
and hazardous sections and the implementation of
appropriate corrective actions and measures. They
include the construction of speed-calming measures
and footbridges and the installation of appropriate
road furniture.
Enhanced road safety requires strong leadership and
collaboration. I would like to express my appreciation to
the United Nations Road Safety Fund for having worked
with the Kenyan Government to improve pedestrian
and cycling infrastructure in Kenya’s cities and towns.
We welcome the prospect of other institutions working
with us towards enhancing safety on Kenyan roads.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the
Government of Kenya’s commitment to working with
the international community to enhance road safety. I
look forward to a positive outcome of this meeting.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Arsénia Felicidade Félix Massingue,
Minister of Home Affairs of Mozambique.
Ms. Massingue (Mozambique) (spoke in
Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): It is a great honour for me, on behalf of
the Government of Mozambique, to participate in this
high-level meeting of the General Assembly, which
addresses an issue of particular importance in assessing
the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030.
Road safety is an urgent priority, as it is closely
linked to people’s economic development and social
well-being. However, the increase in road traffic gives
22-40688

30/06/2022

rise to certain problems that societies are currently
having to contend with, including people being killed
and infrastructure being destroyed as a result of road
accidents, as well as environmental degradation and
the undermining of efforts to promote sustainable
development. We would like to commend the United
Nations for having designated the Decades of Action
for Road Safety — the first from 2011-2020 and the
second from 2021-2030 — and for having established
the goal of halving the number of fatalities and serious
injuries caused by road traffic accidents by 2030. Such
measures contribute greatly to raising social awareness
about the importance of a safe road environment.
The road safety situation is worrisome in
Mozambique. Between 2015 and 2021 alone, the country
recorded around 11,000 road accidents, which resulted
in numerous deaths and injuries, most of them among
children. In the light of that situation, Mozambique has
been implementing the recommendations of the third
Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, which
took place in Stockholm in February 2020, by adopting
the following structural reforms.
We created the National Road Transport Institute,
a State institute responsible for coordinating and
implementing initiatives and agendas relating to road
safety. We also established the Technical and Scientific
Committee for Road Safety, which is an entity that
consults and advises the Government with a view to
seeking solutions to road safety issues in the country.
We formulated and adopted a National Road Safety
Strategy, which constitutes a guiding instrument for
road safety initiatives, while a national road safety
plan, inspired by that document, is currently being
prepared. We implemented a “user pays” programme
on Mozambican roads, which generates funding for
the maintenance and repair of road infrastructure and
ensures its sustainability. We also made it mandatory
to carry out periodic inspections of vehicles, cars and
trailers. And we set up emergency medical services for
pre-hospital care, including post-accident transport.
The outcomes of those actions encourage us to
continue to undertake such measures. Our cooperation
partners have embraced them, particularly in drawing
up road safety and prevention standards. Finally, I
would like to reaffirm Mozambique’s commitment to
implementing decisions and measures conducive to
road safety in order to foster sustainable development.
We would also like to reaffirm our commitment and

A/76/PV.90

willingness to exchange and share experiences with
other Member States on this matter.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Hara, Minister of Transport and
Public Works of Malawi.
Mr. Hara (Malawi): Allow me to express my
delegation’s gratitude for the convening of this meeting.
Road traffic deaths and injuries constitute a major
public-health crisis in Malawi. Between the years 2011
and 2020, Malawi registered 10,265 traffic deaths and
8,326 serious injuries against a vehicle-to-humanpopulation ratio of 1:50. Therefore, in order to further
the objectives of the Global Plan for the Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2021-2030, Malawi has put in place the
following measures towards its implementation.
First, we are developing a multisectoral national
road safety strategy, which builds on the global Decade
of Action and will be completed by the end of this
year. Secondly, we are conducting baseline studies
on drink and drive, speeding and the use of seat belts.
Thirdly, we plan to accede, by 2024, to the 1968
United Nations Convention on Road Traffic. Fourthly,
Malawi is undertaking to ensure that all imported
vehicles, whether used or new, meet high-quality safety
standards. Fifthly, we are committed to ensuring that
most motorcycle riders are using standard-approved
helmets. Sixthly, we are working to ensure safe road
infrastructure at all levels, right from the design stage,
for both new and existing roads. Seventh, we are
improving services for post-crash response along our
major road networks. And finally, we are providing
steady financing for road safety interventions.
The Government of the Republic of Malawi
therefore reaffirms its determination to achieve the
goals of the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for
Road Safety 2021-2030, and commits to undertaking
the following measures. First, we will implement
our national road safety strategy by the year 2030.
We will develop and implement national targets to
reduce fatalities and serious injuries as a result of
road accidents by at least 50 per cent by 2030. We will
develop and adopt evidence-based interventions to
address key risk factors with regard to road safety. We
will implement evidence-based road safety awareness
and training programmes in order to inculcate a safety
culture among all categories of road users. And finally,
we will ensure that all vehicles meet the minimum

22-4068815/27

A/76/PV.90

insurance requirements to provide appropriate support
for victims of road traffic crashes.
Despite all the challenges we may face, Malawi
echoes its commitment to mainstreaming road-safety
issues as an integral part of Malawi’s Vision 2063.
Malawi agrees that the time to act is now. The intolerable
death and injury toll gives the global community
the impetus to do things differently. Malawi is more
committed than ever before to achieving the goals of
the Decade of Action.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Maria del Carmen González del Porro,
Vice Minister and Executive Director of the National
Traffic and Road Safety Agency of Paraguay.
Ms. González Del Porro (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of Paraguay, we greet the authorities
of the General Assembly, the representatives Member
States, members of civil society and all those present
here in the Hall. We welcome this opportunity to reflect
on global road safety.
Given my experience, first as a founding member
of the Association of Family, Friends and Victims of
Road Accidents in my country, and also of having lost
a daughter to a road accident at the very young age of
16 years old, I have come to understand that we are all
compelled to put a human face to the statistics compiled
by our respective observatories. Today, therefore, as a
Government representative with sufficient sentimental
authority, I stand before the Assembly to call on
everyone, wherever they may be, to do everything
possible to protect the lives of young people on
our roads.
Through the recently created National Traffic
and Road Safety Agency, in collaboration with other
institutions, the State of Paraguay is addressing road
safety through proposals for improvements, and we
call on the competent authorities to spearhead the
changes that can save lives, in close collaboration with
all stakeholders. In that regard, we are coordinating
initiatives on safe roads, safe and accessible means of
public transport, mandatory accident insurance — a
report on mandatory accident insurance is currently
before our national Parliament — as well as training
and education for road users. We are aware of the
burden that traffic accidents impose on society, and we
recognize road safety as an urgent public-health and
development priority.
16/27

30/06/2022

Paraguay welcomes the establishment of the
Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety
2021-2030 and the political declaration adopted today
(resolution 76/294). Moreover, the preparation of
Paraguay’s national road safety plan 2030 is in its final
stages, in line with the Global Plan, and we are working
to bring it to completion. We trust that we can depend
on the cooperation of members as a means to effectively
achieve substantial improvements in our societies.
Paraguay is therefore grateful for the collaboration
of international organizations that support various
initiatives in our country, as well as the people and the
leaders who have assumed this crusade for life as a
prominent and inspiring flagship.
In conclusion, we call on members to exercise
collective leadership by bolstering efforts both to
prevent road accidents and care for the victims thereof.
I reaffirm the unwavering willingness of my country’s
Government to continue to seek ways to mitigate the
terrible consequences of road accidents in all areas
with a view to reducing the death rate among children
and young people in my country.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Kristine Ghalechyan, Deputy Minister
of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure of the
Republic of Armenia.
Ms. Ghalechyan (Armenia): Today’s high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on global road safety
is a timely opportunity to take stock of the progress
made and the challenges we face in the implementation
of our collective commitments under the Global Plan
for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030.
Road crashes have become a silent pandemic that
kills millions of people globally, with a particularly
devastating impact on the younger generation, having
become a regular cause of death among children and
youth. In that regard, the statistics are worrisome
in Armenia as well, as more than 300 people die on
the roads in our country every year. Behind every
crash or accident is a story of loss and lives being
permanently altered.
The safety system of Armenia is fraught with
challenges, including those relating to the improvement
of infrastructure; the post-crash care system; the crash
data management system; road safety laws and law
enforcement; vehicle safety; the efficient planning
and governance of transport systems for vulnerable
road users; the strengthening of institutional capacity;
22-40688

30/06/2022

unsafe road-user behaviour, in particular with regard
to unawareness of traffic safety rules; speeding; and
drink driving. Those problems, as well as the dramatic
increase in the number of road accidents, require
immediate action. In response to public demand,
ensuring road safety has become an important priority
for the Government of Armenia.
Armenia is currently holding fast to its ultimate
goal of Vision Zero, as defined by United Nations,
specifically, to achieve zero fatalities and serious
injuries on the roads by 2050, as well as the intermediate
target to halve the number of fatalities on the roads by
2030. Those objectives lie at the heart of our national
road safety policy, which comprises the comprehensive
strategy and specific measures to be undertaken over
the next 20 years.
Despite our many efforts and achievements,
including the introduction of speed cameras,
compulsory insurance, regulatory changes in road
construction, road markings, safety elements and road
safety auditing, inter alia, Armenia still has a long way
to go if we are to catch up with the best performers
worldwide in terms of reducing road crash fatalities.
The successful experience of many well-performing
countries should guide and inspire us as policymakers
at the national level. It should also inspire the entire
road safety community to follow the ambitious agenda
of the United Nations and to tackle the vital road safety
work of the next decade with new energy and resolve.
We still need to implement and improve safety
systems at the country level in order to ensure safe
vehicles, safe infrastructure, safe road use and better
post-crash care, which are all long-established and
important factors in the safe-systems approach.
The measures undertaken to improve road safety in
Armenia are still suffering from numerous gaps that
affect the interconnected implementation of the five
pillars of the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for
Road Safety 2021-2030. For the safe-systems approach
to work, our experience tells us that all actors need to
play their part in a coordinated manner. The public
authorities responsible for road safety objectives
nationwide and locally, including with respect to
transport and infrastructure, the environment,
education, the police, public health, justice and tourism,
need to work together closely at all levels. In addition,
effective implementation requires the active and
meaningful participation of all stakeholders, including

A/76/PV.90

non-governmental organizations, schools, researchers
and many others.
In order to address the current challenges, Armenia
has initiated numerous reforms that envisage the
establishment of a road-safety management system and
modern institutional framework, which will integrate
and coordinate activities on the five pillars of road
safety and hopefully result in the establishment of a
public-relations framework and improving road safety.
Our policy orientations set strategic targets and goals
with regard to education and awareness-raising, which
are supported by strong and sustained compliance and
enforcement regimes, since they have an important role
to play in making sure that road users are capable and
willing to use roads and vehicles safely. The primary
objective of that effort is to reduce the number of
deaths and injuries from road accidents, which will
be achieved through effective implementation and
financing, securing political and social acceptance,
innovation, cost-effectiveness and undertaking action
in the relevant focus areas.
In line with the five pillars of the United Nations
road safety strategy, the targets in our national strategy
will relate to the following aspects: establishing a new
road-safety management system with efficient tools
and regulations; encouraging the deployment and use
of vehicle safety devices using modern technologies;
ensuring increased responsiveness to post-crash
emergencies; improving the inherent safety and
protective quality of our road networks, especially
for the most vulnerable users; and developing
comprehensive programmes to improve road-user
behaviour and knowledge.
Through a national project entitled “Reframing
road safety in Armenia: Connecting data, people, and
policies for safer roads”, the Armenian Government,
together with the United Nations Development
Programme in Armenia and UNICEF, is delivering
innovative solutions to address some of the most
pressing road-safety challenges in our country. The
project is being financed by the United Nations Road
Safety Fund and will focus on instilling evidence-based
and experiment-informed road-safety policies in
Armenia by utilizing data and behavioural science.
Importantly, the project will develop an analytical tool
in order to identify the black spots in Armenia’s road
network and provide continuous insight into the causes
of road accidents.

22-4068817/27

A/76/PV.90

Increased attention is being paid to the gender
aspect of road safety. Armenia is firmly committed
to making progress in that area in the most efficient
manner possible. In that regard, a behaviour-informed
and gender-responsive intervention is currently being
planned together with UNICEF, making use of its
extensive knowledge and experience in the field of
training families on road safety, with a special focus
on ensuring child safety. The intervention will target
a region with a high rate of accidents and will be
implemented by UNICEF via its network of parental
education centres, under the chapeau of social
mobilization and community education, in order to help
reduce the number of child deaths and injuries caused
by road accidents.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Serghei Diaconu, Secretary-General of
the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Diaconu (Republic of Moldova): It is my great
honour to represent the Government of the Republic
of Moldova at this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly. I wish to thank the United Nations for
guiding the preparations and organization of this highlevel meeting on global road safety.
During the first Decade of Action for Road Safety
2011-2020, the Republic of Moldova demonstrated an
unwavering commitment to achieving its goals. Road
fatalities in Moldova were reduced by 46 per cent and
road injuries by 39 per cent, and that at a time of rapid
growth in motorization in our country. Prior to 2013,
Moldova had the most alarming road-safety indicators
in Europe. On average, there were more than 100 deaths
and 855 serious injuries per 100,000 motor vehicles. In
having adopted a safe-systems approach and thanks to
the strict enforcement of safe traffic rules, that picture
changed considerably. Whereas in 2012 around 16 per
cent of road crashes were fatal, in 2021, even with many
more vehicles per capita, the fatality rate dropped to
about 9 per cent — the lowest in 10 years.
Moldova’s support for road safety continues to be
undiminished in the new Decade of Action. We will
do our utmost to meet the new global goals to reduce
both road fatalities and injuries, as agreed by the
States Members of the United Nations. We are aligning
our existing national framework with the values and
principles of the Global Plan for the Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2021-2030, including by bringing in
strategic coordination and institutional monitoring
18/27

30/06/2022

measures in order to achieve its ambitious objectives.
We have initiated discussions with the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe with a view to
launching a road safety performance review in the
Republic of Moldova. That will broaden the scope of
our interventions and create many more opportunities
to help meet our common targets.
I am happy to announce that, just two weeks ago,
the Moldovan Government approved a new package of
legislative amendments. Among them, the penalties
for drivers who systematically break traffic rules were
greatly increased. We hope to reduce road collisions and
make drivers more self-regulating, thereby improving
safety for all road users. However, we know that will
not be enough if we are to achieve our long-term goals.
Moldova is still impacted considerably by road deaths
and injuries, and we would welcome assistance from
our international partners in order to implement all the
improvements that are needed.
Moldova is now facing an additional crisis, with
major challenges impacting road safety. Since the
beginning of the war in Ukraine, more than 500,000
refugees, whom we warmly welcomed, have entered
the territory of the Republic of Moldova. Our country
hosts more refugees per capita than any other European
country. The refugee crisis has put great strain on all our
resources, including those associated with road-safety
management. Our roads are not fit for the volume of
traffic that has been triggered by the influx of refugees.
Our police and family-support services are stretched
beyond capacity in working to keep safe the vulnerable
displaced women and children. Moldova will do
everything possible to meet its road-safety obligations.
At the same time, we count on international assistance
in dealing effectively with the multiple consequences of
the refugee crisis.
We can all play a role in greatly reducing the
number of fatalities and the severity of the injuries that
occur on our roads. The new Global Plan for the Decade
of Action for Road Safety calls on every Government
to adopt a broader focus. We must think differently
about land use and multimodal transport, making our
roads more pedestrian- and child-friendly and our cities
more people-centred. A focus on people rather than
cars will help us achieve many important Sustainable
Development Goals, such as reducing emissions and
making our society more inclusive, accessible and safer
for all.
22-40688

30/06/2022

I underline the importance of involving all
stakeholders in achieving road safety. Moldova has
benefited enormously from the activities of international
and non-governmental organizations, such as the World
Health Organization, the FIA Foundation, the World
Bank, the Eastern Alliance for Safe and Sustainable
Transport, and Fire Aid, all of which have worked
with us over many years to help improve our roadsafety performance.
If a developing country has been able to achieve
tangible results, so can anyone else. We urge
Governments to adopt comprehensive and realistic
road-safety plans as soon as possible. They should stop
complaining about a lack of resources and funding and
start investing in safety for all road users, especially
young people. Safer road infrastructure, better safety
education and smart law enforcement can save lives,
and a future engineer, plumber, teacher, nurse or police
officer being protected from a road crash can ensure a
happier society, a stronger economy and a more dynamic
development of the country in question. We hope that
the steady implementation of the commitments made
under the Global Plan will provide tangible progress and
address the current problems and emerging challenges.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Republic
of Moldova’s commitment to achieving the goals of the
Decade of Action for Road Safety, with the valuable
support of our development partners.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Saúl Antonio Castelar Contreras, Vice
Minister of Transportation of El Salvador.
Mr. Castelar Contreras (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Government of El Salvador, I
thank the President of the General Assembly for having
organized this high-level meeting on improving global
road safety, which is an issue of critical importance,
in particular given that, according to the World Health
Organization data mentioned today, there will be eight
road fatalities during the time it takes me to deliver this
statement, 90 per cent of which take place in low- and
middle-income countries.
El Salvador reiterates its commitment to
accelerating the implementation of the Global Plan
for the Decade of Action for Road Safety in order to
achieve the goal of halving the number of deaths and
serious injuries caused by road accidents by 2030, as
well as to work towards safe, affordable, accessible and
sustainable transport systems for all, in line with the

A/76/PV.90

2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We also
reiterate the need to achieve Vision Zero, namely, to
achieve zero fatalities or serious injuries from road
accidents by 2050.
In that regard, I am pleased to highlight that, in
the course of our Government’s three-year term, road
accidents have been reduced by more than 14 per cent
thanks to the contributions of our National Road Safety
Plan and National Road Safety Observatory, the latter
of which has a unique format in the region and has
become a key component in designing and reviewing
our public policies on road safety, which seek to make
the problem a national issue.
I would also like to underscore certain measures
that have contributed to the achievements made in our
country, such as increasing the number of roadside
checks, engaging in a permanent dialogue on accident
prevention and respect for traffic signals, introducing
higher fines for breaches of the law and continuously
promoting a road culture based on respect. As a result
of those measures, for instance, on 20 and 21 June, we
recorded zero deaths from road accidents nationwide,
which is an achievement we hope will become the norm,
given that, on average, there are four road fatalities in
our country every day.
El Salvador recognizes the importance of
comprehensively addressing this public-health issue,
which also has social and economic ramifications. In
that regard, I should like to highlight that, over the past
three years, we have provided almost $7 million dollars
in aid to the families of victims killed or injured in road
accidents, and we have developed a comprehensive
rehabilitation programme to help mitigate the impact
on those victims. We also support the Streets for Life
initiative, which was launched at the sixth United
Nations Global Road Safety Week in 2021, and we
have subsequently created a 30-zone initiative in the
San Salvador metropolitan area. As a result, our first
30 zone was established last year, with more to be
introduced in areas with medical centres and schools in
order to impose a speed limit of 30 kilometres per hour
and thereby protect the most vulnerable road users.
El Salvador is also drawing up a plan to modernize
its public transport and provide a decent service to the
population, which will resolve issues concerning traffic,
pollution and inefficiency, in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals. We are also very proud of the fact
that we will host the fifth International Child Road

22-4068819/27

A/76/PV.90

Safety Forum in 2024, and we warmly invite members
to attend that important event.
In conclusion, El Salvador calls for strengthened
international cooperation on road safety, bolstered
support for the transfer of technology and data,
capacity-building and the promotion of good practices,
inter alia, so as to help achieve the goals of the Decade
of Action by 2030 and the Vision Zero initiative by
2050. We can achieve those goals worldwide if we work
hand in hand to do so.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Shaikh Nasser bin Abdulrahman Al
Khalifa, Undersecretary of the Ministry of Interior
of Bahrain.
Mr. Al Khalifa (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is
a pleasure to be here in the Assembly Hall today to
participate in this high-level meeting on improving
global road safety. I would like to underscore the
Kingdom of Bahrain’s commitment to strengthening
cooperation with other countries around the world
through the United Nations in order to promote
road safety.
The Kingdom of Bahrain is keen to support all
efforts aimed at improving road safety, developing
road traffic systems and raising awareness among
road users in order to ensure their compliance with
the relevant rules and regulations. Road awareness
and culture constitute an essential basis for sustainable
development, since they provide the means, inter alia,
to protect people’s economic capabilities, which may
be negatively affected by road accidents. The Kingdom
of Bahrain has therefore been determined to develop
strategic plans and programmes, through its competent
authorities, in order to spread road awareness and
culture throughout the year, right from the very
beginning of road traffic being present in Bahrain in
the year 1914, following the introduction of the first
motor vehicle into the country. We also benefit from
all forums that disseminate and promote road culture
among the various categories of road users, which has
had a significant impact in enhancing road safety.
The plans and strategies of the Kingdom of
Bahrain have been positively reflected in the efforts
to disseminate road awareness and culture with a view
to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals that
were adopted by States worldwide. In that regard,
it is important to point out that the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Development
20/27

30/06/2022

Programme believe that road accidents will become
the seventh leading cause of death by 2030 unless
sustainable measures are taken, including by adopting
the goal of halving the number of deaths from road
accidents by 2020. That comprehensive strategy led
to a 60 per cent reduction in road traffic fatalities
and injuries between 2008 and 2021. The Kingdom of
Bahrain continues to implement that strategy in order
to enhance road safety and establish the foundations
of a society that comprehends its responsibilities on
the road.
In conclusion, we wish this meeting every success
and hope it will fulfil its desired goals and objectives.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Nadhapit Snidvongs, Vice Minister of
the Interior of Thailand.
Mr. Snidvongs (Thailand): At the outset, Thailand
would like to express its appreciation to the President
of the General Assembly for holding this first United
Nations high-level meeting on improving global road
safety and for his leadership that has led to today’s
adoption of the political declaration (resolution 76/294).
Global road safety can make important contributions
to sustainable development and the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Target 3.6 of
the Sustainable Development Goals seeks to halve the
number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic
accidents, while Target 11.2 seeks to provide safe,
affordable, accessible and sustainable transport for all.
Improving road safety is one of Thailand’s national
priorities, with a goal to reduce road traffic deaths and
injuries by at least 50 per cent by 2030, in line with the
global goals that have been set under the second Decade
of Action for Road Safety. In order to achieve that
goal, our road-safety policies integrate a safe-systems
approach and the Sustainable Development Goals as
frameworks for implementation. The Government also
works closely with the private sector and civil society
towards that common goal. Between 2020 and now, the
number of fatalities resulting from road accidents in
Thailand has decreased from 27.2 to 22.8 per 100,000
population. More than 5,000 lives have been saved over
that two-year timespan.
Thailand will soon launch the fifth National Road
Safety Master Plan 2022-2027 with the main goal of
reducing the number of lives lost in road accidents
to 12 fatalities per 100,000 population by 2027. The
22-40688

30/06/2022

Master Plan will elaborate on the core elements of
the safe-systems approach, while focusing on key
issues such as reducing motorcycle crashes, speedlimit control, implementing policies through local
mechanisms with effective monitoring, enhancing lawenforcement capacities, strictly enforcing vehicle and
transportation safety standards and enhancing postcrash care. Moreover, it places importance on data
collection and analysis, as well as the use of technology
and innovation, in order to prevent and reduce roadtraffic crashes.
Thailand also strongly believes that local
communities must be the driving force for road safety,
as our statistics show that more than 60 per cent of
road-traffic injuries and fatalities during long-weekend
holidays occur on local roads, not highways. We must
therefore work from the ground up. The Government
has established road-safety operation centres at the
local administrative level as a collaborative mechanism
for Government agencies, the private sector and
partner organizations.
Together with other countries and partners,
Thailand is committed to working towards achieving
the global goals on road safety by 2030, which will
be essential to attaining all the other SDGs, including
poverty eradication, health and sustainable cities, and
ultimately the promotion of human security.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. José Bamoquina Zau, Secretary of State
for Home Affairs of Angola.
Mr. Bamoquina Zau (Angola) (spoke in French):
At the outset, on behalf of the Angolan Government and
my delegation, allow me to thank the President of the
General Assembly for having organized this important
high-level meeting to enable us to share our modest
progress and national experiences with regard to global
road safety.
As we all know, and as referred to in the concept
note, according to international statistics, road
accidents cause millions of deaths and injuries every
year all over the world, thereby claiming the lives of
children, women and young people. Those are grim
and horrifying statistics that could well and truly be
avoided or at least cut in half. Unfortunately, in many
of our countries, the road transport system remains one
of the most dangerous environments for people in their
daily lives.

A/76/PV.90

The Government of the Republic of Angola and its
President adhere to this cause and have done everything
possible to create the conditions necessary to improve
road safety throughout our national territory, thereby
contributing to reducing the number of fatalities caused
by road accidents. In 2013, we set up the National Public
Transport Council, an advisory body with executive
power whose actions are based on our National Accident
Prevention strategy 2019-2022. We are currently in the
final stage of that important policy framework on road
safety, despite the fact that there have been a number
of constraints arising from the economic and financial
downturn, which was aggravated by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and has had a subsequent negative
impact on the implementation of so many other
projects. Despite that, we were able to achieve the
following objectives.
We approved a number of documents complementary
to the highway code, including the National Road Plan,
which is an important instrument that makes it possible
to map the country’s entire road network. We built new
infrastructure equipped with advanced technologies
in order to improve the mechanisms for evaluating
candidates on their driving tests, and gradually set
up centres for the compulsory technical inspection of
vehicles. We also trained and retrained traffic police
on road safety and accident prevention. With regard to
the prevention and management of accidents, as well
as road crime, the establishment of Integrated Public
Security Centres in the capital and certain provincial
towns have come to reinforce the roadside check
mechanisms already in place, including by installing
video-surveillance systems.
In conclusion, the Government of the Republic
of Angola reiterates its commitment to increasingly
improving and strengthening road safety and a safe
public transport system throughout its national
territory with a view to achieving target 11.2 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, on the strengthening
of road safety, as well as Goal 10 of Agenda 2063 of
the African Union, on world-class infrastructure across
the continent.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Pere Navarro Olivella, Director General for Traffic
of Spain.
Mr. Navarro Olivella (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As a representative of Spain, we welcome the initiative
of the General Assembly to promote road safety.

22-4068821/27

A/76/PV.90

In Spain, we have adopted a national road safety
strategy with a time frame of 2030, in line with the
United Nations goal of halving the number of road
fatalities and serious injuries by the end of the current
decade. We also wish to underscore that we have a road
safety commission in the National Assembly, which has
enabled us to align all political parties with the strategy
and ensure that road safety is a State policy. We also
have a national road safety observatory, which gathers
data and develops indicators. Without data, there can
be no road-safety policy. We cannot improve what we
do not measure. It is therefore essential to be able to
evaluate and monitor measures once they are adopted.
The strategy is underpinned by the principle that
we are unwilling to negotiate road traffic measures
in exchange for human lives. Road safety must be
prioritized above any other consideration when it
comes to road management. The strategy creates a link
between road safety and sustainable mobility. We know
that if mobility works, we can ensure road safety, but
if mobility does not work, road safety certainly cannot
be guaranteed. Safe mobility means prioritizing train
travel for middle- and long-distance journeys and
opting for public transport to move around our cities.
The strategy stipulates that enforcing traffic
regulations is the most effective way to reduce
road accidents and their tragic consequences. The
deployment of traffic police, the use of new technologies
for surveillance and control and the handling of
penalties are the basic and fundamental elements of our
road-safety policy. The strategy also focuses on speed
as a risk factor. We have approved a speed limit of 30
kilometres per hour for all single-lane roads in our
cities, because that is the only speed that guarantees
safe coexistence between the different modes and
methods of moving around the city.
The strategy prioritizes the protection of vulnerable
road users, given that, since 2019, 53 per cent of all
road-accident victims have been in that category, that
is to say, more than half of road-accident victims were
pedestrians, cyclists or motorcyclists. For pedestrians,
we are prioritizing traffic-calming measures by
enforcing a speed limit of 30 kilometres per hour in our
cities. For cyclists, we are prioritizing the construction
of separate cycle lanes. And for motorcyclists, we are
prioritizing safe-driving courses and airbag jackets
for motorcycle users on the roads. The strategy is also
firmly committed to promoting connected vehicles,
which enables them to communicate with road
22/27

30/06/2022

infrastructure and other vehicles in such a way that
averts any possibility of a fatal accident, even in the
event of human error.
With regard to road education, the strategy aims
to ensure that when young people leave the education
system, they are trained in the values of road safety and,
above all, as safe pedestrians and cyclists. The strategy
puts victims at the centre of our road-safety policy,
which gives them a voice and visibility, amplifies their
stories and ensures they receive adequate post-crash
care. In Spain, we have a public prosecutor specialized
in road-safety violations who protects and defends
victims in criminal matters.
Finally, we believe that countries that have achieved
tangible results have an ethical and moral obligation
to share their knowledge and experience with other
countries. We are doing that in Spain, including by
cooperating with our friends in Latin America and the
Maghreb. We know where we are, we know where we
want to get to, and we know how to get there. That is
why we remain convinced that we can achieve the goals
set by the United Nations for the current decade.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Pyotr Ilyichev, Director of the Department of
International Organizations in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Ilyichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia welcomes the convening of this firstever high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
improving global road safety. We welcome the fact that
the initiative introduced by our country to hold this
meeting received unanimous support. We hope it will
generate renewed impetus for the implementation of
the second Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030
and lead to a new level of international cooperation.
We believe that the prevention of road accidents is an
important factor in achieving sustainable development
and an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Reducing the number of fatalities and
accidents on our roads should remain our undisputed
priority. A systematic intersectoral approach, in which
people are the central link in building road safety, is
key to facilitating an effective solution to the problem.
Those principles underpin the Global Plan for the
Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030, for
which we express our support. The political declaration
we have adopted today (resolution 76/294) sets clear
guidelines for the implementation of the Global Plan.
22-40688

30/06/2022

The World Health Organization, in partnership
with the United Nations regional commissions and the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Road Safety,
should play a leading role in providing assistance to
countries. In order to prevent road-traffic accidents, we
need to establish comprehensive regulations, modernize
the road network and improve infrastructure, introduce
intelligent transport systems and develop a culture of
safety and compliance with traffic rules. The success
of those measures depends on sustainable funding at
all levels. The United Nations Road Safety Fund has
become a unique mechanism for providing resource
support for specific projects, especially in low- and
middle-income countries. Russia is the Fund’s largest
donor, having allocated $4 million to it since 2018.
Our country was one of the first to advocate
including this issue on the United Nations agenda. We
hosted the first Global Ministerial Conference on Road
Safety in Moscow in 2009. For us, it is a priority at
both the international and national levels. Our work
is based on the Road Safety Strategy in Russia 20182024, as well as a specialized federal project with target
indicators. Over the past decade, the number of road
accidents in our country has decreased by more than a
third, and the number of fatalities resulting from them
has been halved. Detailed information about our work
is expounded in the video message by the First Deputy
Minister of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Colonel-General of the Police Alexander Gorovoy, on
the occasion of today’s meeting, which is available on
the website of the Permanent Mission of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once again
that reducing injuries and saving lives on the roads is
one of our country’s top priorities. We hope that, during
the interim review of the implementation of the Decade
of Action in 2026, the General Assembly will be able to
record positive developments in this area without any
politicization, which, regrettably, was not the case in
preparing for today’s meeting. For its part, Russia will
continue to work constructively, including by preparing
a draft resolution of the General Assembly. We stand
ready to cooperate with others and call on all countries
to do the same.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Zeki Bal, First Degree Chief Superintendent, Deputy
Head of Traffic Department, General Directorate of
Police in the Ministry of Interior of Türkiye.

A/76/PV.90

Mr. Bal (Türkiye): The traffic phenomenon,
which is at the centre of our lives in many respects,
is unfortunately defined as a global public-health issue
by several international organizations. It is believed
that traffic accidents cause an average of 1.3 million
preventable deaths and 50 million injuries per year. In
the period from 2011 to 2020, the target of reducing
traffic casualties by 50 per cent was adopted as a
Government policy, under the leadership of our
President, Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and a strong
promise was therefore made to our nation and the world.
For that reason, the Road Traffic Safety Strategy and
Action Plan 2011-2020 was put into effect, by decree
of the Prime Minister, and many multidimensional and
result-oriented studies were carried out through the
Traffic Safety Implementation Policy of the Ministry of
Interior, which is a document dated 2017.
During the first Decade of Action for Road
Safety, although the number of vehicles increased
by approximately 60 per cent, the number of drivers
by 45 per cent and the population by 13 per cent, the
loss of life from traffic accidents was reduced by
56 per cent, from 13.4 to 5.8 per 100,000 people. The
Republic of Turkey therefore achieved very important
success in having attained the target of reducing the
number of deaths caused by traffic accidents by
50 per cent between 2011 and 2020. In accordance with
resolution 74/299, and in line with the principles of the
safe-systems approach and Vision Zero, which place
the human person at the centre of the traffic ecosystem,
in 2021 we published a Road Traffic Safety Strategy
2021-2030 and a Road Traffic Safety Action Plan 20212023, by presidential decree, with a view to halving the
number of traffic fatalities by 2030 and achieving zero
fatalities by 2050.
For that purpose, a strong structure has been put
in place by presidential decree. In order to ensure
interministerial coordination and carry out studies in a
multisectoral, multidisciplinary and multi-stakeholder
manner, we established the Road Traffic Safety
Strategy Coordination Board, under the chairmanship
of the Minister of Interior. In addition, we set up the
Road Traffic Safety Strategy Monitoring and Executive
Board, under the chairmanship of the Deputy Minister,
in order to monitor activities and studies. Affiliated
to that Board, we have formulated expert groups,
including with the participation of experts from
stakeholder organizations, on priority areas; traffic
safety management; road infrastructure and the

22-4068823/27

A/76/PV.90

30/06/2022

environment; vehicles; education and training; traffic
enforcement; and post-accident response.

standards that are necessary to provide security and
safety for their users.

As our Minister of Interior, Mr. Süleyman Soylu,
underlined in his video message to the General Assembly
on 3 December 2021, based on our achievements in
the area of traffic safety, and in having recalled our
previous successes, we firmly believe that we will
achieve the respective targets for 2030 and 2050, and
that our global and regional cooperation and exchanges,
under the umbrella of the United Nations, will also
contribute to that.

The State of Qatar attaches great importance to the
issue of improving road safety and has unique experience
in the Middle East and among developing countries
in that regard. Road safety and saving people’s lives
are a priority of my country’s socioeconomic policy.
That is why we established a pioneering National Road
Safety Committee, which is responsible for drawing up
general road-safety policies and providing solutions and
proposals to improve the level of road safety throughout
the country in the engineering, technical and human
fields. Since it was established, the Committee has
played an active role in improving the level of road
safety and implementing measures that have led to
positive results in that area.

I should like to pay my respects and offer my
condolences to the relatives of those who have lost their
lives in traffic accidents. I wish members every success
in their work, while recalling the motto repeated
throughout our traffic safety campaigns: “We are all
together on the road to traffic safety”.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Mohammed Abdullah Al-Malki, Secretary of the
National Traffic Safety Committee in the Ministry of
Interior of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Malki (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Today we
meet at this high-level meeting of the General Assembly
to discuss the most important challenges facing our
countries and peoples in the area of improving road
safety, as contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We also meet so that stakeholders can
engage in discussions with a view to achieving further
positive results, as well as promoting interactive
dialogue on investing in road safety and sharing our
experiences and lessons learned in order to address the
remaining gaps in the implementation of the second
Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030.
As members are aware, road safety is a collective
responsibility shared by all countries, since it is
considered to be one of the key pillars for the development
and progress of countries. In that connection, the State
of Qatar is participating in this high-level meeting to
discuss the most important collective issues affecting
countries and peoples alike and the challenges we face
with regard to road accidents, which are the biggest
threat to the social and economic development of
countries given that they affect millions of victims
every year, between death and permanent disability,
and cause suffering to many families worldwide,
especially in developing countries, which have poor
road infrastructure owing to the lack of adequate safety
24/27

The State of Qatar, as a representative of the
countries of the Arab region from the Economic and
Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) on the
Advisory Board of the United Nations Road Safety
Fund, would like to draw the Assembly’s attention
to the situation of road safety in the Arab region and
the challenges it faces. The statistics indicate a high
incidence of fatalities in the region, which demands
that we provide the necessary support to confront those
challenges and limit their dangers, especially in lowand middle-income countries, which are lacking in
road safety and require assistance if they are to achieve
the targets set for the second United Nations Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2021-2030. Those countries also
need help in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and in building sustainable capacities to develop
and implement evidence-based policies, strategies and
action plans so as to improve road safety in an efficient
and effective manner.
Turning to Qatar’s experience of road safety, I
would like to underscore the following.
First, we have developed a 10-year national road
safety strategy, in line with the goals of the first
United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety 20112020, as contained in 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. All relevant sectors have worked to
implement the strategy, which has contributed to
reducing the fatality rate from 13 deaths per 100,000
population in 2013 to less than 5 deaths per 100,000
population in 2021. Those are very positive results that
exceeded our expectations and propelled Qatar to one
22-40688

30/06/2022

of the highest-ranking countries worldwide in the area
of road safety.
Secondly, we have also adopted an educational
framework and curriculum on road safety, which is
taught in schools at all levels, from kindergarten to
pre-university, in all educational institutions across the
country with the aim of instilling and spreading road
culture among all segments of society.
The State of Qatar hosted the twenty-fourth World
International Traffic Medicine Association Congress in
November 2015, which addressed health-care services
for the victims of road accidents. The Congress
achieved results and made recommendations that have
contributed greatly to the development of health care in
our country, as reflected in the fact that we have reduced
the number of lives lost as a result of road accidents.
My country also organized the first International
Traffic Safety Conference in November 2018, which
provided an opportunity for dialogue and discussion at
the global level on all issues relating to the present and
future situation of road safety. It also provided a space
for those concerned to express their views with regard
to finding solutions to road-safety problems at the
institutional and individual levels and to deliberate on
how best to translate ideas into strategies on the ground
and benefit from them in achieving road safety.
One of the most important achievements made by
the State of Qatar during the implementation of the
Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety
2011-2020, consistent with our national road safety
strategy 2013-2022, has been the reduction in the
number of deaths resulting from road accidents to 49
per 100,000 population. The reduction in the average
time taken to answer emergency calls to less than five
seconds and the reduction in the average response
time of ambulances and emergency services attending
accident sites to less than eight minutes contributed to
saving the lives of several victims and therefore reduced
the death rate.
Thirdly, we have also improved, developed and
extended our road network in order to ensure the
highest standards of road safety, and we have created
nearly 300 kilometres of pedestrian walkways and
cycle lanes, which has led to a reduction in the number
of road accidents.
Fourthly, we have also worked to increase the level
of awareness among our communities by launching
a series of awareness-raising programmes between

A/76/PV.90

2010 and 2020, which have served to improve the
behaviour of road users, including drivers, passengers
and pedestrians alike, thereby reducing the rate of
road accidents. My Government has also adopted all
relevant United Nations resolutions on road safety and
the Sustainable Development Goals.
With regard to our current and future plans, the
State of Qatar is determined to implement a number of
projects and programmes in order to improve the level
of road safety in our county. One of the most important
among those projects is the launching of a national road
safety strategy 2023-2030, which will be aligned with
the United Nations Global Plan for the Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2021-2030. We will work to achieve its
goals so as to reduce the number of deaths and injuries
from road accidents by at least 50 per cent by 2030.
Another ESCWA project is being implemented in
three Arab countries — namely, the State of Qatar,
Lebanon and Tunisia — which aims to strengthen
evidence-based interventions in order to improve the
level of road safety in the Arab region by increasing
the effectiveness of data collection, processing and
analysis, which will pave the way for the establishment
of the Arab Integrated Road Safety Observatory in the
countries of the region.
We also intend to organize the second International
Traffic Safety Conference in March 2023, which
aims to strengthen cooperation between the countries
of the world in the area of road safety, providing the
opportunity for experts and specialists in the field to
exchange their positive experiences and expertise, in
particular in countries that have made great progress
in improving road safety and reducing road accidents.
Based on its experience of improving road safety,
the State of Qatar proposes and recommends that all
countries cooperate and work together in order to
achieve the objectives of the second Decade of Action
for Road Safety 2021-2030, given the importance
of road safety to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals; the establishment of a secretariat
to coordinate the work of civil society organizations
and regional and national bodies in order to strengthen
their role and enable them to play an active part in
efforts to improve road safety; the formation of a
technical team of experts and specialists in the field of
road safety, under the auspices of the United Nations,
in order to provide technical support to poor countries
and help them enhance their level of road safety; and

22-4068825/27

A/76/PV.90

30/06/2022

the creation of an effective mechanism for the exchange
of information and experience in order to enhance and
improve road safety in all countries.

conducive to increasing the quality of driving by
professional drivers, which is a measure with a direct
impact on road safety.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Mihnea Drumea, State Counsellor in the Office of
the Prime Minister of Romania.

From a digital perspective, the Romanian Ministry
of Transport and Infrastructure is keen to use new and
advanced technological solutions in the field of road
safety with a view to implementing the 2+1 alternative
traffic system and maintaining readable infrastructure
that addresses all road users and is implemented by the
road administrator through messages and information
signs concerning the correct and proper use of the
relevant infrastructure. In the same vein, the increasing
use of automated traffic management systems will
facilitate the video monitoring of traffic in order to
allow for quicker interventions of emergency crews
or those necessary to clear snow or restore road
practicality, as well as to enable the qualitative and
quantitative analysis of road traffic and automatic
licence plate recognition, inter alia.

Mr. Drumea (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the declaration to be delivered by the European Union
(EU). On behalf of the Prime Minister of Romania, I
would like to make some remarks in a national capacity.
Today’s meeting is about the implementation of
international, regional and national standards in the
field of road safety. As an EU member State concerned
with ensuring safe mobility for all road users, Romania
joins the European effort towards the goal of reducing
both the number of deaths and the number of serious
injuries caused by road accidents by 50 per cent in
the period 2022-2030. In that context, I am pleased
to inform the Assembly that my Government recently
adopted a national road safety strategy for the period
2022-2030 and its subsequent action plans. The strategy
complements other Romanian public policies in the
fields of digitalization, urban mobility, energy and
climate change. The strategy is also timely given that
the road transit of persons and goods has significantly
increased in Romania as a consequence of the war
in Ukraine.
The priority of the Romanian Government is
to increase road safety by reducing the number of
accidents and mitigating their consequences, which
is why we have implemented a holistic approach in
terms of actions and measures aimed at improving
infrastructure, the technical condition of vehicles,
human behaviour and post-accident interventions. To
that end, my Government puts a strong emphasis on
preventive education. Road-education campaigns and
other preventive activities are organized throughout
the country, which target specific groups with the
help of traditional media and social media platforms,
the involvement of youth in road-education classes
in schools and the distribution of leaflets and street
campaigns, including with the support of civil society.
As a lesson learned from the coronavirus disease
pandemic, we have invested in a great number of
measures to ensure safer and more secure parking
spaces for drivers in the professional category. In
particular, we strive to alleviate the dangers posed
to their safety, as well as to offer conditions that are
26/27

In conclusion, allow me to point to the financial
ramifications of road safety for my country. Sadly,
the financial impact of the economic and social losses
caused by road accidents are estimated at around
1.5 per cent of Romania’s gross domestic product. In
that context, the national road safety strategy includes
provisions for increasing administrative capacity and
inter-institutional cooperation in order to ensure that
there is capacity to spend the estimated funds and
certify an efficient course of priority projects.
Owing to time constraints, we will submit a longer
version of this statement in writing.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Saif Saeed Ghobash, Director of Land Transport at
the Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure of the United
Arab Emirates.
Mr. Ghobash (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): It is a pleasure and honour to be here today
at this high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
global road safety.
Roads are an essential part of our everyday
lives. We all use them on a daily basis, and we must
all play a role in making them safer. Recent decades
have demonstrated that effective and comprehensive
road-safety strategies can reduce the number of road
fatalities despite increasing road traffic. We are
currently experiencing the most turbulent era in the
history of transportation and mobility. The goal for all
22-40688

30/06/2022

of us is therefore to create a sustainable transportation
network that guarantees a safe future for the generations
to come.
The United Arab Emirates launched the National
Smart Mobility Strategy based on its vision to be
among the world’s leading countries in the field of
smart multimodal mobility by the year 2030. Road
safety and sustainability are among the main goals and
objectives of our national strategy. We have set a target
to reduce the annual number of fatalities caused by road
accidents from 440 to zero by the year 2030, thereby
reducing the number of deaths from road accidents by
100 per cent. We also aim to accelerate universal access
to safe, sustainable and low-cost transportation, which
would enable our system to overcome the issue of social
inequity that is inherent in transportation systems
across the world.
Our strategy also focuses on adopting zero-emission
vehicles in order to contribute to our country’s ambition
to achieve net-zero emissions by the year 2050. The
United Arab Emirates has invested $40 billion dollars in
clean energy over the past 15 years, which, according to
our leaders, shows that our country is fully committed
to seizing every opportunity to cement its leadership in
combating climate change in the Middle East and North
Africa region, thereby helping to advance development
and growth and create new jobs, while driving our
economy and country towards net-zero emissions.
It is worth noting that autonomous vehicles
can help achieve both safety and sustainability in a

A/76/PV.90

transportation system. Moreover, automation can help
reduce collisions, prevent injuries and save lives by
reducing the potential risks associated with human
error. The development of automotive technology
would also raise the level of social equity, reduce air
pollution and traffic congestion and increase public
access to transportation. In that regard, the National
Smart Mobility Strategy of the United Arab Emirates
aims to ensure that 25 per cent of all journeys in the
country are autonomous by the year 2030.
The road transport system is one of the most
dangerous environments that people use. Therefore, in
addition to the importance of improving the efficiency
of infrastructure in order to improve safety, there is an
urgent need to raise awareness among people, because
being cautious and careful today can ensure their
survival tomorrow.
I would like to thank the United Nations for having
worked together with all Member States and expert
speakers and panellists in order to discuss and exchange
a wealth of ideas on the fundamental issue of road
safety. We reaffirm the commitment of the United Arab
Emirates to cooperating with all countries present here
today in order to ensure a better and safer tomorrow.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this morning. The Assembly will continue
the plenary segment of the high-level meeting at 3
p.m. in this Hall, when we will continue to hear the
remaining statements.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-4068827/27
