A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/137
3 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.3)]
52/137. Situation of human rights in Myanmar
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as stated in the Charter of the United Nations and elaborated in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International Covenants on Human Rights2 and other applicable human
rights instruments,
Aware that, in accordance with the Charter, the United Nations promotes and encourages respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states
that the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government,
Recalling its resolution 51/117 of 12 December 1996,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/58 of 3 March 1992,3 in which the
Commission, inter alia, decided to nominate a special rapporteur to establish direct contacts with the

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II,
sect. A.

98-77071

/...

A/RES/52/137
Page 2

Government and with the people of Myanmar, including political leaders deprived of their liberty, their
families and their lawyers, with a view to examining the situation of human rights in Myanmar and
following any progress made towards the transfer of power to a civilian Government and the drafting of
a new constitution, the lifting of restrictions on personal freedoms and the restoration of human rights in
Myanmar,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1997/64 of 16 April 1997,4 in which the
Commission decided to extend for one year the mandate of its Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar,
Noting with concern that the Government of Myanmar has not yet agreed to a visit by the Special
Rapporteur,
Gravely concerned that the Government of Myanmar still has not implemented its commitment to
take all necessary steps towards democracy in the light of the results of the elections held in 1990,
Gravely concerned also about the travel and other restrictions placed on Aung San Suu Kyi and other
political leaders, the continued arrests and harassment of members and supporters of the National League
for Democracy, trade unionists and students for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of expression,
assembly and association, the forced resignations of elected representatives and the long closure of all
universities and colleges following the student demonstrations in December 1996,
Recalling the withdrawal and subsequent exclusion from the National Convention of members of the
National League for Democracy, late in 1995,
Welcoming the contact between the Government of Myanmar and political parties, in particular the
National League for Democracy, but regretting the failure of the Government of Myanmar to engage in
a substantive political dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and other political leaders, including
representatives of ethnic groups,
Gravely concerned at the continuing violations of human rights in Myanmar, as reported by the
Special Rapporteur, including extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, killings of civilians, torture,
arbitrary arrest and detention, deaths in custody, absence of due process of law, including trial of detainees
in secrecy without proper legal representation, severe restrictions on freedom of opinion, expression,
assembly and association, violations of freedom of movement, forced relocation, forced labour of children
as well as adults, including portering for the military, abuse of women and children by government agents
and the imposition of oppressive measures directed, in particular, at ethnic and religious minorities,
Recalling the observation made by the Special Rapporteur that the absence of respect for the rights
pertaining to democratic governance is at the root of all the major violations of human rights in Myanmar,
Recalling also the conclusion of ceasefire agreements between the Government of Myanmar and
several ethnic groups,

4

Ibid., 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/52/137
Page 3

Noting that the human rights situation in Myanmar has resulted in flows of refugees to neighbouring
countries, thus creating problems for the countries concerned,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
the situation of human rights in Myanmar for his interim report,5 and urges the Government of Myanmar
to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur and to ensure his access to Myanmar, without
preconditions, in order to allow him fully to discharge his mandate;
2.

Also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report;6

3.

Deplores the continuing violations of human rights in Myanmar;

4. Notes that Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi was allowed to travel to the Thaketa
township office of the National League for Democracy to peacefully conduct normal political activities
on 21 October 1997, but was subsequently prevented from attending party meetings of the League, on
5 November 1997 in Tamwe township and on 13 November 1997 in Hlaing township, and requests the
Government of Myanmar to permit unrestricted communication with and physical access to Aung San Suu
Kyi and other political leaders by members and supporters of the League and to protect their physical
well-being;
5. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to release, immediately and unconditionally,
detained political leaders and all political prisoners, to ensure their physical integrity and to permit them
to participate in the process of national reconciliation;
6. Urges the Government of Myanmar to pursue its contacts with the National League for
Democracy with a view to engaging, at the earliest possible date, in a substantive political dialogue with
the General Secretary of the League, Aung San Suu Kyi, and other political leaders, including
representatives of ethnic groups, as the best means of promoting national reconciliation and the full and
early restoration of democracy;
7. Welcomes the visits to Myanmar in the first half of 1997 by the Envoy of the Secretary-General
and the Director of the East Asia and the Pacific Division of the Department of Political Affairs of the
Secretariat for the purpose of discussions with the Government and with Aung San Suu Kyi and other
political leaders, and encourages the Government of Myanmar to broaden its dialogue with the SecretaryGeneral and to facilitate access by his representatives to the political leaders in Myanmar;
8. Again urges the Government of Myanmar, in conformity with its assurances given at various
times, to take all necessary steps towards the restoration of democracy in accordance with the will of the
people, as expressed in the democratic elections held in 1990, and to ensure that political parties and
non-governmental organizations can function freely;
9. Welcomes the holding of the Ninth Anniversary Conference of the National League for
Democracy on 27 and 28 September 1997;

5

A/52/484, annex.

6

A/52/587.
/...

A/RES/52/137
Page 4

10. Expresses its concern that most of the representatives duly elected in 1990 are still excluded
from participating in the meetings of the National Convention, created to prepare basic elements for the
drafting of a new constitution, and that one of the objectives of the Convention is to maintain the
participation of the armed forces in a leading role in the future political life of the State, notes also with
concern that the composition and working procedures of the National Convention do not permit the
elected representatives of the people freely to express their views, and concludes that the National
Convention does not appear to constitute the necessary step towards the restoration of democracy;
11. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to take all appropriate measures to allow all citizens
to participate freely in the political process, in accordance with the principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, and to accelerate the process of transition to democracy, in particular through the
transfer of power to democratically elected representatives;
12. Also strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to ensure full respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including freedom of expression and assembly, the right to a fair trial and the
protection of the rights of persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities, to put an end to violations
of the right to life and integrity of the human being, to the practices of torture, abuse of women, forced
labour and forced relocations and to enforced disappearances and summary executions, to fulfil its
obligation to end the impunity of perpetrators of human rights violations, including members of the
military, and to investigate and prosecute alleged violations committed by government agents in all
circumstances;
13. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to implement fully the recommendations made by the
Special Rapporteur;
14. Welcomes the accession by the Government of Myanmar, on 22 July 1997, to the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;7
15. Appeals to the Government of Myanmar to consider becoming a party to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights2 and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or
Punishment;8
16. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to fulfil its obligations with regard to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child,9 as set out in the concluding comments of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child in its report on its fourteenth session;10
17. Also strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to fulfil its obligations as a State party to the
Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and the Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right

7

Resolution 34/180, annex.

8

Resolution 39/46, annex.

9

Resolution 44/25, annex.

10

CRC/C/62, paras. 135-182.
/...

A/RES/52/137
Page 5

to Organize Convention, 1948 (No. 87), of the International Labour Organization, and encourages the
Government of Myanmar to cooperate more closely with the International Labour Organization, in
particular with the Commission of Inquiry appointed in accordance with article 26 of the Constitution of
the International Labour Organization;
18. Stresses the importance for the Government of Myanmar to give particular attention to improving
the conditions in the country's jails and to allow the competent international humanitarian organization
to communicate freely and confidentially with prisoners;
19. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar and other parties to the hostilities in Myanmar to
respect fully the obligations under international humanitarian law, including article 3 common to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,11 to halt the use of weapons against the civilian population, to
protect all civilians, including children, women and persons belonging to ethnic or religious minorities,
from violations of humanitarian law and to avail itself of such services as may be offered by impartial
humanitarian bodies;
20. Encourages the Government of Myanmar to create the necessary conditions to ensure an end
to the movements of refugees to neighbouring countries and to create conditions conducive to their
voluntary return and their full reintegration, in conditions of safety and dignity;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his discussions with the Government of Myanmar
in order to assist in the implementation of the present resolution and to report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-third session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-fourth session;
22. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-third session.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997

11

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
