VII.

36/51.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of lndependem:~ to Col01lial Countries and Peo_ples in Namibia and in all other Territories under cotomal
domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism,
apartheid and racial discrimination in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled '' Activities of foreign
economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Namibia and
in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts
to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination
in southern Africa'',
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question, 25
Taking into consideration the chapters of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia relating to the
question, 26
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation of the Declaration and 35/ l l 8
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
as well as all other resolutions of the United Nations relating
to the item,
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia and the Programme of Action for the Liberation
of Zimbabwe and Namibia, 27 adopted by the International
Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, as well
as the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, 28
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid,
Recalling the Declaration on Namibia and the Programme
of Action in Support of Self-Determination and National
Independence for Namibia, contained in General Assembly
resolution S-9/2 of 3 May 1978,
Recalling also the Panama Declaration and Programme
of Action on Namibia, 29 adopted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary meeting
held at Panama City on 5 June 1981,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirty-seventh ordinary session, held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 June 1981, 30 and endorsed by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at Nairobi
from 24 to 27 June 1981,
25
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I),
chap. V.
26
Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/36/24), part two, chaps. II and VI.
21
A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year. Supplement
for July, August and September 1977.
28
Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos,
22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XIV.2
JIDd corri~ndum}, sect. X.
29
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/36/24), para. 222.
30
See A/36/534, annex I.

201

Bearing in mind also the relevant provisions of the New
Delhi Declaration, 31 adopted by the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 9 to I 3 February 1981, as well as the final
communique of the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of
the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries on
the Question of Namibia. held at Algiers from 16 to 18
April 1981, 32
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Special
Declaration on Namibia, 13 adopted by the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris
from 20 to 27 May 1981 ,
Bearing in mind further the Declaration on Foreign Investment in South Africa, 34 adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth
ordinary session, held at Freetown from 18 to 28 June 1980.
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering
Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote
the political, economic, social and educational advancement
of the inhabitants of the Territories under their administration and to protect the human and natural resources of those
Territories against abuses,
Reaffirming that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of colonialism,
apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa and
other colonial Territories is in direct violation of the rights
of the inhabitants and of the principles of the Charter and
all relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of all Territories
under colonial and racist domination are the heritage of the
peoples of those Territories and that the exploitation and
depletion of those resources by foreign economic interests,
in particular in southern Africa, in association with the illegal racist minority regime of South Africa, constitute a
direct violation of the rights of the peoples and of the principles stated in the Charter and all relevant resolutions of
the United Nations,
Noting with profound concern that the colonial Powers
and certain States, through their activities in the colonial
Territories, have continued to disregard United Nations decisions relating to the item and that they have failed to
implement in particular the relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 and
35/28 of 11 November 1980, by which the Assembly called
upon the Governments which had not yet done so to take
legislative, administrative or other measures in respect of
their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa, which are detrimental to the
interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to
put an end to such enterprises and to prevent new investments which run counter to the interests of the inhabitants
of those Territories,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financial and other interests which continue to
exploit the natural and human resources of the colonial
Territories and to accumulate and repatriate huge profits to
the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants, particularly
in southern Africa, thereby impeding the realization by the
peoples of the Territories of their legitimate aspirations for
self-determination and independence,
" A/36/116 and Corr. I. annex.
" A/36/222-S/14458 and Corr. I, annex. For the printed text. see Official
Records of the Security Council. Thirty-sixth Year, Supplement for April.
Mav and June /9/i/.
'' A/CONF.10718, sect. X.B.
4
'
See A/35/463 and Corr. I. annex I. declaration CM/St. IS (XXXV).

202

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Strongly condemning the. support_ which the r~cist minority regime of South Africa continues t? receive from
those foreign economic, financial and _oth_er interests which
are collaborating with it in the expl01tat1on of the natural
and human resources of the international Territory of Namibia in the further entrenchment of its illegal racist dominatio~ over the Territory and in the strengthening of its
system of apartheid,
Taking into account the report of the U~i~ed Nati_ons
Council for Namibia on the hearings on Nam1b1an uramum
held in New York from 7 to 1 I July 1980, 35
Strongly condemning the investment of for~ign capital in
the production of uranium and the c~llaboration of ~ertain
Western countries and other States with the racist minonty
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field which, by providing that regime with nuclear equiI?~ent and te~~~ology,
enables it to develop nuclear and military capab1ltt1es and
to become a nuclear Power, thereby promoting South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
Deploring that South Africa and the colonial Power~ ~ontinue to engage in activities and dispositions of a m1htary
character and to establish and maintain bases and other
military installations in Namibia and other _col_onial T_erritories in violation of the purposes and pnnc1ples of the
Charter and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
Deeply concerned about the conditio~s in other ~olonial
Territories, including those in the Canbbean reg!on and
certain Territories in the Pacific region, where foreign economic financial and other interests continue to deprive the
indige~ous populations of their rights over the wealth of
their countries, and where the indigenous peoples of those
Territories continue to suffer from a loss of land ownership
as a result of the failure of the administering Powers concerned to restrict the sale of land to foreigners, despite the
repeated appeals of the General Assembly,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world public
opinion against the involv_ement of f?rei_gn economic, financial and other interests in the explmtatJon of natural and
human resources, which impedes the independence of colonial Territories and the elimination of racism, particularly
in southern Africa,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right_ of the ~eoples of dependent Territories to self-determination and indepe1;1dencc
and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of thetr Territories, as well as their right to dispose of those resource~
in their best interests;
2. Reiterates that any administering or occupying Power
which deprives the colonial peoples of the exercise of their
legitimate rights over their natural resources or_ subordinates
the rights and interests of those peoples to for~1gn _econ_omtc
and financial interests violates the solemn obligations 1t has
assumed under the Charter of the United Nations:
3. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation of natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation
of huge profits and the use of those profits for the enrichment
of foreign settlers and the entrenchment of colomal dom1
nation over the Territories, the activities of foreign economic, financial and other interests operating at p~esent in
the colonial Territories, particularly in southern Afnca, constitute a major obstacle to political independence and _to the
enjoyment of the natural resources of those Terntones hy
the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Condemns the activities of foreign economic and
other interests in the colonial Territories as impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as well as
35
Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirty:fifth Session. S111'
plement No. 24 (N35!24), vol Ill.

the efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination;
5. Condemns the policies of Governments that continue
to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and
other interests engaged in exploiting the natural and human
resources of the Territories, including in particular illegally
exploiting Namibia's marin~ res~mrces, th~s violating the
political, economic and social ~ghts and interests of _the
indigenous peoples and obstructing the full and spee~y implementation of the Declaration in respect of those Temtones:
6. Strongly condemns the continuing ~ollaboration. of
certain Western countries and other States with South Afnca
in the nuclear field which, by providing the racist_ regime
with nuclear equipment and technology, enable!\ 1t to increase its nuclear capability, and calls upon all Governments
to refrain from all such collaboration with that regime;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Sit~ation with
regard to the Implementation of. the Decl~at10n on the
Granting of Independence to Colomal_Cou_ntn~s and Peoples
to continue to monitor closely the s1tuat1on in other NonSelf-Governing Territories so as to ensure that all ec':mom1c
activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthemng and
diversifying their economies in the in_terests _of the indigenous peoples and their speedy accession to 1_n~epen~e_nce,
and that those peoples are not exploite~ f~r political. m1htary
and other purposes detrimental to their interests:
8. Strongly condemns those Western countries and _all
other States, as well as the transnational corporations, which
continue their investments in, and supply of armaments and
oil and nuclear technology to, the racist regime of South
Africa, thus buttressing it and aggravating the threat to world
peace;
9. Strongly condemns the collusion by the Govei:nments
of certain Western countries and other States, particularly
those of the United States of America, the Federal Republic
of Germany and Israel, with the racist regime of South
Africa in the nuclear field and calls upon the Government
of France and all other Governments to refrain from supplying the racist minority regime of South Africa: directly
or indirectly, with installations that might enable it_ to produce uranium, plutonium and other nuclear matenals, reactors or military equipment;
10. Calls upon all States, in particular the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America, the t<ecteral Republic of Germany, France.
Japan, Belgium, Israel and Italy, to_ take ~rgent, effective
measures to terminate all collaboration with South Afnca
in the political, diplomatic, economic, trade, military and
nuclear fields and to refrain from entering into other relations
with the racist regime of South Africa in violation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations and of the Organization of African Unity;
11. Calls once again upon all Governments that have
not yet done so to take legislative, _administrative or other
measures in respect of theu nationals and the bodies
corporate under their jurisdiction t~at own a_nd op~rate ent_erprises in colonial Territories, part1culai:ly in _Afnca, _which
are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises and
to prevent new investments which run counter to the interests
of the inhabitants of those Territories;
12. Requests all States to refrain from making any investments to the benefit of, or extending loans to, the minority racist regime of South Africa and to refrain from a~y
agreements or measures to promote trade or other economic
relations with it;
13. Calls upon those 011-proctucing and oil-exporting
countries that have not yet done so to take effective measures

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

against the oil companies that supply crude oil and petroleum
products to the racist regime of South Africa;
14. Requests all States that have not yet done so to take
effective measures to end the supply of funds and other
forms of assistance, including military supplies and equipment, to the regimes that use such assistance to repress the
peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
15. Condemns all military activities and dispositions of
a military character in Namibia and other colonial Territories
which are prejudicial to the interests of the peoples of those
Territories and to their right to self-determination and
independence;
16. Calls upon South Africa and the colonial Powers
corn:erned to end the military activities and dispositions of
a military character in Namibia and other colonial Territories
and to eliminate the military bases in accordance with the
provisions of the pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular paragraph 9 of the Plan of Action for
the Full Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 35/118;
17. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering of
the natural resources of Namibia by South African and other
foreign economic interests, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
and of Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council
for Namibia on 27 September 1974, 36 are illegal and contribute to the maintenance of the illegal occupation regime;
18. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of Namibia, in complete disregard of the legitimate interests of
the Namibian people, and for its illegal extension of the
territorial sea and its proclamation of an economic zone off
the coast of Namibia;
19. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue all
economic, financial and trade relations with South Africa
concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic, financial or other relations with South Africa, acting
on behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend support
to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
20. Invites all Governments and organizations of the
United Nati_ons system, having regard to the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of I May 1974, and of the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to
ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial Territories over their natural resources is fully respected and
safeguarded;
21. Requests the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations to prepare from available sources a register indicating the profits that transnational corporations
derive from their activities in colonial Territories and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
22. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish every discriminatory and unjust wage system prevailing in the
Territories under their administration and to apply an
equitable system of wages;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, a
sustained and broad campaign with a view to informing
world public opinion of the facts concerning the pillaging
36

Ibid., vol. I, annex II.

203

of natural resources in colonial Territories and the exploitation of their indigenous populations by foreign monopolies
and the support they render to the colonialist and racist
regimes;
24. Appeals to all non-governmental organizations to
continue their campaign to mobilize international public
opinion for the enforcement of economic and other sanctions
against the Pretoria regime;
25. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to continue to examine this question and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/52.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
contained in the annex to its resolution 35/118 of 11 December 1980, as well as all other relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on this subject, in particular resolution 35/29 of 11 November 1980,
Recalling also its resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981
on the question of Namibia,
Taking into account the relevant decisions adopted by the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 9 to 13 February 1981, 37
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-sixth ordinary session, held at Addis
Ababa from 23 February to I March 1981, by the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries on the Question of Namibia, held
at Algiers from 16 to 18 April 1981, 38 by the United Nations
Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary meeting
held at Panama City on 5 June 198139 and by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at
Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, 40
Having examined the reports submitted on the item by
the Secretary-General, 41 the Economic and Social Counci142
and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 43
See N36/ 116 and Corr. I, annex.
See N36/222-S/14458 and Corr. I, annex. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth Year, Supplement for
April, May and June 1981.
39
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Supplement No. 24 (N36/24), para. 222.
40
See N36/534, annex.
4
' N36/154 and Add.1-3; NAC.109/L. 1389.
42
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 3 (N36/3/Rev. l), chap. XXX.
43
Ibid .. Supplement No. 23 (N36/23/Rev. l), chap. VI.
37

38
