S/PV.9058

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9058th meeting

Wednesday, 8 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. McSwiney
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2022/436)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-37533 (E)
*2237533*

S/PV.9058

Central African region

security in Central Africa. I want to thank Mr. Fall for
his service and for his personal dedication to peace.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2022/436)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations; His
Excellency Mr. Gilberto Da Piedade Veríssimo, President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
Central African States; and Ms. Jeanne-Danielle Nicole
Nlate, Vice-President of the Coalition des organisations
de la société civile d’Afrique centrale pour la
préservation de la paix, la prévention des conflits, la
resolution et la transformation des crises.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/436, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee (spoke in French): I thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council today on the situation in Central Africa and on
the activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA).
At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Central Africa, Mr. François Louncény Fall, whose
mandate came to an end last week. Over the past five
and a half years of his mandate, Mr. Fall has contributed
to broadening UNOCA’s activities through his good
offices and to strengthening the capacity of the region
in conflict prevention and resolution. He has provided
support in terms of the coordination and coherence of
United Nations actions aimed at restoring peace and
2/23

08/06/2022

Several countries in the subregion are preparing
for crucial electoral processes. For the current year,
legislative and local elections are expected to be held
in the Republic of the Congo in July; general elections
in Angola in August; legislative, regional and local
elections in Sao Tome and Principe in September;
and legislative elections in Equatorial Guinea, with a
date to be determined. In 2023, presidential elections
are expected to be held in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Gabon and Equatorial Guinea. Chad is
also expected to hold general elections at the end of its
transitional process.
The United Nations has been clear in its message
that all stakeholders must work to create the conditions
conducive to credible, inclusive and peaceful elections
in line with democratic principles. UNOCA and
other presences in the region will exercise their good
offices wherever required to encourage inclusive and
meaningful political dialogue in countries preparing for
elections. The Office will also encourage Governments
to widen the democratic space and further democratic
gains, including by expanding the participation
of women and young people in elections, both as
candidates and voters.
Some countries in the subregion continue to face
political and security challenges. In some instances,
those challenges, if not addressed, could risk
affecting neighbouring countries and the subregion.
The challenges that persist in Cameroon include the
conflict in its north-west and south-west regions, the
crisis generated by Boko Haram-affiliated and splinter
groups in the far north and the influx of refugees
fleeing conflict in its neighbour to the east, the Central
African Republic. During my visit to Cameroon
in March with former Special Representative Fall,
I engaged in fruitful exchanges with the national
authorities and various stakeholders on the country’s
peace and security challenges. The situation in the
north-west and south-west is particularly worrying,
as the violence there is continuing. It will be crucial
for the international community to step up its support
for national efforts to resolve the conflict peacefully,
in line with the conclusions of the Major National
Dialogue and international standards.
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

In Chad, despite delays in the timeline, the political
transition continues to be on course. However, the most
important challenges remain ahead. It is our hope
that the Doha pre-dialogue with the armed opposition
will lead to an inclusive peace agreement, including
a viable process for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of Chadian armed groups
present in neighbouring countries, particularly Libya. I
want to underline here that a DDR process in line with
international standards will facilitate the mobilization of
support from the international community. The United
Nations stands ready to support a donor conference to
help mobilize funding for the implementation of the
transition road map, as and when the national dialogue
process gains further traction.
Meanwhile, I am concerned about the recent
violence among groups of illegal gold miners, some of
whom are allegedly from neighbouring countries, in an
area of north-western Chad near the border with Libya.
Those clashes have resulted in the deaths of at least
100 people, injuries to many persons and a significant
number of displaced persons. In coordination with the
transitional authorities, we will explore options for
humanitarian support, while also remaining cognizant
of the need to address the root causes of instability in
that area.
UNOCA has continued its support for the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) in its
efforts to implement institutional reform. UNOCA
has also been working to strengthen the Coalition des
organisations de la société civile d’Afrique centrale pour
la préservation de la paix, la prévention des conflits, la
resolution et la transformation des crises (COPAC).
We look forward to hearing Ambassador Gilberto
Da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the ECCAS
Commission, and Ms. Jeanne-Danielle Nicole Nlate,
Vice-President of COPAC, at this morning’s meeting.
I welcomed Ambassador Da Piedade Veríssimo’s
participation at the meeting of the Heads of United
Nations presences in Central Africa earlier this year.
UNOCA will continue to mobilize and coordinate
United Nations system-wide support for building the
capacity of ECCAS.
The central Africa region continues to face
persistent security challenges that are best addressed
through regional cooperation. Last week, I briefed
the Council (see S/PV.9051) on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I remain concerned
about the activity of all armed groups in the eastern

S/PV.9058

part of the country, in particular the heinous attacks
against civilians carried out by the Allied Democratic
Forces and the Coalition des démocrates congolais and
attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars against Congolese
security forces and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Those attacks are exacerbating humanitarian
crises, harming bilateral relations at different levels
and contributing to the spread of hate speech. In that
regard, we welcomed the timely mediation role of
President João Lourenço of Angola.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call on all armed
groups to disarm and join the political process of the
Nairobi Conclave. I also encourage all countries of the
region to take steps conducive to peace and to maintain
dialogue with a view to avoiding any further escalation
of tensions.
Central Africa remains one of the regions in the
world that is most severely affected by climate change,
which continues to compound peace and security
challenges in the subregion, as manifested by the
intensifying clashes between farmers and herders
in Chad and among farming, fishing and herding
communities in Cameroon.
UNOCA, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Climate Security Mechanism, is preparing
a report on the negative impact of climate change
on peace and security in Central Africa, based on
several months of research and field visits, as well
as consultations with United Nations and non-United
Nations partners, in collaboration with ECCAS. It will
provide recommendations to regional stakeholders on
how to better prevent, mitigate and manage the security
risks linked to climate change, under the leadership
of ECAAS.
In the Lake Chad basin, Boko Haram-affiliated and
splinter groups, including the so-called Islamic State
West Africa Province, continue to prey on civilian
populations. Intensified air and ground operations by
Nigerian and regional military forces have reportedly
killed hundreds of terrorist fighters.
At the same time, thousands of former associates of
Boko Haram-affiliated and splinter groups have been
surrendering to authorities in Nigeria and Cameroon,
where they are undergoing a screening process.
UNOCA continues to work with the Governments of
the region, the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and other United Nations

22-375333/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

entities to support the implementation of the Regional
Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of the Lake Chad
Basin Region.
UNOCA and UNOWAS also continued their highlevel advocacy with Member States of the Lake Chad
basin to increase coherence in their responses to violent
extremism and provide technical support for DDR. The
two Offices jointly advocate for increased synergies
between the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin Regional Strategy.
In the Gulf of Guinea, piracy incidents have
decreased as a result of the commendable efforts of the
authorities in the region. At the same time, maritime
security remains a key challenge, and it will be crucial
that initiatives to address it be further intensified going
forward. I therefore welcome the adoption of resolution
2634 (2022) of 31 May. Pursuant to the resolution,
UNOCA and UNOWAS will continue to report on and
support States and subregional organizations in their
efforts to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea.
Those security challenges were among the
challenges discussed at the ministerial level at the fiftythird meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa
(UNSAC), which was held last week. The Ministers and
Heads of delegation exchanged views on the situation in
Chad and adopted the Yaoundé declaration, renewing
their support for the transition process in that country.
They also discussed the situation in the Central
African Republic and adopted a second declaration
reaffirming their support for the Government’s peace,
national reconciliation and reconstruction efforts.
Furthermore, UNSAC Member States adopted a third
declaration marking the thirtieth anniversary of UNSAC
and reaffirming the importance of the Committee in
promoting peace and security in Central Africa.
I would like to thank the Government of Cameroon
for hosting the meeting and commemorating the
thirtieth anniversary of that important Committee,
which has over the years been a forum for cooperation
among Member States in the region.
Within the Committee, the countries of the region
have agreed on important mechanisms, such as the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa,
the Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
4/23

08/06/2022

Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly, also known as the Kinshasa
Convention, and the regional strategy on counterterrorism and the non-proliferation of small arms and
light weapons. UNOCA will continue to work with
UNSAC Member States to ensure complementarity
between the work of the Committee and that of the
ECCAS Commission.
The women and peace and security agenda remains
a key priority for the subregion and UNOCA, which
continues to support the preparation and implementation
of national action plans based on resolution 1325
(2000) across the region. In Angola, Chad, the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe,
the United Nations system provides support for capacitybuilding, consultations and public initiatives by civil
society focused on women’s participation in mediation,
peacebuilding, political dialogue and elections.
In the case of Chad, the United Nations provides
support for the transition process. Collaboration
between UNOCA and UN-Women has also led to a
dialogue with the Peacebuilding Fund on opportunities
to fund a multiyear regional programme that would
help operationalize and strengthen the implementation
of the agenda.
UNOCA has continued to demonstrate the utility
of a regional office as a key mechanism for preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
We look forward to the continued support of the Office
for the subregion in addressing its peace and security
challenges under a new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo.
Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by apologizing for some technical
difficulties. Fortunately, thanks to our good cooperation
with the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), I was able to move to the UNOCA
headquarters here in Libreville.
It is an honour and a great responsibility to address
the Security Council in order to outline a general view
of the current security and political situation in the
Central African region from the perspective of our
regional organization. I would like first like to thank
the Security Council for the invitation to address this
meeting and to offer my sincere congratulations to you,
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

Madam President, on your country’s assumption of the
rotating presidency of the Council. It brings with it not
only prestige but a great deal of responsibility, thanks
to the Council’s role in maintaining collective peace
and security. I wish you every success in the fulfilment
of your beautiful and noble mission. I would also like
to take this opportunity to greet all the other members
of the Security Council, including one State member
of our Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), as well as the senior officials of the Secretariat
who are doing us the honour of listening today.
As President of the ECCAS Commission of the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
body that emerged from the institutional reform of our
regional organization following the entry into force of
its revised treaty, I am delighted to see the Security
Council taking an interest in our analyses, insights and
perspectives on issues of political governance, peace
and security and stability, not only within our States
members but also in their relations with one other. I
would like to take this opportunity to underline the
Commission’s readiness to cooperate with the Security
Council in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. While the political and security
situation in our region of Central Africa is generally
stable, it is also true that the region continues to face
numerous threats to peace, security and stability. The
elements in the positive developments we are seeing are
essentially the following.
First, there has been an improvement of the
security situation on Rwanda’s borders with Uganda
and Burundi and the diplomatic relations between them
and Rwanda.
Secondly, confidence-building measures between
Gabon and Cameroon have been strengthened. That
progress was reflected in the holding of their first
permanent joint commission on cross-border security
and the second session of an ad hoc border commission
from 24 to 27 May in Yaoundé.
Similarly, the commitment to ensuring security at
their shared borders brought together the authorities
of Angola and the Republic of the Congo from 11 to
14 May in Pointe-Noire, in Congo, for a fifth technical
meeting on the verification of their maritime border.
It should also be noted that no major incidents
have occurred on the borders between the majority
of ECCAS member States. There is no doubt that
such developments demonstrate the will to prevent

S/PV.9058

conflicts and to responsibly and definitively manage
issues that may emerge on shared borders. However,
they also reflect the efforts of the people of Central
Africa to strengthen the sense of belonging to a single
community, in which borders would no longer be
viewed as lines of separation but instead as bridges that
unite populations, ethnic groups and cultures that were
forced apart by colonization.
That statement cannot in any way deny recent
events, which represent one of the greatest threats to
regional security in Central Africa along national
borders. In that regard, the Commission deplores
and deeply laments the deterioration of the security
situation on the border between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, which followed
attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars — a rebel
movement that was defeated in 2013 — on the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
and the forces of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Those attacks have led to new population
displacement flows and heightened diplomatic tensions
between those two member States of our Community.
Both countries accuse each other of having links with
and providing support to the rebel groups that pose a
threat to their security.
The ECCAS Commission welcomes the fact that
the Security Council was seized of the situation on
3 June and that it condemned all the armed groups
operating in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and implored them to participate in the dialogue led
by His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta in the
framework of the Nairobi process. I would like to stress
that a number of initiatives are under way in Central
Africa aimed at reducing tensions and encouraging both
States to engage in talks to find a permanent solution
to the scourge of armed groups on their respective
shared borders.
I have just returned from Rwanda, where I
discussed the situation with His Excellency Mr. João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the Republic
of Angola and current head of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region. That followed
the meeting I held in Kinshasa last week with His
Excellency Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo,
President of Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In addition to the security threat I just mentioned,
one of the many other threats is the ongoing
mobilization of other rebel armed groups and negative

22-375335/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Their
actions have led to mass population displacements,
damage to infrastructure that was already weak and the
development of a war economy, which prevents genuine
development from taking place. The destabilizing
consequences of the actions of those armed groups
have led the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to declare a state of siege in the region and
to set up joint actions with Ugandan armed forces in
an attempt to suppress the disruptive capacity of those
armed groups.
It should be underscored that they remain active in
other areas of our region, in particular in one part of the
territory of the Central African Republic, where they
carry out abuses against civilians despite the signing
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, the announcement of
a unilateral ceasefire by His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera on 16 October 2021 and the holding
of the Central African dialogue from 21 to 27 March
this year. The rebels are also in Cameroon, operating
under the cover of secessionist demands in the NorthWest and South-West regions.
In our region, Central Africa, terrorism is no longer
confined to the Sahel-Saharan area. The actions of
two rival factions of Boko Haram and the expansion
of terrorist groups, such as the Allied Democratic
Forces and Madina at Tauheed Wau Mujahedeen in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, show that
our region is seriously affected by terrorism. We must
do our utmost to prevent such groups from becoming
entrenched in countries of the region.
Concerning respect for human rights, it must be
acknowledged that we have strengthened awareness
of the need to build the rule of law in the region. The
Constitutions of all States of the region have ensured
that democratic governance and institutions that
promote and protect human rights are now part of the
institutional landscape of the countries in the region.
However, that development has not put a stop to
human rights violations. The most severe human rights
violations are those committed by armed groups, which
are often guilty of summary violations.
Intercommunal violence has also re-emerged in
our region. Humanitarian crises and transhumance
for criminal purposes persist, thereby demonstrating
the ever-increasing collusion between transhumance
communities and criminal networks in at least three
6/23

08/06/2022

countries of the region — Chad, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Piracy, which was the subject of a Security Council
meeting (see S/PV.9050) held on 31 May at the initiative
of Ghana and Norway, remains a threat in our region,
in particular in the Gulf of Guinea, as no significant
decrease in the number of incidents has been recorded.
Although piracy may be a cause of insecurity at
sea, it must be acknowledged that it is above all a
symptom — behind piracy several issues are concealed.
For the Council’s information, on the sidelines of the
upcoming Summit of Heads of State and Government
to be held in Kinshasa in July, ECCAS will organize a
maritime conference on the theme “Sea, security and
development”. The issue of combating piracy on the
high seas and in other maritime areas of the region, as
well as that of the governance of the region’s maritime
areas and the development of the blue economy, will be
addressed at the conference and broadly discussed.
With regard to the issue of human security and its
links to peace and the security and stability of States,
there have been some encouraging developments. I
would like to mention a few salient points in relation to
internal political governance.
All the members of our region except one have signed
the protocol of the African Peer Review Mechanism.
The region is preparing to establish a programme
focused on deepening democratic governance through
greater commitment from member States. Despite the
economic and social constraints and consequences
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
States of the region have respected the election dates
set in 2021 and our Community is ready to observe
the elections. That is a clear sign of the collective
ownership of our shared values and the entrenchment of
democracy in the region. That trend continues, and will
be strengthened with the electoral processes planned
for this year, 2022, and 2023. Elections are scheduled
in Angola, Congo and Sao Tome and Principe in 2022,
and in Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2023. The latter are already
preparing. The Commission has started conducting
missions to the countries holding elections in 2022 to
ensure that the processes are well under way.
In relation to those electoral processes, we should
already welcome some initiatives, in particular the
updating of the electoral register in Angola ahead of the
general elections scheduled for August. A major new
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

development is the opening up of voting to Angolans
living abroad by registering them on the electoral roll.
The holding of a political consultation in Owando,
Congo, in March, with a view to building consensus
on strengthening electoral governance for the July
elections, is also encouraging. The publication of
the road map for holding elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2023 by its Independent
National Electoral Commission is welcome, too.
However, in terms of political governance, it is
also worth noting the holding of the national dialogue
in the Central African Republic last March and the
establishment of a contact and coordination group,
comprising senior officials from Burundi, Uganda,
Tanzania, Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, supported by the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region and the three guarantor institutions,
the Southern African Development Community, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the African Union (AU), tasked with drawing up
an action plan that includes measures to support the
military operations that an operational unit will be
responsible for implementing.
In addition to those political events and activities,
which may help to ease tensions on the political front,
one cannot help but focus on other actions that have
the potential to lead to mistrust among political actors,
thereby triggering crises and conflicts. In that regard, I
would like to mention the postponement of the Chadian
inclusive national dialogue to a later date, which will
effectively prolong the political transition period. The
planned electoral processes, namely, the constitutional
referendum and the presidential, legislative and local
elections, will most likely also be delayed. Although
we should not succumb to the temptation to adopt dates
or trivialize their importance, the concern must be to
create the conditions for the participation of all political
groups in rebuilding the State in the Republic of Chad.
Another concern is the start of discussions in the
political class on amending the Constitution, particularly
article 35, on the number of presidential terms in the
Central African Republic. That move by part of the
Central African political class may exacerbate political
tensions in the country. The polarization caused by this
debate in a country like the Central African Republic,
where peace is fragile, should be very closely watched.
This is the message that the ECCAS Commission,
through me, felt it had to highlight to the Security

S/PV.9058

Council concerning the current security and political
situation in the Central African region. Those
challenges are clearly the primary responsibility of the
region and of its own AU Peace and Security Council,
but, at the same time, they transcend them. By affecting
the Central African States and the region, in one way
or another such challenges affect the collective security
for which the Security Council is responsible under the
Charter of the United Nations, adopted in San Francisco
in 1945.
In conclusion, allow me to take this opportunity
to express the readiness of the ECCAS Commission
to collaborate in good faith, responsibly, productively
and effectively with the Security Council, in the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, to ensure security and
peace, which are prerequisites for the protection of
human dignity and the development of peoples.
The President: I thank Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nlate.
Ms. Nlate: (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Steering Committee of the Coalition des organisations de
la société civile d’Afrique centrale pour la préservation
de la paix, la prévention des conflits, la resolution et la
transformation des crises (COPAC), I have the honour
to brief the Council on the regional context, the human
rights situation and the situation pertaining to the
implementation in Central Africa of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security.
At the outset, and because it is the first time that
our organization has had the honour of addressing the
members of the Council, I would like to provide a short
summary of the work of COPAC. Who are we? Our
organization was established on 10 October 2019. It has
five principal networks and platforms in Central Africa,
which have existed for more than 15 years. Each has at
least 500 members and the largest has approximately
1,200. The establishment of COPAC solved the problem
of the lack of leadership at the subregional level, which
undermined the possibility of relevant interactions
between civil society and the decision-making bodies
in the region and across the continent.
Turning to the security situation, according to
a study conducted by the African Union Peace and
Security Council in June 2020, the peace and security
landscape in Central Africa is both heterogeneous and
complex. It reflects the ever-evolving social, economic
and political dynamics of its various communities, as

22-375337/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

well as the numerous factors that shape the nature,
trajectory, scope, intensity and duration of conflicts
across the continent. Those factors include such
underlying causes as the triple threat represented
by a lack of governance, respect for human rights
and democracy that fuels political conflict, through,
for example, electoral violence; conflicts between
arable and livestock farmers; the illicit or unequal
exploitation of resources to which populations lay
claim; and conflicts with religious undertones. Their
major consequences are the conflicts we see across
Central Africa; instability in regional forums, with low
levels of regional integration and cooperation; weak
State institutions and at times corruption that is deeply
entrenched in all customs and practices; the oppression
of the poor and disenfranchised; and insecurity and
instability, which are also exacerbated by instability
within States with adverse effects, especially on women
and minorities.
We will also address the plight of young people, who
are making demands and organizing protests. If we map
recent conflicts or old conflicts that have re-emerged,
we can see that they are concentrated in the Great Lakes
region and around Lake Chad and the Gulf of Guinea,
affecting a number of countries, particularly Burundi,
Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Chad. In some cases, those conflicts lead to problems
with neighbouring countries accused of fuelling the
tensions, as is the case with the conflict between
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
addition to conflict situations, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated vulnerabilities
and fragilities among the peoples of Central Africa,
where civil society’s low level of engagement and
exclusion from health-crisis management programmes
did not help to prevent the spread of the pandemic.
Nonetheless, international organizations now
acknowledge civil society as an important agent in
promoting peace, respect for human rights, an awareness
of gender-based violence and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Civil society plays an important
role in advocacy, monitoring and evaluation with a
view to creating an environment conducive to more
effective policymaking and equitable and sustainable
inclusive growth.
I will keep our remarks on the human rights
situation fairly brief in view of the previous speaker’s
statement. In the current volatile security and health
environment, COPAC is particularly concerned about
8/23

08/06/2022

the human rights situation in Central Africa. According
to a study conducted on 20 September 2021 on genderrelated human rights violations and threats to security
in Central Africa, commissioned by the West African
Network for Peacebuilding together with COPAC, some
populations in the subregion are either suffering or in
extreme distress, and yet the leaders of their various
countries solemnly declare that their primary concern
is the happiness of their peoples.
The report evaluates the relationship between the
leaders and peoples and draws the following main
conclusions. There are serious human rights violations
occurring in the countries of the subregion and at their
borders, and it is women who are worst affected by them.
The study participants said that 56 per cent of the people
most affected by human rights violations are women,
and I can confirm that. That also confirms information
in country reports on the status of their implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), which clearly reflects the
reasons for women’s insistent calls to be considered
as equal partners in the work of decision-making with
regard to preventing and responding to human rights
violations. The rights most often violated are the right
to life, to a fair trial and to freedom of opinion and
expression, which shows that the people of the subregion
are more concerned about seeing their strategic needs
met than their practical needs and demonstrates their
aspirations for greater consideration and for respect for
their dignity and their desire for justice.
However, we commend and congratulate the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), which, during the sixteenth ordinary session
of its Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held
on 23 November 2014 in N’Djamena, issued a statement
that on the one hand committed its member States to
considering civil-society organizations as fully fledged
stakeholders in the area of peace and security, and on
the other instructed the ECCAS General Secretariat
to draft a formal cooperation framework with civilsociety organizations and increase measures to combat
violence against women in armed conflict.
We very much welcomed the efforts and support
of ECCAS and its partners, including United
Nations entities, in particular the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
the United Nations Development Programme, for the
establishment and operationalization of COPAC, as
well as its capacity-building.
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

S/PV.9058

We also welcome the support from ECCAS and its
partners, thanks to which the countries of the region
are currently equipping themselves with the second
generation of national action plans on women and peace
and security. There is visible progress, which is reflected
in the changes to national laws that we see in some
countries. However, the problems of dissemination and
implementation on the ground, which we are capable of
overcoming, remain.

which are known to be very restricted in terms of
civic space, where one cannot express oneself freely.
However, we started to work with the authorities and
to raise awareness among civil society organizations
and put them in touch with the authorities. Some are
positive about that, and we continue our work.

We welcome and commend the partnership between
UNOCA and ECCAS, in particular the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. François Louncény Fall, which
has enabled COPAC to become a representative
organization of Central African civil society, with
a regional secretariat, equipped since 2020 with
substantial material — computer and all other kinds of
equipment — sophisticated equipment, I must say — for
data collection, as well as to combat COVID-19. That
has served us well.

We believe that, with frank collaboration with civil
society, Governments will find solutions to most of the
problems that arise from violence.

I must outline civil society actions, since we are
active on the ground, as I said. Civil society carries
out field activities in election observation; capacitybuilding of the smallest associations; protecting
vulnerable people and defending the rights of victims
of violence, including armed violence, particularly
involving women and young people; awarenessraising to support peace at the borders and in conflict
zones; support for refugees and persons internally
displaced from conflicts — internal or displaced
from neighbouring countries in the ECCAS region;
advocating for the free movement of people and goods
in Central Africa, which raises a serious issue of
violence; combating terrorism, violent extremism and
the dissemination of hate messages on social networks
through awareness-raising campaigns and training and
information workshops; training women and young
people in income-generating activities to promote
entrepreneurship in order to combat economic violence,
because that is widespread; educating young people
about citizenship through educational talks; awarenessraising among young people about the harmful effects
of drugs, narcotics and all forms of violence in schools;
and awareness-raising to combat the COVID-19
pandemic, which we have undertaken with the support
of various institutions and international organizations.
We started campaigns on civic space in four
countries, namely, Cameroon, Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic,

We are involved in continuous advocacy. Early
warning, mediation and negotiation are also among our
skills and actions. The list is by no means complete.

Moving on to COPAC’s challenges and expectations
and the major challenges for civil society organizations
in Central Africa, in general, and for COPAC, in
particular, despite the progress made, civil society
in Central Africa continues to face challenges that
prevent it from fully playing its role. Those clearly
include a lack of financial resources, leading to a lack
of management capacity, communication, visibility
and service provision. Today we are therefore grateful
to the Security Council for having invited us and
for affording us this platform. Other challenges
include poor institutional capacities and the lack
of professionalism in institutional activities; the
unfavourable environment for the functioning and
development of civil society organizations due to the
closed, restricted or, sometimes, extremely repressed
civic space; the mistrust of Governments towards
civil society organizations, which are often seen as
opposition organizations; and a lack of inclusiveness,
as civil society organizations have little, or hardly any,
involvement in consultations on, and the monitoring
and evaluation of, development policies and projects.
The expectations of COPAC are simple. In order to
promote the Security Council resolution on women and
peace and security in Central Africa and to contribute
to the new dynamic of an ECCAS of the peoples
that we want, which leaves no one behind and which
collaborates with its partners in order to restore peace
to the subregion, COPAC seeks the political, material
and financial support of the United Nations and its
partners to facilitate its work, in particular with regard
to further involving regional civil society, represented
by COPAC, in awareness-raising and dissemination
regarding the Sustainable Development Goals and
the principles of good governance and inclusion for
greater ownership by populations and decision-makers;
supporting mutually supportive gender-sensitive early-

22-375339/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

warning work between Governments and civil society
in order to take concrete action to consolidate peace,
establish security and stabilize the subregion in general
and prevent conflicts; strengthening the capacity of
COPAC and its member organizations to make them more
effective and professional; creating multi-stakeholder
platforms, both virtual and physical, for the sharing
of best practices to facilitate dialogue, mediation and
conflict resolution; and, lastly, supporting COPAC and
civil society organizations in Central Africa to better
contribute to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, particularly
so as to address the challenges of the shrinking regional
civic space and all forms of violence against women
and vulnerable groups, including armed violence.
The President: I thank Ms. Nlate for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking all our briefers for their valuable contributions
this morning. I also welcome the written contribution
from the Peacebuilding Commission, which has an
important role to play in the region. I would like to
express the United Kingdom’s appreciation to former
Special Representative Fall for his dedicated service
over the past five years.
Central Africa today faces significant political,
economic, humanitarian and security challenges. I
want to make four key points in response to what we
have heard so far.
First, the ongoing crisis in the North-West and
South-West regions of Cameroon requires urgent
attention. Over the past five years, the United Kingdom
has given $25 million in humanitarian aid to support
those profoundly affected by the crisis. The United
Kingdom calls on all parties to enable safe access to
schools and humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, inclusive, peaceful and credible political
processes are critical for building and sustaining
peace in the subregion. The United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and its partners
have an important role to play in supporting those
processes, but it is up to Member States to draw on that
support and deliver democratic elections and inclusive
transitional processes.
In that respect, the United Kingdom reiterates its
support for Chad as it undergoes its transition to civilian
10/23

08/06/2022

and constitutional rule. While the pre-dialogue between
the transitional authorities and political-military groups
is welcome, a date should be set as soon as possible
for an inclusive national dialogue to progress Chad’s
transitional road map.
Thirdly, I want to reiterate our concern over the
ongoing violence in the Central African Republic,
including the documented human rights abuses
committed by Wagner Group mercenaries. That
violence continues to compound an already acute
humanitarian situation. The activities of all security
actors operating in the country should be coordinated
by the Government of the Central African Republic
and held to international human rights standards. We
welcome the republican dialogue between stakeholders
in March and encourage further progress in that regard.
Fourthly, the United Kingdom welcomes UNOCA’s
implementation of climate security projects in Central
Africa. Meeting the challenges posed by water
shortages, floods and threats to the Congo basin forest
requires a joint effort to accelerate progress. It is critical
that UNOCA’s work on climate security in the region
continue and that the Security Council support efforts
to mitigate the challenges posed by climate change.
Finally, Russia’s illegal and unjustified war in
Ukraine is exacerbating economic pressures and food
insecurity in Central Africa and beyond. The United
Kingdom calls on Russia to end the violence and enable
safe exports of Ukrainian wheat to help address food
and energy crises across the African continent.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Ghana, Kenya and my
own country, Gabon (A3).
We pay a warm tribute to Mr. François Louncény
Fall, who has reached the end of his mandate as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We commend
him for the work he has accomplished over the past
five years as the Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). We thank him for
his dedication and commitment in working with all the
countries of the region, political actors, civil society
and other partners to strengthen cooperation among the
countries of Central Africa and with the United Nations
for a peaceful region.
We thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa in the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and Peace Operations, Ms. Martha Pobee, and
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of Central African States, Mr. Gilberto
Da Piedade Veríssimo, for their briefings. We also
welcome the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory on
this meeting.
(spoke in French)
Our statement will focus on the political, security
and humanitarian situation in the region.
At the political level, the A3 welcomes the measures
taken by several States in the subregion to prepare
for the elections to be held in 2022 and 2023. Those
elections represent an opportunity for the Central
African region to consolidate its democratic gains.
We welcome the smooth conduct of those preparations
and encourage the authorities to continue taking
all necessary measures to organize free, credible,
transparent and inclusive elections.
We recognize the active participation of women
and young people in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding efforts and call for
their greater involvement in the ongoing electoral
processes. Similarly, in countries experiencing crises
and tensions, the A3 encourages the organization of
inclusive national dialogues involving all stakeholders.
A successful national dialogue can make a significant
contribution to reducing social and political tensions
and providing solutions that align with the expectations
of the people.
In that regard, we welcome Chad’s organization of
the pre-dialogue held in Doha and hope that platform
for discussion will pave the way for an inclusive peace
agreement. The envisaged agreement should include
a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme for the armed groups present in Chad, as
well as for combatants returning from neighbouring
countries, in particular from Libya. We call for the
full implementation of all recommendations emanating
from those forums for dialogue. In that connection, we
note with satisfaction the actions of the Government of
Cameroon, which have led to the adoption of measures
to consolidate the decentralization process and
strengthen the capacities of local institutions.
The A3 welcomes the strengthening of relations
between the Member States of the region and
encourages the positive dynamic represented by
continuous dialogue, enhanced cooperation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. In that regard, the
diplomatic agreements between Burundi and Rwanda

S/PV.9058

aimed at improving their bilateral relations and
strengthening cooperation are most welcome. The
lifting of the financial and budgetary sanctions imposed
by the European Union on Burundi also reflects the
significant progress made in the country and the region
in recent years.
The A3 welcomes the ongoing process in Nairobi
to address the insecurity that has been caused by armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
for decades. We reiterate our call to all those groups to
unconditionally lay down their arms and participate in
the inter-Congolese consultations.
The A3 are concerned about the emergence of
tensions between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda. We reiterate the African Union’s
call for the resolution of disputes through diplomatic
means, with the support of regional and subregional
mechanisms. We also welcome Angola’s mediation in
that regard.
The A3 stresses the importance of strengthening
cooperation among the Governments of the region
and with regional, subregional and international
organizations, which is essential to improve coordination
and create synergies with international partners.
In view of the challenges facing Africa, we
encourage the joint efforts by UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to improve
their coordination in addressing cross-cutting issues,
including maritime security and the fight against
terrorism and organized crime.
We also welcome the close cooperation between
UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). In that connection, ECCAS
members hope that the Security Council will reach
a consensus on the rapid adoption of a presidential
statement, which will ensure the Council’s effective
support for the UNOCA mandate.
With regard to security, the region faces complex
and multidimensional challenges that must be
addressed, including terrorism and violent extremism;
cross-border crime; the persistence of armed groups,
such as the Lord’s Resistance Army and Boko Haram;
maritime insecurity; the illicit exploitation of natural
resources; and intercommunal clashes, all exacerbated
by the growing effects of climate change.
In view of those challenges, Central African
States have proceeded to strengthen the ECCAS peace

22-3753311/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

and security architecture and measures to promote
structural conflict prevention. Those efforts are all the
more important as they have lowered the risk of crises
flaring up in the subregion.
The A3 welcomes the reduction in acts of
maritime piracy, as well as the decision taken at the
ECCAS Summit of Heads of State and Government
on 19 January to organize the first Central African
maritime conference. In that regard, we congratulate
the Council on its successful adoption of the resolution
on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea (resolution
2634 (2022)).
While the African Union Emergency Summit on
Combating Terrorism and Unconstitutional Changes
in Africa just ended, the terrorist threat continues to
affect certain countries in the Central African region.
Indeed, despite States’ consolidated security measures,
the tenacity of terrorist groups such as Da’esh, Boko
Haram and the Allied Democratic Forces continues
to have a negative impact on the lives of populations
and to undermine the economic development of the
countries in the region. We commend the determination
of Cameroon, Chad and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to combat those terrorist groups and
congratulate those countries on the voluntary surrender
of 6,000 former combatants in recent months, primarily
associated with Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin.
The A3 calls for concerted efforts by the
international community to address the root causes of
that scourge in the countries of the region. It is time
to make the fight against terrorism multidimensional.
We welcome the decision adopted at the most recent
Extraordinary Summit of the African Union to
reactivate the Subcommittee on Counter-Terrorism of
the Peace and Security Council.
The A3 condemns in the strongest terms the
continued attacks against civilian populations, United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers. In
particular, we condemn the use of explosive devices
and attacks against schools and hospitals by armed
groups and terrorist groups in the Lake Chad basin and
Congo basin regions. Those groups must immediately
cease their attacks.
We commend the ongoing efforts of humanitarian
actors to provide assistance to the most vulnerable
persons, in security situations that are sometimes
precarious. We echo the call by the Secretary-General
12/23

08/06/2022

on international partners to continue their efforts to
fund the humanitarian response plans of the region.
The A3 underscores that climate change is an
aggravating factor in the humanitarian crisis faced
by the countries of the Central African region and is
adding to the erosion of peace and security. We recall
that the world critically relies on the Congo basin
rainforest as one of the last remaining net sinks of
carbon in the world, which is why there is an urgent
need to preserve it.
We all know that global warming, drought,
desertification and natural disasters resulting from
weather events, combined with sea-level rise, flooding
and other related phenomena, are pushing millions of
people into extreme poverty. Such climate phenomena,
which are occurring with increasing frequency in
Central Africa, are negatively affecting agricultural
production in particular.
It is therefore imperative that the international
community honour its commitments to finance
adaptation and mitigation policies. We support the
efforts of the relevant United Nations bodies, in
particular UNOCA, to systematically integrate the
dimensions of climate change and natural resource
management into conflict prevention, mediation,
peacebuilding and development processes.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates its support for the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa team
and looks forward to the timely appointment of a new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): It is a pleasure to see you, Madam
President, presiding over our work. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee, the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States, Mr. Gilberto Da Piedade Veríssimo,
and the representative of civil society in Central Africa
for their briefings.
Mexico acknowledges the progress made in regional
governance and political dialogue in several Central
African countries. At the same time, we note that the
outbreaks of violence, the fragile and weak economic
recovery and the effects of climate change in the region
continue to require the solidarity of the international
community. In that regard, my country reiterates its
support for the work in preventive diplomacy that is
being carried out by the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

Concerning situations that warrant particular
attention, Mexico calls on the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa to continue supporting
the transition in Chad towards a timely return to
constitutional order. The region’s support is critical
for all Chadian political actors, including those of the
opposition, to commit to the successful implementation
of the transition road map. The good offices of the
Regional Office for Central Africa must also be
directed at finding a political solution to the violence
prevailing in the North-West and South-West regions
of Cameroon.
With regard to the Central African Republic, the
Regional Office for Central Africa must also continue
to support the implementation of the Luanda road map.
In that regard, we welcome the results of the republican
dialogue in the Central African Republic and call on
the international community to support the holding of
municipal elections. In addition, Mexico congratulates
the authorities of the Central African Republic on the
abolition of the death penalty last month, which is a
cause that Mexico has supported for many years.
In those and other hotspots of conflict in the region,
it is imperative that United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa coordinate its efforts with those of the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. In order to move towards stability
in Central Africa, Mexico believes that it is necessary
to address three major issues.
First, it is important to accord particular attention
to combating illicit arms trafficking to and within the
region, which is a subject of particular urgency for
Mexico that we reiterate in almost every statement
we make. We also reiterate that the implementation of
the Kinshasa Convention is critical for stopping the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which
continues to fuel conflicts in Central Africa.
We therefore welcome the follow-up to the
establishment of national commissions for the
management of small arms and light weapons. We also
believe that, in accordance with resolution 2616 (2021),
which was sponsored by Mexico, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa can promote better
regional mechanisms for intelligence-sharing and more
effective controls in border areas.
Secondly, in order for politics to succeed where
violence and armed struggle have failed, the necessary

S/PV.9058

conditions must be met so that opposition groups can
freely express their views and participate in the public
space. Therefore, we call for protecting and prioritizing
the work of civil society and promoting the inclusion of
all voices in the political debate, particularly the voices
of women and young people.
Thirdly, the urgent humanitarian situation in Central
Africa must be addressed to stave off further tragedy.
Access to international assistance is particularly urgent
in a context that is marked by rising food prices, an
increase in the number of people displaced by violence
and the socioeconomic consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. In that regard, Mexico condemns the
attacks in the region against civilian infrastructure,
especially hospitals and schools. Similarly, my country
condemns the attacks against humanitarian personnel
reported in Cameroon and the Central African Republic.
Lastly, we believe that, in order for United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa to be able to fulfil the
tasks with which the Secretary-General has entrusted
it, it needs strong leadership. We therefore hope that
a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the region will be appointed as soon as possible.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me thank
our three briefers this morning for their informative
and useful briefings.
Let me begin by highlighting two issues that have
been raised by several of my colleagues who spoke
before me — two issues that are causing a great deal
of harm in the Central African region and exacerbating
conflict: the climate crisis and food insecurity.
The United States Government reiterates that the
climate crisis is a security crisis and a threat multiplier
that contributes to instability in various ways. Within
the scope of its mandate, we urge the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) to
consider ways to effectively assess and take into
account the impacts of the climate crisis.
We also remain concerned, as others are, about
the impacts of the food security crisis across Central
Africa. Approximately 2.2 million people in the
Central African Republic are projected to experience
high levels of acute food insecurity, classified in crisis
or worse, between April and August due to conflict,
population displacement and high food prices.
Unfortunately, people throughout Central Africa
have suffered from significant food, fertilizer and fuel

22-3753313/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

shortages, which have exacerbated by Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine. Russia’s illegal invasion has affected the
entire global food supply chain, increasing suffering
and hardship for millions of people across the globe,
but has caused particular harm in Africa. We call again
on Russia to end its war on Ukraine.
I would now like to talk about several countries in
Central Africa where people are owed greater progress
towards democratic reforms, as we heard from our
civil society speaker. The United States reaffirms
the importance of a peaceful, timely transition to a
democratically elected and civilian-led Government in
Chad. We urge the Chadian transitional Government
to signal its commitment to the political transition by
reaching a thorough and swift resolution to the political
military negotiations under way in Doha. To achieve
durable stability and prosperity in Chad, an inclusive
national dialogue should begin as soon as feasible and
pave the way for a constitutional referendum and free
and fair elections.
We share the concern of others about the continued
violence in Cameroon, including in the Far North,
North-West and South-West regions of the country. We
continue to urge all participants to end the violence.
A broader dialogue without preconditions is needed
for a peaceful and durable resolution, and the United
States supports UNOCA’s role in promoting inclusive
political dialogue in Cameroon. We strongly encourage
transparency in efforts to investigate allegations of
human rights violations and abuses.
With regard to the Central African Republic, we
note the dialogue that was held in March but urge
tangible progress towards the implementation of the
road map of the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region and the revitalization of the country’s
2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. We continue to urge
the Government of the Central African Republic and
all security actors in that country to deconflict their
operations with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, in line with existing United Nations
resolutions, and to ensure that their activities do not
harm civilians.
Turning to Boko Haram and the Islamic State West
Africa Province, we join others in condemning their
attacks against civilians. Those terrorist organizations
continue to threaten the region’s peace and
development. The displacement of millions of civilians,
14/23

08/06/2022

compounded by the drought, is a terrible situation
that requires significant humanitarian assistance. The
United States supports the regional coordination and
efforts by neighbours and the Multinational Joint Task
Force to combat the actions of those terrorist groups
and to implement holistic strategies that address the
underlying drivers of terrorism.
The United States is also concerned about the
destabilizing activities of the Kremlin-backed Wagner
Group, whose forces are reported to have committed
egregious human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law. Make no mistake: the
Wagner Group threatens the safety and security of
United Nations peacekeepers in the Central African
Republic and Mali and prevents United Nations
missions there from protecting civilians.
The ongoing reports of human rights violations
and abuses by Government security forces in Burundi
are also alarming. We call on the Government to
hold perpetrators accountable and cooperate with
international human rights mechanisms.
Finally, the victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
past and present, still deserve justice. The United States
offers a reward of up to $5 million for information that
leads to the arrest, transfer or conviction of Joseph
Kony, who is wanted for crimes against humanity by
the International Criminal Court. We urge anyone
with knowledge of Kony’s whereabouts to contact our
War Crimes Rewards Programme and help bring him
to justice.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I join others
in thanking the briefers for their briefings and written
statements. I would like to make three points.
The first relates to our support for the political
processes in Central Africa. In Chad, France recalls
its commitment to the holding of an inclusive dialogue
as soon as possible. We hope that the discussions with
political and military movements under way in Doha
will make it possible to confirm their participation in
the dialogue.
In Cameroon, we are continuing our exchanges
with the authorities and support mediation and reform
initiatives, which should result in a political resolution
to crisis in the North-West and South-West regions.
France condemns the attacks on civilians, schools,
teachers and humanitarian personnel, as well as the
increasing use of improvised explosive devices. We
welcome the Peacebuilding Fund’s investments to
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

restore trust in those regions and call for further support
for such actions.
In Burundi, we welcome the country’s strengthening
of relations with the international community and
the region. Progress has been made in protecting
human rights. Such progress must continue over the
long term. It has led the European Union to lift its
financial restrictions on Burundi. The European Union
will continue to support Burundi in the context of its
political dialogue with the country.
Secondly, we must redouble efforts to protect
civilians and support civil society. In the Lake Chad
basin, civilians continue to be victims of attacks by
the Islamic State and Boko Haram. In Cameroon,
armed groups have targeted United Nations personnel
and humanitarian personnel. France condemns those
attacks, which hamper the delivery of humanitarian aid
to people in need. Humanitarian access must be restored
as soon as possible and guaranteed in the long term.
France commends the vibrancy of civil society in
the region, as mentioned by the Vice-President of the
Coalition des organisations de la société civile d’Afrique
centrale pour la préservation de la paix, la prévention
des conflits, la résolution et la transformation des crises.
The voice of civil society must be heard, and its rights
must be protected. We commend the Network of Women
Mediators of Central Africa, which was launched by
the Economic Community of Central African States,
as well as the project entitled “Les jeunes tisserands
de la paix dans les régions transfrontalières du Gabon,
Cameroun et Tchad”, which will promote the role of
young people in the border regions of Gabon, Cameroon
and Chad.
That same spirit of inclusivity should guide the
preparations for the upcoming elections to be held in
Angola, the Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea
and Sao Tome and Principe. Elections must be held
in the right conditions and contribute to building
democracy in the region.
Lastly, regional integration must be strengthened
so as to encourage sustainable development in Central
Africa. The institutional reform of the Economic
Community of Central African States demonstrates the
deepening of cooperation in the region. We encourage
the countries of the region to extend their cooperation
efforts to issues such as climate change.
The forests of the Congo basin are increasingly
under threat, in particular from the illegal exploitation

S/PV.9058

of natural resources. That is why France and its
partners, including the countries of the Congo basin,
created the Tropical Forest Preservation Alliance. The
region can count on France’s ongoing commitment
to protecting biodiversity in protected areas and
developing sustainable value chains in forest areas.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the work
of Special Representative François Fall, whose mandate
has just ended. We call for the swift appointment
of his successor, who can count on the France’s
continued support.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), His Excellency Mr. Gilberto
Da Piedade Veríssimo, for their respective briefings. I
also thank civil society briefer Jeanne-Danielle Nlate
for her insights.
The multidimensional challenges that Central
Africa has been facing cannot be viewed in isolation.
The legacy of colonialism underpins current
instabilities, which are further exacerbated by recent
global developments. Despite that difficult situation,
Member States in the Central Africa region have
demonstrated commendable resilience. During the past
six months, their economies have shown a recovery,
and faith in the democratic process has been sustained
across the region. The regional approach adopted by
countries, in collaboration with regional organizations,
to address common challenges is showing results. We
need to recognize those positive trends. The United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
needs to support those efforts and work closely with the
countries in the region and regional organizations, in
line with its mandate.
In the coming months, Angola, Equatorial Guinea,
Sao Tome and Principe and the Congo will be holding
elections. We hope that those upcoming elections will
further deepen democracy in the region, with greater
participation by women, enhance resilience and
strengthen their resolve to address the socioeconomic
challenges. I also take this opportunity to express our
condolences on the sad demise of President Evaristo
Carvalho, former President of Sao Tome and Príncipe,
whose contribution to strengthening democracy in the
Central Africa region will be remembered in the years
to come.

22-3753315/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

The long-overdue national dialogue in the Central
Africa Republic took place a few months ago. However,
the implementation of the 2019 peace agreement
remains the key to securing peace in the country and the
region. Progress on the road map of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the holding
of local elections in the coming months will be equally
important. In Chad, the ongoing political transition
requires further momentum. We hope that the inclusive
national dialogue will be held soon. In Burundi, we
welcome the efforts to deepen the democratic space and
the proactive engagement with neighbours.
Despite those positive trends, there exist complex
political and security challenges in the region. The
international community must heed the call of the
countries of the region and support their aspirations for
peace and development. Inclusive political processes
and electoral reforms are critical to strengthening
political institutions. Similarly, capacities at the
local-administration level also require assistance. We
encourage UNOCA and ECCAS to continue to assist
the State authorities in such efforts. The humanitarian
needs of the region also need to be addressed more
purposefully by scaling up assistance.
On the security front, terrorist groups, such as the
Islamic State in West Africa Province, have continued
to expand their activities, mainly in the Lake Chad
region. Boko Haram and its splinter groups have
persisted with terror attacks. The Lord’s Resistance
Army has remained active along the borders of the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We strongly condemn terror attacks
perpetrated by those groups. We commend the efforts
of the Multinational Joint Task Force and recognize its
contribution to counter-terrorism. Maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea remains a matter of concern, and
cannot be ignored, despite the decrease in incidents
in 2022. India has been engaged with the countries
of the region on maritime matters, and we would be
glad to contribute further to their efforts to strengthen
maritime security.
The countries of the region are also affected by
the Ukraine conflict due to the shortage of food grains
and increasing oil prices. The international community
needs to do more to support the people living in
vulnerable countries. We also need to explore affordable
alternatives to the question of the free movement of
goods to the region.
16/23

08/06/2022

With regard to climate change and its impact
on the region, our position remains consistent.
We have maintained that issues of climate change
should be addressed holistically through the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
in accordance with its provisions and principles,
especially that of climate finance and adaptation, and
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We reiterate
that no artificial link should be drawn between climate
change and security-related issues without any firm
scientific basis.
In conclusion, India has cordial and friendly
bilateral relations with countries in Central Africa. In
recent years, India has further expanded its diplomatic
footprint in the region by opening resident missions in
several countries. India has so far extended development
cooperation assistance through lines of credit worth
$2 billion for projects in critical sectors, such as
agriculture, transport, power and water supply. We
have also provided assistance to fight the coronavirus
disease pandemic. In keeping with our high-level
political exchanges with the region, the Vice-President
of India, His Excellency Mr. Venkaiah Naidu, visited
Gabon last week. We will continue to engage closely
with Central Africa and be steadfast in our support for
its peace and prosperity.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank Ms. Martha Pobee,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, His Excellency
Mr. Gilberto Da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States, and Ms. Jeanne-Danielle Nlate,
Vice-President of the Coalition des organisations de la
société civile d’Afrique centrale pour la préservation de
la paix, la prévention des conflits, la resolution et la
transformation des crises, for their briefings.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. François Fall for his good offices as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa over the past five years and for his service as
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA).
Addressing the various security, economic and
humanitarian challenges in the Central Africa region
requires continued cooperation and coordination among
UNOCA and regional and subregional actors seeking to
support stability in the region, including the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the International Conference on the Great
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

Lakes Region and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission. In that context, we would like to focus
on three aspects related to the strengthening of
such cooperation.
First, with regard to security challenges, including
cross-border and regional threats, such as organized
crime, extremism, terrorism and piracy, there is a need
to follow a comprehensive approach to tackle those
threats, which undermine the stability of the region and
affect its development and economic integration. That
includes intensifying joint action between the United
Nations and regional initiatives.
Addressing such threats also requires the
international community to continue to support
countries in Central Africa in effectively countering
terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram, including those
affiliated with Da’esh, Al-Qaida and other groups.
Such support is critical, especially in countries that
are experiencing an escalation in threats associated
with those groups. The continued implementation of
the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad Basin Region for the period from 2022 to 2024 is an
important approach to supporting region-wide stability.
We also stress the need to address maritime piracy
activities in the territorial waters of the Gulf of Guinea,
which is a strategic imperative for the economy and
security of the region. We believe that the recent
Security Council resolution 2634 (2022), on maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea, is a decisive step and
an example of constructive approaches that bring
together regional and local contexts to address complex
challenges and contribute to long-term stability.
Secondly, it is critical to continue promoting an
inclusive political dialogue in non-mission settings and
to redouble efforts and coordinate with local actors in
consolidating peace, resolving tensions and preventing
or mitigating political crises. To that end, the United
Arab Emirates appreciates the good offices of UNOCA
in supporting mediation and conflict-prevention efforts
in Central Africa, including through the Office’s recent
engagement in dialogue with a number of countries
of the region. As part of those efforts, we stress the
importance of the effective and comprehensive
integration of young people and women in the political
processes to ensure their success.
Thirdly, in line with the concrete examples outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report on the consequences

S/PV.9058

of climate change in Central Africa (S/2022/436), we
underscore the importance of understanding the impacts
of, and potential solutions to, such consequences and
how to better support regional efforts. In that regard,
we believe UNOCA’s initiatives to provide a clearer
picture of the impact of climate change on the region
will contribute to finding effective solutions to respond
to the challenges related to food security and water,
build community resilience and mitigate risks related
to climate change.
Furthermore, there is a need for ongoing
international support to all affected countries in
Central Africa, particularly given the increasingly dire
humanitarian situation and the continued global food
insecurity. As the Secretary-General’s report indicates,
more than 12 million people in the region need
humanitarian assistance this year alone, in addition
to the increase in the number of internally displaced
persons, particularly in Burundi, Chad and Cameroon.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates has contributed
humanitarian and development aid to support countries
in the region and alleviate the suffering of their peoples.
Between 2016 and 2022, the United Arab Emirates
provided approximately $55 million.
In conclusion. we reaffirm our support for
UNOCA’s efforts and look forward to its continued
coordination with the relevant organizations and actors
to assist countries of the region in achieving peace,
stability and prosperity.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee,
Mr. Gilberto Da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States, and Ms. Jeanne-Danielle Nlate,
Vice-President of the Coalition des organisations de la
société civile d’Afrique centrale pour la préservation de
la paix, la prévention des conflits, la resolution et la
transformation des crises, for their informative briefings.
The Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Central Africa (S/2022/436) shows a mixed scenario,
where political advances in some countries in the
region contrast with persistent security challenges and
some worrisome trends.
The peaceful transfer of power in Sao Tome and
Príncipe, a nation close to Brazil for linguistic and
historical reasons, is a markedly positive step that
confirms the democratic stability in that country and
may serve as an example for the region. Sao Tome and

22-3753317/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

Príncipe will hold legislative elections in September,
and we expect once again to witness a peaceful and
efficient process.
Several other countries in the Central African
region, such as the Congo and Equatorial Guinea, will
hold regional elections in the coming months. Moreover,
Angola, another sister nation to Brazil, will hold
general elections in August. That is encouraging, since
functional democratic and electoral systems are the
most effective way to prevent conflict and instability.
Another positive development are the efforts of the
Government of Burundi to normalize relations with its
neighbours and with the international community. We
thank Special Representative François Louncény Fall
for supporting those efforts.
The pre-dialogue between political actors from
Chad is in itself a positive development. We expect
that that process, hosted by Qatar, may soon yield
results that allow for the convening of an inclusive
national dialogue.
The national dialogue in the Central African
Republic also allowed for necessary discussions among
the local stakeholders, even though it did not produce
the expected results. As in Chad, there too much
remains to be done in terms of political transition.
Even though Nigeria does not fall under the scope
of this meeting, Brazil cannot avoid mentioning the
horrific attack on a crowded Catholic church that took
place in the town of Owo last Sunday. That appalling
incident is a reminder of the dangers that terrorism
poses to the world and, in that case, to Africa.
As the Secretary-General’s report indicates, Central
Africa faces multidimensional and cross-border threats
to peace and security. Terrorism, including the presence
of the so-called Islamic State and Boko Haram, is a
grave threat in the Lake Chad basin. We must therefore
commend the efforts of the authorities, which made a
reduction in the activities of those groups possible in
late 2021.
The situation in Cameroon is concerning. That
country is not only directly affected by the violence
in the Lake Chad basin, but it has also been facing
protracted conflicts in its English-speaking regions.
The international community must stand ready to
provide its support to address those crises.
We believe that socioeconomic development will be
key for the evolution of the situation in Central Africa
18/23

08/06/2022

in the next few months. Just as the region seemed posed
to recover from the effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, rising food prices may plunge large numbers
of people into acute poverty. Popular discontent
may have a destabilizing effect on political systems,
which, in turn, can become vulnerable to disruption
and violence.
Brazil will continue working closely with its
African partners in South-South cooperation initiatives
to address the challenges that they face.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee and Mr. Gilberto Da Piedade Veríssimo, President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
Central African States, for their briefings. We listened
carefully to Ms. Jeanne-Danielle Nlate. We would also
like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. François Fall,
former Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, for his work.
The situation in Central Africa is characterized by
a high level of terrorist threat, ongoing conflicts and
political and social tensions. The insufficient capacity
of the armed forces of States of the region, problems
with military coordination and a lack of reliable
intelligence do not allow them to effectively resist wellorganized militant groups that use the tactic of guerrilla
war and often have the support of the locals, who have
to live side by side with the militants. The ideology of
radical Islam is gaining popularity, especially among
young people.
The Islamic State in West Africa Province and Boko
Haram pose a major threat in the Lake Chad basin. The
militants are enhancing their capabilities and continue
to attack military personnel in Nigeria, Chad, the Niger
and Cameroon and terrorize the local population.
We support the decision taken by the command of
the Multinational Joint Task Force of the Lake Chad
basin States to launch, in April this year, Operation
Lake Sanity, a large-scale operation to eliminate
terrorists from islands within the borders of the three
States — Chad, the Niger and Nigeria.
We believe that it is important to strengthen
interaction among countries of the region both
bilaterally and in various international forums,
including the United Nations. We welcome the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
in promoting peacekeeping processes and strengthening
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

security in the region, including through the tools of
preventive diplomacy.
We are concerned by the increasing number
of attacks on commercial vessels in the Gulf of
Guinea. It is crucial to employ the resources of the
international community in order to build the capacity
of coastal States to combat piracy. There is a need for
cooperation on maritime surveillance, establishing
systems for identifying and escorting vessels, as well
as early warning on potentially hazardous objects on
navigation routes.
We welcome the establishment of the Gulf of Guinea
Maritime Collaboration Forum in July last year, which
provided a new format for cooperation and coordination
on joint anti-piracy operations. We take an active part in
the work of that mechanism and stand ready to provide
assistance to our Western African partners.
In 2021, Russia made an earmarked contribution
to the United Nations Global Maritime Crime
Programme to provide technical assistance to Gabon
and Equatorial Guinea. In October 2021, a squadron
of ships from Russia’s Northern Fleet participated in a
tour of duty in the Gulf of Guinea for naval manoeuvres
aimed at combating piracy.
To conclude my main statement, I would like to
note that we categorically reject the assessments in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/436) of the
situation in Ukraine and its influence on global food
security, views that we consider highly politicized. In
that regard, we also want to comment on the far-fetched
accusations we have heard yet again today alleging that
Russia has created a global food crisis that is damaging
the economies of countries in Africa. I reiterate that
we categorically reject the way that the issue has
been framed. We have repeatedly clarified in various
international forums why the global food security
situation began to worsen long before the escalation of
the conflict in Ukraine. I ask the Council to refrain from
trying to blame Russia for socioeconomic problems
related to global development issues and challenges
such as the coronavirus pandemic. Members would also
do well to remember that the current difficulties with
food supplies are primarily a result of the introduction
of illegal unilateral restrictive measures on our country
and Belarus.
The United States recent disturbing fictions
claiming that grain that Russia has been shipping to
Africa is stolen are deeply hypocritical, and we are

S/PV.9058

glad to see that the countries of Africa do not believe
them. We have been able to discuss the true state of
affairs with regard to food supplies and other vital
issues with African representatives, including at
President Putin’s meeting with the Chairperson of
the African Union, President Macky Sall of Senegal.
In the general historical context, the real question
that arises is why countries that are so rich in human
and natural resources find themselves in this kind of
economic and security situation. The countries of the
West have curated them for decades, trying to impose
their own ideas of governance, primarily in the sphere
of financing and other resources. They have deployed
their own military missions to African lands and have
allegedly been fighting terrorism there. Yet the situation
is only getting worse. A few months ago, however, our
Western colleagues found a reason to blame someone
else. Apparently, it is Russia’s fault.
In reality we are actually helping African countries,
including the Central African Republic, to build the
combat capacity of their official armed forces. With the
permission of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic we have provided it with a number of shipments
of military supplies. Russian instructors have also
been conducting successful training at the invitation
of the official authorities. To say that the campaign to
discredit us is bewildering would be an understatement.
Russia has strictly complied with all the restrictions
that the Council has imposed regarding the Central
African Republic. And with regard to the activity
there of private military companies, we want to stress
that the choice of any partner engaged in that or any
other area is the prerogative of the national authorities,
including with regard to issues of law enforcement and
investigations of violations of international law.
Mr. McSwiney (Ireland): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and President Da Piedade
Veríssimo for their briefings. I also thank our civil
society briefer, Ms. Jeanne-Danielle Nicole Nlate.
Ireland appreciates the extensive activities being
carried out by the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) to support and improve
regional cooperation, including with the Economic
Community of Central African States and other
regional organizations.
Enhanced cooperation is essential, as the region
faces multidimensional challenges, including the
activities of armed groups, as well as cross-border

22-3753319/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

threats to peace and security, such as maritime
insecurity, farmer-herder conflicts and the adverse
impacts of climate change on security across the region.
We welcome the national dialogue in the
Central African Republic as an important forum for
sociopolitical actors and community representatives to
convene, and look forward to further progress on the
path to peace. We welcome the work of UNOCA, in
conjunction with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, to mobilize support for a return to the 2019
peace agreement and the implementation of the Luanda
road map.
In Chad, Ireland views the national dialogue
process as key to the political transition. We hope
that the pre-dialogue will prepare the ground for an
inclusive peace agreement. However, elections and
a return to constitutional governance are urgently
needed, and the security situation should not be used
as an excuse for delay. We are concerned by the lack
of meaningful participation by women’s groups in the
ongoing peace negotiations.
Ireland continues to call for the link between
climate change and security to be appropriately
recognized in the Council’s work. UNOCA’s approach
to climate and security is an example of how that link
can be given prominence.
The Council should take note of the effects of
climate change on the stability of Central Africa. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/436) shows that
we are seeing an increase in intracommunal clashes
due to water shortages, floods and drought, leading to
significant population displacement.
Ireland is pleased to note UNOCA’s implementation
of its climate and security project, building on the 2021
scoping study. That work can inform efforts at the
national, regional and international levels to address
climate and security.
We welcome the ongoing work by UNOCA to
further the women and peace and security agenda
across the region. Promoting the role of women in
governance, mediation and peacebuilding processes,
as well as engagement with women-led civil society,
is vital for peace and security in Central Africa. We
urge all Governments in the region to further integrate
that approach.
20/23

08/06/2022

We again heard about the dire humanitarian situation
facing countries across Central Africa, with significant
increases in vulnerability and the displacement of
people. Food insecurity is also increasing, exacerbated
by Russia’s war in Ukraine and the consequent global
rise in food prices.
The numbers in need of humanitarian assistance
are staggering. Within the most affected populations,
women and girls are facing higher rates of sexual and
gender-based violence.
Ireland was appalled by the recent killing of a
Médecins Sans Frontières staff member in the Central
African Republic. Attacks on those working to assist
the vulnerable, including humanitarian, health and
education personnel, must end. Ireland condemns
such attacks and calls for perpetrators of violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights to be held accountable. We
urge all parties to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance.
Finally, Ireland welcomes the steps that are being
taken in many countries in the region to strengthen their
national human rights institutions. However, much still
needs to be done. Human rights violations and abuses
against civilians in Cameroon persist, with inexcusable
attacks against schools now having deprived 700,000
students of their right to education. In Chad, too, we are
concerned at the violent repression of peaceful protests,
the decline of press freedoms and the shrinking civil
society space.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
sincere thanks to Mr. François Fall. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, he has made a
lasting contribution in support of peace and stability in
Central Africa. We appreciate all that he has done and
wish him all the best for the future.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers for
their important insights.
Last week, the Norwegian Refugee Council
published its annual list of the world’s most neglected
displacement crises. Three out of five of these
crises — those in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Cameroon and Chad — are in the region under
the purview of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), and in addition to those,
there is the ongoing crisis in the Central African
Republic. This clearly shows both the challenges, and
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

importance, of UNOCA’s work. While we know that
preventive diplomacy rarely reaches the headlines, it
can certainly avert some of the most negative headlines.
Let me briefly touch upon the three mentioned
most-neglected displacement crises, according to
the list. For the second year in a row, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo tops the list as a protection
crisis that we also addressed in our meeting last week
(see S/PV.9051). In Chad, we have taken note of the
transitional Government’s recent declaration of a food
emergency, and its call for support. In the light of the
situation, Norway has allocated about $25 million
to humanitarian efforts in the Sahel and Lake Chad
regions this year. In Cameroon, we remain concerned
about the situations in the North-West and South-West
regions of the country. We commend the exploration by
the United Nations of ways to bridge gaps between the
parties on a framework for dialogue. In all situations,
humanitarian assistance and basic social services must
be ensured without delay.
Last week, the Security Council adopted resolution
2634 (2022), the first resolution in 10 years on maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea (see S/PV.9050). Piracy
remains a grave risk to sailors and hampers trade,
exports and growth in Central and West Africa. It also
affects seafarers and shipowners in countries such as
Norway and the ability to enhance cooperation with
these regions. We see the new resolution as a strong
call to action ahead of the 10-year anniversary of the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct in 2023.
Moving forward, the region should remain in the
driver’s seat, with already commendable efforts being
scaled up. We fully support closer regional maritime
coordination between the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Economic
Community of West African States. Norway will also
continue its support through the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, including to strengthen regional
efforts aimed at establishing legal systems for the
prosecution of pirates.
The security situation around the Lake Chad basin
remains alarming due to armed groups, terrorists and
violent extremists. We are shocked by the brutal attacks
against civilians, including children, and attacks on
schools. We are also deeply concerned about attacks on
medical personnel and facilities. The use of improvised
explosive devices against civilian targets causes further
harm for populations and affects humanitarian access.
Accountability must be ensured.

S/PV.9058

Let me also highlight an underlying issue that
may not feel like the most urgent matter, but which is
silently worsening the situation: the issue of climate
and security. As one example, we note in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/436) that humanitarian
needs in Burundi are strongly linked to effects of
climate change.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Fall is stepping down, we want to thank him — and,
through him, his team as well — for all their efforts.
Some of their achievements are linked to the crucial
phases around elections. Another key contribution
includes working with a reformed ECCAS as part of
vital regional cooperation. We thank him and look
forward to the appointment of his successor.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and President Da
Piedade Veríssimo for their briefings. I also listened
attentively to the briefing by Ms. Nlate.
In connection with the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/436), I would like to make the
following three points. First, in terms of maintaining
the general situation of peace and stability, this year the
security situation in the Central African Republic has
continued to improve, with President Touadera holding
the Republican dialogue and reaching a wide range
of results. The Government of Cameroon has actively
implemented the outcomes of the national dialogue,
promoted the decentralization of the south-west
and north-west regions, supported development and
reconstruction and built a solid foundation for peace and
stability. The Chadian authorities promoted a political
transition and steadily advanced the preparations for
a national dialogue with the main parties. Angola, the
Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Sao
Tome and Principe will all hold elections in within this
year, and preparations are under way.
Maintaining peace and stability in Central Africa
will contribute to the overall security of the African
continent. The international community and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
should support countries of the region in solving their
own problems, strengthening national governance
and capacity-building in accordance with their own
actual situations, and pursuing a development path that
fits their national conditions. China firmly supports
the efforts of countries of the region with regard to
safeguarding their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The countries concerned in the region should resolve

22-3753321/23

S/PV.9058

Central African region

their differences through diplomatic and political
channels and maintain unity and stability.
Secondly, in terms of leveraging the role of regional
organizations, as the rotating Chair of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
Republic of the Congo has actively promoted regional
integration and established such collective security
mechanisms as the ECCAS Peace and Security
Council and the Panel of the Wise in order to address
non-traditional security challenges and has made
significant progress.
Countries of the region have actively carried out
counter-terrorism operations. Some fighters from Boko
Haram and other groups have laid down their arms.
Thanks to the efforts of regional maritime authorities,
maritime-security incidents in the Gulf of Guinea are
also on the decline.
At the same time, illegal armed groups, terrorism
and violent extremism are still very frequent, and
intercommunal conflicts and conflicts between
farmers and herdsmen continue, making the situation
in eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
worrying. To tackle these problems, countries of the
region need to enhance mutual trust and work together.
The international community should provide greater
financial and technical assistance to countries of the
region in their counter-terrorism efforts and support
them in formulating disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes to curb the spread
of terrorism.
Support should be given to countries of the region
to enhance capacity-building, help people overcome
poverty and underdevelopment, solve the problems of
illegal exploitation and trading of natural resources,
and eliminate the root causes of conflicts. China
attaches importance to the challenges posed by climate
change to countries of the region and hopes that the
developed countries will honour their climate-related
financing commitments and support countries of the
region in enhancing their resilience to adapting to
climate shocks.
Thirdly, in terms of making joint efforts to address
the challenges, countries of the region have actively
responded to the complex changes in the international
situation, worked to fight the pandemic and recover
their economies by showing sufficient resilience, and
the international financial institutions have provided
important financial support. Thanks to the impact
22/23

08/06/2022

of geopolitical conflicts among some major Powers,
the countries of the region continue to face multiple
challenges, such as crises related to food, energy and
other resources, and humanitarian needs are growing.
The current situation highlights the importance and
urgency of development issues more than ever. The
countries concerned, along with international financial
institutions, should implement their aid commitments,
maintain adequate humanitarian funding and ensure
that other crises do not distract their attention from the
region and the importance of investment in it.
We must continue to support countries in the
region in their response to the pandemic, provide
universal access to safe and affordable vaccines and
create conditions conducive to post-pandemic recovery
in the region. We should assist the countries of the
region in improving their investment environment
based on their national conditions and development
needs, fostering industrialization and economic
diversification, supporting digital innovation, youth
entrepreneurship and the development of small- and
medium-sized enterprises and enhancing their capacity
for independent development.
Lastly, we would like to pay tribute to Mr. Fall, the
outgoing Head of UNOCA. He has played an important
role in leading UNOCA’s work and promoting greater
cooperation between the United Nations and the
countries of the region. I hope that UNOCA will
continue to provide tailored assistance as mandated
by the Security Council, while taking into account
the real conditions in the region and the wishes of the
countries concerned.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I want to begin by thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee, Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo and Ms. Nlate
for accepting our invitation and briefing the Security
Council today. I too would like to express our thanks
to François Louncény Fall for his work. While wishing
him every success, we urge for the swift appointment
of his successor. Albania also commends the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) in supporting the countries of the region that
are preparing the ground for elections to be held next
month and next year. We hope that the electoral processes
will be credible and inclusive, with the meaningful
and active participation of women. We were pleased
to hear from Assistant Secretary-General Pobee that
the women and peace and security agenda is a priority
22-37533

08/06/2022

Central African region

for UNOCA and that the Office is working with UNWomen to strengthen it. We also commend UNOCA’s
collaboration with other regional actors, especially
the Economic Community of Central African States.
We expect that collaboration to continue and further
intensify, as we witnessed today even in facilitating the
briefing. I will now focus on a few issues pertaining to
some specific countries and themes.
First, we are pleased that relations between Burundi
and its neighbours are improving, and we welcome
the progress that has been made domestically in
safeguarding civil and political rights. The steps made
towards consolidating democracy have encouraged
international partners to lift financial and budgetary
restrictions. We have nevertheless received worrisome
reports of attacks, torture and disappearances of
political opponents allegedly attributed to lawenforcement authorities — troubling developments that
undermine the results achieved so far.
As for Cameroon, dialogue continues to be hindered
by the tensions in the North-West and South-West
regions, where political violence persists, and clashes
continue to rage between State and non-State armed
forces. We firmly condemn the attacks on civilians,
including children, as well as the targeting of United
Nations and humanitarian staff, which continues to
obstruct the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Turning to Chad, Albania welcomes the efforts
made to enhance the national dialogue that is
essential to rebuilding the constitutional order and
sustainable peace. We call on all stakeholders to engage
constructively in the pre-dialogue efforts in Doha,
which will enable the national dialogue to resume and
will pave the way for an inclusive peace agreement
that envisages the disarmament, mobilization and
reintegration of the Chadian armed groups present in
neighbouring countries.
With regard to the Central African Republic, while
the republican dialogue has seen some progress, the
security situation in the country remains highly volatile.
We commend the work of the Special Representative of

S/PV.9058

the Secretary-Genera1 in mobilizing regional support
for the implementation of the 2019 Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, including through the implementation of
the Luanda joint road map. However, we are deeply
concerned about the grave violations of human rights
and abuses perpetrated against civilians. In particular,
the Wagner Group, while hiding behind a pretext of
providing security, is using the conflict to pursue its
own gains.
I would now like to shift my focus to specific
themes. Issues of climate security are having a deep
and sizeable impact on the region’s stability. We
cannot ignore the tensions among communities and the
increasing numbers of displaced people and those in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/436)
and its recommendations, and we hope to see
them implemented.
That leads me to my last point, which is the
socioeconomic impact of both the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the war in Ukraine. The SecretaryGeneral’s reports have highlighted how those problems
have been fuelling popular frustration in the region.
In conclusion, we strongly echo the SecretaryGeneral’s deep concern about the possibility that the
socioeconomic impact of the war in Ukraine may
challenge the recovery efforts that have been made
so far. The war that Russia is waging on Ukraine has
indeed had repercussions on the purchasing power of
entire communities, owing to the increases in bread
prices recorded in the Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, which
formerly imported more than 60 per cent of their wheat
from the Russian Federation or Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-3753323/23
