United Nations

A/RES/61/229

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 March 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 62 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2006
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/61/L.23/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

61/229. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations
Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and
appraisal of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the
1990s and support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and
resolutions 58/233 of 23 December 2003, 59/254 of 23 December 2004 and 60/222
of 23 December 2005 entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1 including the recognition
of the need to meet the special needs of Africa,
Bearing in mind that African countries have primary responsibility for their
own economic and social development and that the role of national policies and
development strategies cannot be overemphasized, and also the need for their
development efforts to be supported by an enabling international economic
environment, and in this regard recalling the support given by the International
Conference on Financing for Development to the New Partnership, 2
Stressing the need to implement various commitments by the international
community regarding the economic and social development of Africa,
1.

Welcomes the fourth consolidated report of the Secretary-General; 3

2.
Reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development; 4

_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
See Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
A/61/212.
4
A/57/304, annex.
2

06-50811

A/RES/61/229

3.
Recognizes the progress made in the implementation of the New
Partnership as well as regional and international support for the New Partnership,
while acknowledging that much needs to be done in its implementation;
Reaffirms the resolve to provide assistance for prevention and care, with
4.
the aim of ensuring an AIDS-, malaria- and tuberculosis-free generation in Africa,
and of achieving as closely as possible the goal of universal access by 2010 to
HIV/AIDS treatment in African countries, to encourage pharmaceutical companies
to make drugs, including antiretroviral drugs, that are affordable and accessible in
Africa and to ensure increased bilateral and multilateral assistance, where possible
on a grant basis, to combat malaria, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases in
Africa through the strengthening of health systems;
Reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the Declaration of
5.
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted at the twenty-sixth special session of the
General Assembly on 27 June 2001, 5 and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS,
adopted by the Assembly on 2 June 2006; 6
I
Actions by African countries and organizations
6.
Welcomes the progress made by the African countries in fulfilling their
commitments in the implementation of the New Partnership to deepen democracy,
human rights, good governance and sound economic management, and encourages
African countries, with the participation of stakeholders, including civil society and
the private sector, to intensify their efforts in this regard by developing and
strengthening institutions for governance, creating an environment conducive to
involving the private sector, including small and medium-size firms, in the New
Partnership implementation process and to attracting foreign direct investment for
the development of the region;
Also welcomes the good progress that has been achieved in implementing
7.
the African Peer Review Mechanism, in particular the completion of the peer review
process in some countries, further welcomes the progress in implementing the
recommendations of those reviews, and in this regard urges African States to
consider joining the Mechanism process as soon as possible and to strengthen the
Mechanism process for its efficient performance;
Further welcomes and appreciates the continuing and increasing efforts
8.
of African countries to mainstream a gender perspective and the empowerment of
women in the implementation of the New Partnership;
Stresses that conflict prevention, management and resolution and post9.
conflict consolidation are essential for the achievement of the objectives of the New
Partnership, and welcomes in this regard the cooperation and support granted by the
United Nations and development partners to the African regional and subregional
organizations in the implementation of the New Partnership;
10. Welcomes the efforts by African countries to achieve food and nutrition
security by adopting appropriate strategies inspired by the Comprehensive Africa
Agricultural Development Programme and by debates at various summits, such as at

_______________
5
6

2

Resolution S-26/2, annex.
Resolution 60/262, annex.

A/RES/61/229

the New Partnership’s Fish for All Summit, held in Abuja from 22 to 25 August
2005, and the Africa Fertilizer Summit, endorsed by the African Union on 29 August
2005 and held from 9 to 13 June 2006, and the New Partnership’s Food Security
Summit, held in Abuja from 4 to 7 December 2006;
11. Emphasizes the importance for African countries to continue to
coordinate, on the basis of national strategies and priorities, all types of external
assistance in order to integrate effectively such assistance into their development
processes;
12. Recognizes the important role that African regional economic
communities can play in the implementation of the New Partnership, and in this
regard encourages African countries and the international community to give
regional economic communities the necessary support to strengthen their capacity;
13. Supports the ongoing efforts by the African Union to improve the
coordination between the New Partnership secretariat, the African Union
Commission, the regional economic communities and African States;
14. Encourages the establishment of national institutional mechanisms for
further domestication and integration of the priorities and objectives of the New
Partnership in national policies and programmes;
II
Response of the international community
15. Welcomes the efforts by development partners to strengthen cooperation
with the New Partnership;
16. Also welcomes the various important initiatives of Africa’s development
partners in recent years, and emphasizes in this regard the importance of
coordination in such initiatives on Africa;
17. Recognizes the important role that South-South cooperation can play in
supporting Africa’s development efforts, including implementation of the New
Partnership, and in this regard welcomes the convening of the Beijing Summit of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation on 4 and 5 November 2006 and the
Africa-Latin America Summit, held in Abuja on 30 November and 1 December
2006;
18. Welcomes the ongoing initiatives on the follow-up to the second AsiaAfrica summit, held in Jakarta on 22 and 23 April 2005, aimed at promoting greater
partnership and cooperation between Africa and other regions;
19. Urges continued support of measures to address the challenges of
poverty eradication and sustainable development in Africa including, as appropriate,
debt relief, improved market access, support for the private sector and
entrepreneurship, enhanced official development assistance and increased flows of
foreign direct investment, and transfer of technology;
20. Reiterates the need for all countries and relevant multilateral institutions
to continue efforts to enhance coherence in their trade policies towards African
countries, and acknowledges the importance of efforts to fully integrate African
countries into the international trading system through initiatives such as building
Africa’s capacity to compete and the provision of assistance to address the
adjustment challenges of trade liberalization;

3

A/RES/61/229

21. Calls for a comprehensive and sustainable solution to the external debt
problems of African countries, including cancellation or restructuring for heavily
indebted African countries not part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
that have unsustainable debt burdens, and emphasizes the importance of debt
sustainability;
22. Welcomes the recent pledges by the Group of Eight countries to double
by 2010 official development assistance to Africa, looks forward to the realization
of those pledges, and urges donors to continue to improve the quality of aid in
accordance with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness: Ownership,
Harmonization, Alignment, Results and Mutual Accountability, adopted at the Highlevel Forum on the question of “Joint Progress towards Enhanced Aid Effectiveness:
Harmonization, Alignment, Results”, held in Paris from 28 February to 2 March
2005, and to ensure that the increase in official development assistance translates
into the actual flow of financial resources to developing countries;
23. Recognizes the need for national Governments and the international
community to make continued efforts to increase the flow of new and additional
resources for financing for development from all sources, public and private,
domestic and foreign, to support the development of African countries;
24. Welcomes the efforts by development partners to align their financial and
technical support to Africa more closely to the priorities of the New Partnership, as
reflected in national poverty reduction strategies or in similar strategies, and
encourages development partners to increase their efforts in this regard;
25. Invites developed countries to promote investment by their private
sectors in Africa, to help African countries attract investments and promote policies
conducive to attracting domestic and foreign investment, such as encouraging
private financial flows and promoting and maintaining macroeconomic stability, to
encourage and facilitate the transfer of the technology needed to African countries
on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually
agreed, and to assist in strengthening human and institutional capacities for the
implementation of the New Partnership, consistent with its priorities and objectives
and with a view to furthering Africa’s development at all levels;
26. Requests the United Nations system to continue to provide assistance to
the African Union and the New Partnership secretariat and to African countries in
developing projects and programmes within the scope of the priorities of the New
Partnership;
27. Invites the Secretary-General, as a follow-up to the 2005 World Summit,
to urge the United Nations development system to assist African countries in
implementing quick-impact initiatives through, inter alia, the Millennium Villages
Project;
28. Decides to hold within existing resources a high-level meeting on
“Africa’s development needs: state of implementation of various commitments,
challenges and the way forward” during its sixty-third session, the focus and
modalities of which will be decided upon at its sixty-second session;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to promote greater coherence in the work
of the United Nations system in support of the New Partnership, on the basis of the
agreed clusters;
30. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to take measures to
strengthen the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa in order to enable it to
4

A/RES/61/229

effectively fulfil its mandate, including monitoring and reporting on progress related
to meeting the special needs of Africa;
31. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report
on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session on the basis of inputs from Governments, organizations of the
United Nations system and other stakeholders in the New Partnership, such as the
private sector and civil society.
84th plenary meeting
22 December 2006

5
