S/PV.7944

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7944th meeting

Monday, 22 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14426 (E)
*1714426*

S/PV.7944

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, to participate
in this meeting.
Mr. De Mistura is joining us via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: When I briefed the Security
Council in April (see S/PV.7921), we saw two paths
ahead — either international and internal escalation
and deeper intra-Syrian conflict, or international
dialogue, cooperation on de-escalating tensions and
moving forward on the political track, even if only in
small steps. So far, there are signs that together, we
have chosen the latter course. Our common job now is
to turn that into something more meaningful, both on
the ground and on the political track.
In the beginning of May, I attended the high-level
Astana meeting to stress that any attempt to de-escalate
violence is what the Syrians want and is indeed vital,
in and of itself, and can support Geneva, just as Geneva
mutually supports Astana. In Astana, my team provided
technical support to ceasefire guarantors — Russia,
Turkey and Iran — and I was active in political
consultations with all of them and with the Syrian
parties. Jordan and the United States were represented
as observers.
In my modest opinion, Astana produced a
promising step — a memorandum between the three
guarantors on the creation of de-escalation zones. The
reports I have received so far indicate a significant drop
in violence, including in aerial bombing in most of the
areas identified by the memorandum. United Nations
contacts on the ground have described tangible change,
clear skies and areas quickly coming back to life.
That is typical of the Syrian reality. Whenever there
is a moment of peace or at least a halt in the fighting,
2/8

22/05/2017

they take their future and their present into their
own hands. Markets have started functioning anew in
those locations. We welcome this, and the efforts of the
Astana guarantors should be praised because we want
them to succeed. I thank the Kazakh Government for
ably hosting the Astana meeting. That is the good news.
There is also not-so-good news. Despite the
nationwide ceasefire that was announced last December
and the de-escalation zones now being created to
deepen that effort, we have received reports of
ongoing hostilities and even bombardment between the
Government and armed opposition groups in areas such
as Hama, Homs and Damascus. Some of these areas
appear to be outside of the current de-escalation zones.
However, as Council members know, their precise areas
and ambit will become clear only when the guarantors
complete the extremely important so-called mapping
process. These clashes resulted in another evacuation
of armed opposition fighters and civilians from areas
of eastern Damascus city, which are called Barzeh and
Al-Qaboun. Separately, following the memorandum,
we saw some Government attacks on armed opposition
groups that are otherwise engaged in fighting Da’esh in
the desert near Homs and Al-Suwaydah.
While we have registered that the Government
of Syria has made some significant advances against
Da’esh, we also note with great concern the continued
activities of Security Council-listed terrorist groups.
We condemn in particular the attack last week by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) on civilians in
rural Salamiya, a very important and small community
that has been there for hundreds of years, and the ISIL
assault on Deir ez-Zor city, which is still ongoing
today. These incidents show that, despite losing further
territory this month, ISIL/Da’esh still has the capacity
to cause great harm.
We are also aware of the reports that the anti-ISIL
coalition has carried out strikes on an armed convouy,
which allegedly was composed of forces of the Syrian
Government and its allies in the desert east of Homs.
I am also encouraged by the recent Government of
Syria’s agreements with armed opposition groups,
which are resulting in the release of some detainees and
abducted people.
All these facts remind us that there are still important
details to clarify to ensure the full implementation
of the Astana memorandum by all parties. We should
therefore urge together the ceasefire guarantors to
17-14426

22/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7944

address those details quickly, diligently and fairly
within the time frame they themselves stipulated in
the memorandum. All relevant international actors,
specifically regional ones and the co-chairs of the
International Syria Support Group, have a particular
interest in this regard.

Council approved after the fourth round. They also had,
in the previous case, showed that the process is now
facing fewer obstacles related to possible walk-outs,
procedural objections or long statements attacking each
other or even questioning the other side’s legitimacy.
We strongly insisted on that, and we got it.

The United Nations remains ready to provide its
technical expertise. Our goal is not just de-escalation
but — at least on the military side — the realization of
the nationwide ceasefire. Therefore, in order to make
sure that the memorandum can be implemented fully,
we have a common interest in ensuring that no party
to the conflict takes advantage of any ambiguity on the
ground or in the memorandum.

I do not deny that there are, of course, still major
gaps between the parties, but we have also seen a
deepening of the process across the baskets and a greater
understanding of what is required if the parties are to
succeed in negotiating a framework for a transitional
political agreement that safeguards the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and independence of Syria,
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), adopted by all
Council members.

We urge all the parties, the Astana guarantors and
those who have an influence on the parties to take steps
to ensure rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to the more than 4.5 million people in need in
areas that are hard to reach and besieged. When there
is a reduction of violence, that should be the first
consequence — the first secondary positive effect. We
have not seen enough of that. The United Nations stands
ready to respond to any opportunity for increased
humanitarian access based on the needs of the people
and in line with international humanitarian law.
Finally, regarding Astana, we were encouraged to
note that the guarantors seriously engaged in discussions
on two additional subjects of importance to us and to
the Syrians: detainees, abductees and missing people,
and humanitarian demining. Indeed, on detainees,
they finalized at the technical level an agreement on
a process for addressing the issue in which the United
Nations would be closely involved, and we are ready
and willing to be so. I have therefore urged the Astana
guarantors in writing to formally confirm that technical
agreement as soon as possible. Meanwhile, the United
Nations Mine Action Service, which is based in New
York and was part of the United Nations team in Astana,
is ready to do its part to advance an effective approach
to humanitarian demining in Syria.
In the immediate aftermath of Astana, I invited
the parties to the intra-Syrian talks to a sixth round in
Geneva. They all came and met in a proximity format.
The round was kept brief so as to proceed in a focused
manner. It lasted four intense days, including one case
of night/evening discussions. In the previous round,
the parties had already begun to engage in substance
across all four baskets of the agenda that the Security

I assessed that the parties needed to be ready to roll
up their sleeves. We had only four days and needed to
make good use of them to go even deeper. Specifically,
I saw an opportunity and a need to increase focus and
work on the constitutional and legal dimensions of
the talks as the talks proceed. Everything is touched
by that; every question that comes up has either a
constitutional or a legal aspect. Why not go in deeper?
Why not prepare in advance of that? I think we can all
agree that no stakeholder — be it Syrian, regional or
international — will accept any constitutional, legal or
institutional vacuum in Syria before, during or after any
negotiated transitional political process. I believe that
on that, at least, we all agreed. Most importantly, the
process needed and needs to be owned by the Syrians.
They are the ones who should be drafting their own
constitution, but we can help in preparing the ground
for it.
Therefore, to that end, I informed the parties that I
intended to establish a technical consultative process to
move forward and examine in greater depth the relevant
constitutional and legal issues raised within the formal
sessions. The sessions remain formal, but can we not
go a little bit deeper, especially when the subject may
have common ground? Can we not prepare better for
the time when there will be a peace conference and
many of those issues could be at least more or less, if
not sorted out, at least prepared?
I therefore shared initial ideas with the participants
in the talks, while sketching out a possible vision for that
type of approach. That stimulated a very intense and, in
my opinion, valuable discussion and many constructive

17-144263/8

S/PV.7944

The situation in the Middle East

oral and written observations from the parties. We met
the sides during the day and in the evening to answer
their queries and urge them to indicate the basis of their
own participation in the expert consultative process.
That enabled us to move beyond the paper and the initial
set of ideas that we had prepared, and to focus on the
real deliverable, which was establishing a consultative
process at the technical level as an additional, effective
new tool and piece of architecture in the intra-Syrian
talks process.
Participants wasted no time and on 19 May agreed
on two separate technical meetings with experts from
my own team. The first would be with experts from
the Government, which until then had hesitated with
respect to entering into any kind of expert group, and
the second with experts from the delegation of the
Syrian opposition that was announced on 11 February.
Two additional technical aspect meetings were also held
under the consultative process on 19 May with the Cairo
and the Moscow platforms, respectively. The meetings
were businesslike, constructive and informative. We
can now say that the process is up and running, and it
has already shown its own potential.
We also had constructive discussions on trying to
find a formula through which experts from the Cairo
and the Moscow platforms might join, at least, the expert
meetings of the delegation of the Syrian opposition
announced with its own composition on 11 February.
Intensive conversations on that took place within the
main opposition and between it and all the platforms,
and we should encourage them to make that a reality
during the next round, That would send an important
new message of the opposition’s unity.
As members of the Security Council know and
have mentioned, the opposition has indicated that I
should invite the High Negotiations Committee and the
Cairo and the Moscow platforms. We have all thought
and hoped that, one day — at least, with regard to
some technical areas — that could be the beginning
of their sharing a common pool of ideas. That might
be an initial step towards a common understanding
concerning some of the issues, and international and
regional actors, such as the members of the Security
Council, in my opinion, should do everything that
they can to support it so that we might enjoy a unified
opposition as soon as possible. Although we realize that
it is not an immediate prospect — as borne out by the
fact that we cannot see it happening immediately — we
hope that it would bring us closer to the possibility
4/8

22/05/2017

of direct negotiations between the Government and
the opposition.
I would like to thank once again the Women’s
Advisory Board, which has been providing valuable
feedback on the United Nations proposal with regard
to a technical consultation process. In fact, it came up
with many valid ideas that we were able to use, as well
as timely and constructive suggestions concerning the
process, in general, with a view to making it as inclusive
as possible for all Syrian men and women. Furthermore,
today, in two hours, I will begin engagement in a series
of in-depth consultations with representatives of Syrian
civil society. They are important, particularly at the
point at which we have arrived. Such consultations
have already provided us with much insightful and
practical advice.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge and express
appreciation for the support of the members of the
Council, who actively participated in Geneva, the
International Syrian Support Group and the other
countries that have dispatched their own senior
officials or envoys for Syria to the Geneva talks.
Their close involvement and efforts in consulting with
me and engaging the sides so as to bring them closer
to a possible formula remain an invaluable tool of
diplomatic leverage for my own mediation efforts. I
also welcome the fact that, regardless of what side of the
conflict the groups were closer to, they all welcomed
and supported some of the United Nations proactive,
concrete proposals to the parties.
Before concluding, I should like to add a few
important points of clarification concerning the
meetings of experts so as to be clear about what they
are and what they are not, and, importantly, what the
link with the four baskets is and what it could be.
First, the meetings of experts are not intended to
replace formal negotiations. That process is intended to
support the four baskets and the principle of parallelism,
which remain the focus of the talks’ agenda. We agreed
on that. The work of the experts remain fully framed
within the terms of reference, which we all know as the
intra-Syrian talks. We were unable to enter into in-depth
discussions on the four baskets during that round, but
we spoke of important issues concerning both parties.
We hope to address those more substantially during the
next round of talks.
Secondly, our focus on constitutional, legal issues
does not in any way take away the Syrian people’s right
17-14426

22/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

to draft and determine their own constitutional future.
We do not seek to draft a new Syrian constitution in
Geneva, Astana or anywhere else. Instead, we are
laying the foundations for when the Syrians are able
to do so. Nevertheless, in Geneva the United Nations is
ready to help prepare the ground for that because much
homework remains to be done.
Thirdly, any legally and constitutionally solid
framework agreement will require an important
underlying technical structure and details. We hope
that the experts can work continuously through those
details together or separately. In that regard, I have
also strongly encouraged the experts to hold meetings
between the rounds of the Geneva talks, not just during
them. However, if anyone wants to meet only during
the talks, they are welcome. The experts will not make
any decisions, but rather propose options — solid, well
thought out and thoroughly discussed options — to the
official participants in the formal talks.
Naturally a great deal of work remains to be done.
We are aware that important gaps remain among
the parties with regard to major issues, but we have
established an agenda, gone into substance on all
baskets and taken a new, further step towards preparing
the ground for real negotiations, which, I hope, will be
possible in the near future. For the first time, we have
received the consent of all parties to engage with us
on an expert, solid and concrete level. Furthermore, I
am pleased that all parties were receptive to the United
Nations convening a seventh round that we intend to
schedule some time in June.
The United Nations in Geneva has begun to help
the Syrian parties to put the building blocks in place
for real negotiations on a real political solution, while
we hope that Astana will contribute to ensuring that
the de-escalation works. During the past few weeks,
several important meetings of key international and
regional leaders that are taking place as we speak and
will take place in various capitals have all produced
important statements on the need to find a political
solution in Syria. With the help of the Council and the
Secretary-General’s guidance, we are doing our part
to incrementally find a political agreed framework in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Uruguay.

S/PV.7944

We reiterate our full support for the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and his entire team. We thank them for their
tireless efforts and their willingness to push ahead, in
spite of the notorious obstacles that repeatedly emerge.
We welcome the fact that yet another round of
negotiations has taken place and that some progress
made on the four baskets of issues on the Geneva
agenda, in particular with regard to the drafting of
a new constitution. Nonetheless, it is important to
step up efforts and set earlier deadlines to achieve a
political transition that would gradually restore a sense
of normalcy to the country. Once again, we reiterate
our conviction that there is no military solution to
the conflict and that we will be able to emerge from
this labyrinth and put an end to the humanitarian
tragedy only through a process of political transition
agreed to by the Syrian people and with mediation
by the United Nations. We trust that unilateral action
that would prevent us from reaching that goal will be
avoided, which would give the Security Council greater
credibility as a key player in resolving the crisis.
As we mentioned on previous occasions, the United
Nations and the Special Envoy are not protagonists
in the tragedy that has been occurring in Syria since
2011; they are merely mediators, assisting the parties
to the conflict. The primary responsibility for ending
the conflict lies directly with the Syrian people, and
in particular with the Government, on the one hand,
and all individuals and entities that make up the
opposition, including armed groups, on the other. We
support the efforts of the Special Envoy to ensure
that the process towards a political transition in Syria
is genuinely inclusive and we commend him on his
commitment to working with large sections of Syrian
civil society, religious leaders and women’s groups.
Third States — those in the region and outside of it
that are direct or indirect participants in the situation in
Syria — also bear responsibility in the conflict.
In that regard, Uruguay understands that the
Security Council’s responsibility in this issue is to
continue putting pressure on and persuading the parties
to remain at the negotiating table and make gradual and
tangible progress on the road map outlined in resolution
2254 (2015). It is essential now more than ever to
strengthen political will in the various multilateral
forums in which the Syrian crisis is discussed — the
Security Council, negotiations in Geneva and the Astana
process. The memorandum that established four safe

17-144265/8

S/PV.7944

The situation in the Middle East

zones in Syria, signed in early May in Astana, appears
to have been a step forward towards achieving the
goal of strengthening the ceasefire and in reducing the
extremely high levels of violence in the majority of
areas in Syria.
Although we do not yet have detailed information
on how the agreement will be implemented, we are
nonetheless concerned that, thus far, provisions have
not been made for the unimpeded access of the United
Nations to the interior of those zones. It is essential that
humanitarian access be guaranteed and that the civilian
population be allowed to move freely and be able to
enter and leave those areas, as they please.
The Syrian crisis, with its high economic and
humanitarian costs, has led to the spread of a even
more extremist type of terrorism, which creates greater
instability in the Middle East and throughout the world.
After more than six years of war, a peaceful solution to
the conflict in Syria is a moral imperative for the Council
and for the entire international community. We urge the
parties to the conflict — those that have influence with
them and those that, in one way or another, take part in
the conflict — to cease hostilities, engage in good-faith
negotiations, and reach an agreement that would allow
the Syrian people to open a new chapter on peace and
national reconciliation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to those Council members who wish
to make statements.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to
Special Envoy De Mistura for his continued efforts
and commitment to the political resolution of the
Syrian conflict.
We regret the fact that the latest round of
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva did not bring much
progress. A breakthrough did not happen because the
main ingredient for a sustainable solution — trust — is
missing . The lack of trust is poisoning the current
environment and dooms the Syrian people to more
suffering. We are appalled by the reports that the Syrian
regime is now using cremation to hide mass murders at
Sednaya prison, where thousands are believed to have
been executed.
The general idea of de-escalation zones is welcome;
however, the devil is always in the details. Thus far,
we are short of them. Still, we support all efforts that
6/8

22/05/2017

genuinely seek to de-escalate violence in Syria and
guarantee sustainable humanitarian access. However,
any talk on de-escalation zones is meaningless without
a credible enforcement mechanism. Forgive me for
being frank, but we really do not see how this ceasefire/
de-escalation is any different from the previous
initiatives that ultimately failed. The general idea does
not seem to be new — we witness a short period of
calm followed by another wave of escalation, when
the regime feels prepared for a new major offensive
at a time and location of its choosing. We have yet to
hear what the real tools are to prevent such a scenario
from recurring.
Another problem is the Syrian regime’s commitment
to fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), which is clearly lacking now. In the meantime,
the regime and its allies are using the de-escalation
agreement to shift focus to the east, trying to seize
ground from anti-ISIS rebel forces in Al-Badia. How
else would one interpret the numerous attacks by the
pro-regime forces on multiple fronts against the Free
Syrian Army (FSA), which is waging a relentless
war on ISIS? Here are the words of Tlass Salameh, a
commander of one of the FSA units that is leading the
fight against ISIS:
“The regime is trying to cut us off from our
front line with ISIS because they want to be the
ones to move from the southern desert up towards
eastern Syria and Deir ez-Zor. Imagine that — they
have ISIS behind them and instead they are bombing
us, the ones fighting ISIS there.”
If anything, it only proves yet again that the regime
is sticking to its long-standing strategy of using military
force to eliminate the Syrian opposition instead of
ISIS. Indeed, the fight against ISIS has always been
secondary to the regime and its allies. Why is that?
Perhaps Damascus wants to leave the international
community with a difficult choice: Al-Assad or ISIS. It
is therefore imperative that the Council make absolutely
sure that the de-escalation zones are not used as yet
another tool of the regime and its allies to regroup
forces and prepare for an assault.
Finally, we remain convinced that unless serious
pressure is applied on Damascus and an accountability
mechanism is established in Syria, we will not see any
progress on the political track.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
17-14426

22/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his briefing. Once again, we express our
support for his efforts.
We welcome the outcome of the sixth round of
peace talks, held in Geneva last week under the auspices
of the United Nations, on the four baskets of issues
referring to governance, constitution, elections and the
fight against terrorism. At the same time, we highlight
the willingness demonstrated by the parities involved.
Similarly, we commend the leadership shown by the
Special Envoy in establishing an additional mechanism
to strengthen the peace talk — meetings with experts on
legal and constitutional experts to foster and facilitate
the process of political dialogue in Syria.
We also highlight and praise the great step forward
taken by the guarantors of the ceasefire — Russia, Iran
and Turkey — during the Astana meeting on 4 May,
in which a memorandum to create four de-escalation
and safe zones was adopted with a view to preventing
incidents and putting an immediate end to any kind
of armed confrontation, as well as to improving the
unconditional deployment of humanitarian assistance
and to creating conditions favourable to progress toward
reaching a political solution to the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic. That achievement strengthened the
guidelines of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2336 (2016),
and was recognized by the Secretary-General in his
press statement of 4 May as an encouraging measure.
We note with great hope that the parties involved,
the regional actors and the ceasefire guarantors are
taking specific actions to strengthen the path towards
political dialogue and to maintain the ceasefire, which
has been the most long-lasting since the beginning of
the conflict and which, fortunately, has remained stable
as a result of the joint efforts of Russia, Turkey, Iran and
Kazakhstan. In that regard, we reiterate our call on the
parties to the conflict to lay down their weapons once
and for all and refrain from any belligerent behaviour,
because a political process is the only way to resolve
this conflict.
Despite that remarkable process, we see that
completely illegal, unilateral military actions are
still occurring, not only affecting the stability of the
political process and the agreements designed to
strengthen it, but also undermining the sovereignty and
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and Government
efforts to combat Da’esh. We reiterate and stress that
we must not allow unilateral actions that contravene the

S/PV.7944

principles of the Charter of the United Nations to be an
obstacle to reaching peace in Syria, to the detriment of
the lives of its inhabitants — all the more so when such
actions are taken by actors outside the process of the
political dialogue.
Lastly, we express our support for continued
dialogue, both in Geneva in June and in Astana in
July, and the result thereof, which would be a process
led by and for the Syrian people with respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
that country.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. De
Mistura, for his update. We have always believed that
there is no military solution to the Syrian conflict
and that dialogue is, therefore, the only path to peace.
Kazakhstan therefore commends the Special Envoy
for his efforts to reach a peaceful resolution to the
conflict in Syria, and for his steadfast commitment
and indomitable determination, which have enabled
the international community to come this far. His input
into the Astana talks, which are intended to support the
Geneva process, have, therefore, facilitated the search
for common political ground as well as the respect of
the ceasefire for humanitarian purposes.
Nonetheless, we find that the Geneva talks have
experienced difficulties. Although no one has been
expecting miracles, we share the view of the Special
Envoy that the parties to the conflict now have a clear
agenda to pursue a political solution. We applaud the
parties to the Geneva negotiations for demonstrating
political maturity and for undertaking efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
Kazakhstan has high regard for all of the efforts
undertaken by the Russian Federation, the Republic of
Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran to consolidate
the ceasefire in the Syrian Arab Republic through
the launching of the Astana process between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the armed
opposition groups. Those countries, with their in-depth
knowledge of and enviable expertise in the political and
humanitarian situation on the ground, have succeeded
in bringing the parties to the negotiating table under the
most complex and sensitive conditions.
We also value highly the participation of the
observers from the United States of America and the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan at the recent Astana
meeting. We believe that rapid, safe and unhindered

17-144267/8

S/PV.7944

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian access should be provided. Meanwhile,
the conditions necessary for the delivery of medical aid
to the local population should be created so as to meet
the basic needs of civilians. Furthermore, Kazakhstan
remains committed to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as to ensuring the continuity of
State institutions.
Kazakhstan welcomes the adoption of the
memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas in
the Syrian Arab Republic, signed in Astana on 4 May. It
will surely decrease the hostilities between the parties
to the conflict. We attach the utmost importance to
compliance with ceasefire agreements by the parties to
the conflict and their enforcement by guarantor States.
All agreements reached in Astana must not simply
remain on paper; instead, they must produce tangible
results if the credibility of the world community and
the Syrian people involved in the negotiation process is
to be maintained.
The Astana talks form an integral part of Geneva
process. Geneva is the main venue for negotiations

8/8

22/05/2017

on the Syrian settlement under the auspices of the
United Nations, where the political part of the agenda
is discussed. However, it is important to understand
that the success of the Geneva process is intertwined
with the results of negotiations in the Kazakh capital.
Kazakhstan welcomes the efforts of the Special Envoy
and the results of the sixth round of the intra-Syrian
negotiations, which were held from 16 to 19 May
in Geneva.
Finally, Kazakhstan is ready to support Mr. Staffan
de Mistura in his efforts to continue negotiations
in Geneva and in Astana. We call on the Council to
do everything possible to assist him in achieving the
speedy cessation of bloodshed and a peaceful settlement
of the situation in Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list.
I now invite the members of the Council to continue
informal consultations so as to continue our discussion
on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

17-14426
