United Nations

A/RES/70/176

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 106

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/70/490)]

70/176. Taking action against gender-related killing of women
and girls
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/191 of 18 December 2013 on taking action against
gender-related killing of women and girls, in particular the obligation to promote
and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including women
and girls,
Deeply concerned that the global prevalence of different manifestations of the
gender-related killing of women and girls is reaching alarming proportions, and
noting especially that one of every two women victims of homicide is killed by her
intimate partner or a family member, 1
Deeply concerned also at the scourge of sexual violence in all situations,
including those of conflict, and targeted mass kidnapping, rape and killing of
women and girls,
Recalling the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on violence against women, its causes and consequences 2 and Council resolution
20/12 of 5 July 2012 on accelerating efforts to eliminate all forms of violence
against women: remedies for women who have been subjected to violence, 3
Recalling also the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on creating and/or strengthening synergies and
linkages on violence against women and girls 4 and Human Rights Council resolution
23/25 of 14 June 2013 on accelerating efforts to eliminate all forms of violence
against women: preventing and responding to rape and other forms of sexual
violence, 5

_______________
1

See the Global Study on Homicide 2013 prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
A/HRC/20/16.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. IV, sect. A.
4
A/HRC/23/25.
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53),
chap. V, sect. A.

2

15-16930 (E)

*1516930*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/176

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls

Recalling further its resolution 69/147 of 18 December 2014 on the
intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls,
Taking note with appreciation of the political declaration on the occasion of
the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-ninth session, 6 which focused on the
20-year review of the Beijing Platform for Action, 7
Expressing its gratitude to the Government of Thailand for hosting and
chairing the meeting of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group on genderrelated killing of women and girls, held in Bangkok from 11 to 13 November 2014,
as mandated by resolution 68/191,
Taking note with appreciation of the recommendations of the above-mentioned
expert group meeting, 8
Welcoming the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and
Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, and Public Participation, 9 in particular the endeavour of
Member States to mainstream a gender perspective into criminal justice systems by
developing and implementing national strategies and plans, in order to promote the
full protection of women and girls from all acts of violence, including genderrelated killing of women and girls,
Stressing the importance of eliminating all forms of violence against all
women and girls in the public and private spheres and significantly reducing all
forms of violence and related death rates everywhere, in the context of the
post-2015 development agenda, 10
Stressing also that States have the obligation to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including women and girls, to take
measures to prevent and investigate acts of violence against women and girls and to
prosecute and punish those responsible, no matter who the perpetrators of such
crimes are, and to eliminate impunity,
Expressing appreciation for the work undertaken by the United Nations system
in preventing and responding to all forms of violence against women and girls,
Viewing with appreciation the considerable input of many civil society
organizations, as well as academia, in addressing the different forms of violence
against women and girls, through research and direct action in their respective
communities,
Taking note of national and international judicial decisions that condemn mass
killing of women and girls,
Remaining alarmed by the high level of impunity with regard to gender-related
killing of women and girls and the fact that violence against women and girls is
among the least prosecuted and punished crimes in the world,
_______________
6

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I,
sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
7
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
8
See E/CN.15/2015/16.
9
Resolution 70/174, annex.
10
See A/68/970 and Corr.1.

2/5

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls

A/RES/70/176

1.
Urges Member States to take measures to prevent, investigate, prosecute
and punish acts of violence against women and girls, in particular gender-related
killing, in accordance with national laws, and to act at all levels to end impunity for
those responsible for committing these heinous crimes against women and girls;
2.
Also urges Member States to strengthen their criminal justice response to
gender-related killing of women and girls, in particular by taking measures to
support their capacity to investigate, prosecute and punish all forms of such crime,
and to consider measures in their capacities to provide, as appropriate, reparation,
compensation and/or necessary legal, medical, psychological and social support to
victims and their families or dependents;
3.
Encourages Member States to consider ways to enhance international
cooperation and the exchange of good practices in criminal matters related to
gender-based violence, including by, as appropriate, ratifying or acceding to and
implementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocols thereto 11 and other relevant international legal instruments;
4.
Encourages States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women 12 and the Optional Protocol thereto, 13 the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto 14 and the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 15 to effectively implement those
instruments;
5.
Invites Member States to take into consideration the existing practical
tools, as recommended by the open-ended intergovernmental expert group on
gender-related killing of women and girls at its meeting held in Bangkok from 11 to
13 November 2014, namely the Latin American model protocol for the investigation
of gender-related killing of women and the recommendations for the effective
investigation of the crime of femicide; 16
6.
Encourages Member States to promote integrated and comprehensive
strategies to prevent all forms of violence against women and girls, including
gender-related killing of women and girls, that include early and continuous
educational programmes, community mobilization and awareness-raising, in order
to counter attitudes and social factors that foster, justify or tolerate any violence
against women and girls;
Urges Member States to adopt integrated and comprehensive responses
7.
to violence against women in order to reduce risks of gender-related killing through
early intervention and risk assessment, exercise due diligence to prevent,
investigate, prosecute and punish gender-related killing of women and girls, ensure
equal protection of women under the law and equal access to justice, consider
adopting an integrated, multidisciplinary and gender-sensitive approach to the
prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment of gender-related killing of
women and girls to minimize the risk of secondary victimization in the criminal
justice system and develop appropriate mechanisms and enhance capacities for
forensic investigations to identify human remains and missing persons;
_______________
11

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
13
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
14
Ibid., vols. 1577, 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
15
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
16
See E/CN.15/2015/16, para. 8.
12

3/5

A/RES/70/176

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls

8.
Encourages Member States to criminalize, prosecute and punish rape and
other forms of sexual and gender-related violence against women and girls
committed in all situations, including situations of conflict, taking into account
international standards, and urges, where appropriate, relevant stakeholders to
support the development and strengthening of the capacities of national institutions,
in particular law enforcement, judicial and health systems, and of local civil society
networks to provide sustainable assistance and access to justice to women and girls
affected by gender-related violence;
9.
Also encourages Member States to ensure that appropriate punishment
for perpetrators of gender-related killing of women and girls are in place and are
proportionate to the gravity of the offence;
10. Calls upon Member States to protect and support victims, drawing on the
important role of civil society and ensuring effective cooperation between all
relevant State agencies, including, where appropriate, the judiciary, prosecution
services, law enforcement agencies, health and social services and local and
regional authorities;
11. Urges Member States to ensure that victims and victims’ survivors are
informed of their rights and can participate, as appropriate, in the criminal
proceedings, taking into account their dignity, well-being and safety, and that
victims are supported through appropriate services;
12. Encourages relevant United Nations entities and agencies, in particular
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to continue to support
Member States in developing and implementing strategies and policies, upon
request, at the national, regional and international levels to address and prevent
gender-related killing of women and girls;
13. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations entities and
agencies, including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the
High Commissioner, UN-Women and other specialized funds and programmes of
the United Nations, to raise awareness regarding gender-related killing of women
and girls;
14. Encourages Member States to collect, disaggregate, analyse and report
data on gender-related killing of women and girls, according to the International
Classification of Crime for Statistical Purposes endorsed by the Statistical
Commission and, where appropriate, to the extent possible, involve civil society,
academia, victims’ representatives and relevant international organizations and
provide appropriate training to relevant personnel on technical and ethical aspects of
such data collection and analysis;
15. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme
network to continue to conduct and coordinate relevant research on gender-related
killing of women and girls, particularly in connection with the standardization of the
collection, disaggregation, analysis and reporting of data;
16. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to prepare,
in collaboration with Member States, an analytical study on gender-related killing of
women and girls at the global level, containing disaggregated data, including from
relevant stakeholders, on this phenomenon to illustrate its different forms and
patterns;
4/5

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls

A/RES/70/176

17. Invites the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal
justice programme network to include in their work programmes the issue of
gender-related killing of women and girls with a view to promoting ways and means
of more effectively preventing, investigating, prosecuting and punishing such crime,
and to develop appropriate training material;
18. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
contributions for the purposes described above, in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the United Nations;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
80th plenary meeting
17 December 2015

5/5
