S/PRST/2006/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 February 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5365th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 February 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council congratulates the Palestinian people on an
electoral process that was free, fair, and secure. It commends all the parties for
the preparation and conduct of the elections, particularly the Central Elections
Commission and the Palestinian Authority security forces, for their
professionalism.
“The Security Council expresses its expectation that a new government
remain committed to realizing the aspirations of the Palestinian people for
peace and statehood. The Security Council welcomes President Abbas’
affirmation that the Palestinian Authority remains committed to the Roadmap,
previous agreements and obligations between the parties, and a negotiated
two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The Security Council
expresses its view that all members of a future Palestinian government must be
committed to the aforementioned instruments and principles.
“Cognizant of the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people, the
Security Council reaffirms its continuing interest in the fiscal stability of the
caretaker government, consistent with clear reform and austerity benchmarks.
The Security Council notes that major donors have indicated they will review
future assistance to a new Palestinian Authority government against that
government’s commitment to the principles of non-violence, recognition of
Israel, and acceptance of previous agreements and obligations, including the
Roadmap.
“The Security Council reminds both parties of their obligation under the
Roadmap and on existing agreements, including on movement and access. It
calls on both parties to avoid unilateral actions which prejudice final status
issues. The Security Council underlines the need for the Palestinian Authority
to prevent terrorist attacks and dismantle the infrastructure of terror. It
reiterates its view that settlement expansion must stop and its concern
regarding the route of the barrier.

06-23304 (E) 030206

*0623304*

S/PRST/2006/6

“The Security Council reaffirms its profound attachment to the vision of
two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side-by-side in peace and
security. The Security Council reiterates the importance of, and the need to
achieve, a just, comprehensive, and lasting peace in the Middle East, based on
all its relevant resolutions including its resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), and 1515 (2003), the Madrid terms of reference and the principle
of land for peace.”

2
