United Nations

A/RES/60/99

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 29

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December 2005
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/60/475)]

60/99.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses
of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004 and 59/116 of 10 December 2004,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as
an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Considering that space debris is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space
exploration and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space
projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the importance of
_______________
1

05-49354

Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

A/RES/60/99

further developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in
this field,
Convinced of the importance of the recommendations in the resolution entitled
“The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”,
adopted by the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), held at Vienna from 19 to 30 July 1999, 2 and
the need to promote the use of space technology towards implementing the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 3
Taking note of the actions already taken as well as those to be embarked upon
to further implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III, as reflected in
resolution 59/2 and the Plan of Action of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, 4
Convinced that the use of space science and technology and their applications
in such areas as telemedicine, tele-education, disaster management and
environmental protection as well as other Earth observation applications contribute
to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that
address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, inter alia,
poverty eradication,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-eighth session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-eighth session;5
2.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 6 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties as well as incorporating them in their national legislation;
3.
Notes that, at its forty-fourth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its work, as mandated by
the General Assembly in its resolution 59/116; 7
4.
Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Legal
Subcommittee, at its forty-fifth session, taking into account the concerns of all
countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following as regular agenda items:

(i)

General exchange of views;

_______________
2

See Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, Vienna, 19-30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap. I, resolution 1.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
A/59/174, chap. VI.B.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum (A/60/20
and Corr.1).
6
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue
of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution
2345 (XXII), annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects
(resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
(resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex); and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 34/68, annex).
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum
(A/60/20 and Corr.1), chap. II.D.

2

A/RES/60/99

(ii)

Status and application of the five United Nations treaties on outer space;

(iii) Information on the activities of international organizations relating to
space law;
(iv) Matters relating to:
a.

The definition and delimitation of outer space;

b.
The character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including
consideration of ways and means to ensure the rational and equitable use of
the geostationary orbit without prejudice to the role of the International
Telecommunication Union;
(b)

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Review and possible revision of the Principles Relevant to the Use of
Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space; 8
(ii) Examination and review of the developments concerning the draft
protocol on matters specific to space assets to the Convention on International
Interests in Mobile Equipment;
(c) Consider the practice of States and international organizations in
registering space objects in accordance with the workplan adopted by the
Committee; 9
5.
Notes that the Legal Subcommittee, at its forty-fifth session, will submit
its proposals to the Committee for new items to be considered by the Subcommittee
at its forty-sixth session, in 2007;
Also notes that, in the context of paragraph 4 (a) (ii) above, the Legal
6.
Subcommittee, at its forty-fifth session, will reconvene its Working Group and
review the need to extend the mandate of the Working Group beyond that session of
the Subcommittee;
Further notes that, in the context of paragraph 4 (a) (iv) a. above, the
7.
Legal Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group on the item only to consider
matters relating to the definition and delimitation of outer space;
Agrees that, in the context of paragraph 4 (c) above, the Legal
8.
Subcommittee should reconvene its Working Group in accordance with the
workplan adopted by the Committee;9
9.
Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-second
session, continued its work as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution
59/116; 10
10. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-third session, taking into account the concerns
of all countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following items:

_______________
8

See resolution 47/68.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20),
para. 199.
10
Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum (A/60/20 and Corr.1), chap. II.C.
9

3

A/RES/60/99

(i) General exchange of views and introduction to reports submitted on
national activities;
(ii)

United Nations Programme on Space Applications;

(iii) Implementation of the recommendations of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE
III);
(iv) Matters relating to remote sensing of the Earth by satellite, including
applications for developing countries and monitoring of the Earth’s
environment;
(b) Consider the following items in accordance with the workplans adopted
by the Committee: 11
(i)

Space debris;

(ii)

Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;

(iii) Space-system-based telemedicine;
(iv) Near-Earth objects;
(v)

Space-system-based disaster management support;

(vi) International Heliophysical Year 2007;
(c) Consider the following single issue/item for discussion: examination of
the physical nature and technical attributes of the geostationary orbit and its
utilization and applications, including in the field of space communications, as well
as other questions relating to developments in space communications, taking
particular account of the needs and interests of developing countries;
11. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-third
session, will submit its proposal to the Committee for a draft provisional agenda for
the forty-fourth session of the Subcommittee, in 2007;
12. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the symposium to
strengthen the partnership with industry should be organized during the first week of
the forty-third session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and should
address synthetic aperture radar missions and their applications;
13. Agrees that, in the context of paragraphs 10 (a) (ii) and (iii) and 11
above, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-third session, should
reconvene the Working Group of the Whole;
14. Also agrees that, in the context of paragraph 10 (b) (i) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-third session, should reconvene
its Working Group on Space Debris to consider issues arising from its workplan and,
in particular, the draft of the space debris mitigation document of the Subcommittee
and that the Working Group should continue its intersessional work as required to
expedite agreement on the document; 12

_______________
11

See A/AC.105/848, annex II, para. 6, for item (i); ibid., annex III, para. 8, for item (ii); Official Records
of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 138, for item (iii);
A/AC.105/848, annex I, para. 20, for item (iv); A/AC.105/823, annex II, para. 15 and A/AC.105/848,
annex I, para. 21, for item (v) and A/AC.105/848, annex I, para. 22, for item (vi).
12
See A/AC.105/848, annex II, para. 6.

4

A/RES/60/99

15. Further agrees that, in the context of paragraph 10 (b) (ii) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-third session, should reconvene
its Working Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space and that the
Working Group should continue its intersessional work on the topics described in
the multi-year workplan as amended by the Subcommittee at its forty-second
session; 13
16. Agrees that a joint technical workshop on the objectives, scope and
general attributes of a potential technical safety standard for nuclear power sources
in outer space should be organized together with the International Atomic Energy
Agency and held during the forty-third session of the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee;
17. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2006,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications and endorsed by
the Committee; 14
18. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 30 of General
Assembly resolution 50/27 of 6 December 1995, the African regional centres for
space science and technology education, in the French language and in the English
language, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, as well as the Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific and the Regional
Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Latin America and the
Caribbean, entered into an affiliation agreement with the Office for Outer Space
Affairs of the Secretariat and have continued their education programmes in 2005;
19. Agrees that the regional centres referred to in paragraph 18 above should
continue to report to the Committee on their activities on an annual basis;
20. Notes with satisfaction that the Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education in Asia and the Pacific celebrated its tenth anniversary in 2005;
21. Also notes with satisfaction the contribution being made by the Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee and the efforts of Member States and the Office for
Outer Space Affairs to promote and support the activities being organized within the
framework of the International Heliophysical Year 2007;
22. Further notes with satisfaction that the Government of Ecuador will be
hosting the Fifth Space Conference of the Americas in Quito in July 2006 and that
the Government of Chile will organize a preparatory meeting for the Conference,
with the support of the Government of Colombia, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations Office for Outer Space
Affairs, during the International Air and Space Fair, to be held in Santiago in March
2006;
23. Notes with satisfaction that the Pro Tempore Secretariat of the Fourth
Space Conference of the Americas, in accordance with paragraph 21 of resolution
59/116, informed the Committee of its activities to implement the Declaration of
Cartagena de Indias and the Plan of Action of the Conference; 15

_______________
13

Ibid., annex III, para. 8.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum
(A/60/20 and Corr.1), paras. 88 and 94; see also A/AC.105/840, sects. II and III and annex III.
15
See A/AC.105/L.261.
14

5

A/RES/60/99

24. Also notes with satisfaction that the Federal Government of Nigeria, in
collaboration with the Governments of Algeria and South Africa, hosted the first
African Leadership Conference on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable
Development from 23 to 25 November 2005 and that the Conference provided,
under the theme “Space: an indispensable tool for Africa’s development”, a forum to
exchange information on global space activities for societal development and
African needs, including capacity-building, to benefit from the applications of space
science and technology and to consider how to strengthen the participation of Africa
in the work of the Committee and its Subcommittees;
25. Further notes with satisfaction that the Islamic Republic of Iran, in
cooperation with the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,
hosted the eleventh session of the Intergovernmental Consultative Committee on the
Regional Space Applications Programme for Sustainable Development in September
2005;
26. Recommends that more attention be paid and political support be
provided to all matters relating to the protection and the preservation of the outer
space environment, especially those potentially affecting the Earth’s environment;
27. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to
the problem of collisions of space objects, including those with nuclear power
sources, with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the
continuation of national research on this question, for the development of improved
technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and
dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible,
information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand
appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on
future space missions;
28. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
29. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
mitigation of the consequences of disasters, in particular in the developing
countries;
30. Notes that space science and technology and their applications could
make important contributions to economic, social and cultural development and
welfare, as indicated in the resolution entitled “The Space Millennium: Vienna
Declaration on Space and Human Development”;2
31. Reiterates that the benefits of space technology and its applications
should be prominently brought to the attention, in particular, of the major United
Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural development
and related fields and that the use of space technology should be promoted towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and summits and for implementing the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;3
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session, through the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, a
report on the inclusion of the issue of the use of space technology in the reports
6

A/RES/60/99

submitted by the Secretary-General to those conferences and summits, and its
inclusion in the outcomes and commitments of those conferences and summits;
33. Notes with satisfaction the increased efforts of the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee as well as the Office for Outer Space Affairs
and the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to promote the use of space
science and technology and their applications in carrying out actions recommended
in the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”); 16
34. Urges entities of the United Nations system, particularly those
participating in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities, to examine, in
cooperation with the Committee, how space science and technology and their
applications could contribute to implementing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, particularly in the areas relating to, inter alia, food security and
increasing opportunities for education;
35. Invites the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to continue
to contribute to the work of the Committee and to report to the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee on the work conducted at its annual
sessions;
36. Notes with satisfaction that the open informal meetings, held in
conjunction with the annual sessions of the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space
Activities and in which representatives of member States and observers in the
Committee participate, provide a constructive mechanism for an active dialogue
between the entities of the United Nations system and member States and observers
in the Committee;
37. Encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate fully in
the work of the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities;
38. Notes that space technology could play a central role in disaster
reduction and that both the Committee and its Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee could contribute to the implementation of the Hyogo Declaration and
the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015, adopted by the World Conference on
Disaster Reduction, held at Kobe, Japan, from 18 to 22 January 2005; 17
39. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session, and agrees that during its
consideration of the matter, the Committee could continue to consider ways to
promote regional and interregional cooperation based on experiences stemming
from the Space Conference of the Americas and the role space technology could
play in the implementation of recommendations of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development;
40. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee would be establishing a closer
link between its work to implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III and the
work of the Commission on Sustainable Development by contributing to the
thematic areas that will be addressed by the Commission;
_______________
16

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
17
A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolutions 1 and 2.

7

A/RES/60/99

41. Agrees that the Director of the Division for Sustainable Development of
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat should be invited
to participate in the sessions of the Committee to inform it how it could best
contribute to the work of the Commission;
42. Also agrees that the Director of the Office for Outer Space Affairs should
participate in the sessions of the Commission on Sustainable Development to raise
awareness and promote the benefits of space science and technology for sustainable
development;
43. Notes with satisfaction the progress made, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 59/2, by Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) and
augmentation system providers to establish an international committee on GNSS
and by the ad hoc expert group established to study the possibility of creating an
international entity to provide for coordination and the means of realistically
optimizing the effectiveness of space-based services for use in disaster management;
44. Welcomes the fact that the Office for Outer Space Affairs could integrate
into its programme of work a number of actions identified for implementation by
the Office in the Plan of Action of the Committee for the further implementation of
the recommendations of UNISPACE III; 18
45. Notes that some actions identified for implementation by the Office in
the Plan of Action could only be integrated into its programme of work if additional
staff and financial resources were provided; 19
46. Urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the United
Nations Programme on Space Applications to enhance the capacity of the Office to
provide technical and legal advisory services and initiate pilot projects in
accordance with the Plan of Action of the Committee, while maintaining the priority
thematic areas agreed by the Committee;
47. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider a report on the
activities of the International Satellite System for Search and Rescue as a part of its
consideration of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications under the
agenda item entitled “Report of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee” and
invites Member States to report on their activities regarding the System;
48. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-ninth
session, its agenda item entitled “Spin-off benefits of space technology: review of
current status”;
49. Also requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-ninth
session, under its agenda item entitled “Space and society”, the special theme for
the focus of discussions for the period 2004-2006 “Space and education”, in
accordance with the workplan adopted by the Committee; 20
50. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider, at its forty-ninth
session, its agenda item entitled “Space and water”;
51. Also agrees that a new item entitled “Recommendations of the World
Summit on the Information Society” should be included in the agenda of the

_______________
18

See A/AC.105/L.262.
Ibid., para. 6.
20
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 239.
19

8

A/RES/60/99

Committee at its forty-ninth session, with a view to contributing to their
implementation;
52. Further agrees that a symposium on space and forests should be held
during the forty-ninth session of the Committee;
53. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee agreed to consider, at its
forty-ninth session, under its agenda item “Other matters”, the evolution of space
activities and how to develop a long-term plan to strengthen the role of the
Committee in international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space; 21
54. Notes that in accordance with the agreement reached by the Committee at
its forty-sixth session on the measures relating to the future composition of the
bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 22 on the basis of the measures
relating to the working methods of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 23 the
Group of African States, the Group of Eastern European States, the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Group of Western European and Other
States nominated their candidates for the offices of Second Vice-Chair/Rapporteur
of the Committee, First Vice-Chair of the Committee, Chair of the Legal
Subcommittee and Chair of the Committee, respectively, for the period 2006-2007;
55. Urges the Group of Asian States to nominate its candidate for the office
of Chair of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for the period 2006-2007 in
time for the Subcommittee to begin its work at its forty-third session as scheduled;
56. Agrees that, upon the nomination of the candidate of the Group of Asian
States for the Chair of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, the two
Subcommittees should elect their officers;
57. Notes that the Committee, at its forty-ninth session, would endorse the
election of the officers of its Subcommittees and would elect its officers for the
period 2006-2007;
58. Also notes that the Group of Western European and Other States
nominated its candidate for the office of Second Vice-Chair/Rapporteur of the
Committee, for the period 2008-2009, at the forty-eighth session of the Committee,
for its consideration;
59. Further notes that each of the regional groups has the responsibility to
actively promote the participation in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary
bodies of the member States of the Committee that are also members of the
respective regional groups, and agrees that the regional groups should consider this
Committee-related matter among their members;
60. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer
status to the European Space Policy Institute;
61. Urges the Committee to expand the scope of international cooperation
relating to the social, economic, ethical and human dimensions in space science and
technology applications;

_______________
21

Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum (A/60/20 and Corr.1), paras. 316 and 317.
Ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, paras. 4-9.
23
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/52/20), annex I; see also Official Records of the
General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, appendix III.
22

9

A/RES/60/99

62. Requests entities of the United Nations system and other international
organizations to continue and, where appropriate, to enhance their cooperation with
the Committee and to provide it with reports on the issues dealt with in the work of
the Committee and its subsidiary bodies.
62nd plenary meeting
8 December 2005

10
