General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

170

consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
6. Welcomes the entry into force on 28 March 1979
of article 41 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and invites the States parties to the
Covenant to consider making the declaration provided
for in article 41 ;
1. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee
continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and of the Optional
Protocol thereto and emphasizes the importance of the
strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the Covenant;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of the Commission on Human Rights, the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and also to transmit the
annual reports of the Human Rights Committee to those
bodies;
9. Notes with due attention the recommendation of
the Human Rights Committee regarding the holding of
future meetings of the Committee in developing countries39 and requests the Secretary-General to explore this
possibility, taking into account the recommendation of
the Committee, and to submit a report in this regard to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the report requested in Commission on Human
Rights resolution 23 (XXXV) of 14 March 1979 40 concerning the development of public information activities
in the field of human rights, to bear in mind the question
of improving the publicity for the work of the Human
Rights Committee;
12. Urges the Secretary-General to take all possible
steps to ensure that the Division of Human Rights of the
Secretariat is able to assist effectively the Human Rights
Committee and the Economic and Social Council in the
implementation of their respective functions under the
International Covenants on Human Rights, taking into
account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX) of
17 December 1975 and 31/93 of 14 December 1976.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34 / 46.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations to achieve international co-opera-

tion in solving international problems of an economic,
social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling the importance of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights 41 and of the International Convenants
on Human Rights 42 in further promoting international
co-operation for respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that the acceptance by Member States of
the obligations contained in those Covenants is an important element for the universal realization of and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human
beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can be
achieved only if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy economic, social, and cultural rights, as
well as civil and political rights,
Recalling its resolution 32/130 of 16 December 1977,
in which it decided that the approach to the future work
within the United Nations system with respect to human
rights questions should take into account the concepts
set forth in that resolution,
Recalling also its resolution 33/104 of 16 December
1978, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to continue with high priority the over-all analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, which will contribute to the implementation of
resolution 32/ 130,
Recalling further its resolution 32/ 197 of 20 December 1977, in particular paragraphs 5 (b) and 41 of the
annex thereto, regarding the responsibilities of the Economic and Social Council to monitor and evaluate the
implementation of over-all strategies, policies and priorities established by the General Assembly,
Noting with interest Economic and Social Council
decisions 1979/29 and 1979/30 of 10 May 1979, and
Commission on Human Rights resolutions 4 (XXXV)
and 5 (XXXV) of 2 March 1979, 4 :i in which the Commission reiterated that the right to development is a
human right and that equality of opportunity for development is as much a prerogative of nations as of
individuals within nations,
Recognizing the need to create satisfactory conditions
at the national and international levels for the full promotion and protection of the human rights of individuals
and peoples,
Noting with interest that in the Political Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, the non-aligned countries
called on the United Nations to continue working towards ensuring human rights in a comprehensive manner
to ensure the dignity of human beings and, in this regard, reaffirmed their own willingness to work actively
for the implementation of the steps outlined in General
Assembly resolution 32/ 130 in the form which it prescribes, through the existing structures of the United
Nations system, 44
Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
43 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
44 See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 262.
41

89

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Third Committee, 31st meeting, para. 40.
40 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.

42

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking into account Economic and Social Council
resolution 1979/36 of 10 May 1979,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report on the
work relating to the over-all analysis of the United Nations approach to human rights 45 submitted to the General Assembly by the Commission on Human Rights,
through the Economic and Social Council, in accordance
with paragraph 2 (a) of General Assembly resolution
32/130;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue at its thirty-sixth session its ongoing work on
the over-all analysis with a view to further promoting
and improving human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the question of the Commission's programme
and working methods, and on the over-all analysis of the
alternative approaches and ways and means for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the provisions and
concepts of resolution 32/130;
3. Reiterates its profound conviction that all human
rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion and protection of both civil and political, and
economic, social and cultural rights;
4. Reaffirms the absolute necessity, under all circumstances, of eliminating massive and flagrant violations of human rights and of the rights of peoples and
individuals affected by situations such as those enumerated in paragraph 1 (e) of resolution 32/130;
5. Reaffirms also that it is of paramount importance
for the promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms that Member States should undertake specific
obligations through accession to or ratification of international instruments in this field and that, consequently,
the standard-setting work within the United Nations system in the field of human rights and the universal acceptance and implementation of the relevant international
instruments should be encouraged;
6. Emphasizes the need to create conditions at the
national and international levels for the full promotion
and protection of the human rights of individuals and
peoples;
1. Recognizes that, in order fully to guarantee human rights and complete personal dignity, it is necessary to guarantee the right to work, participation of
workers in management, and the right to education,
health and proper nourishment, through the adoption of
measures at the national and international levels, including the establishment of the new international economic order;
8. Emphasizes that the right to development is a human right and that equality of opportunity for development is as much a prerogative of nations as of individuals within nations;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirty-sixth session, to consider the ~xisting human
and other resources that the Division of Human Rights
of the Secretariat has at its disposal for the implementation of General Assembly resolutions, on the basis of
complete data which the Secretary-General is requested
to provide to it, and thereafter to make recommendations, through the Economic and Social Council, to the
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, with a view to further improving the working of the Division;
4
G See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. IX, sect. A.

171

10. Requests the Secretary-General to give, through
the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights, priority to the holding in 1980 of a seminar,
as already decided by the Economic and Social Council
in its decision 1979/30, on the effect of the present unjust international economic order on the economies of
developing countries and the obstacle that this constitutes for the implementation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular for the right to enjoy an
adequate standard of living as stated in article 25 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
11. Requests the Secretary-General and concerned
organs and bodies of the United Nations system to implement fully the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 /36;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, taking into account relevant information already available
within the United Nations, and to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a study on the nature
and extent to which the realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms is affected by present international conditions, with particular reference to situations
resulting from apartheid, from all forms of racial discrimination, from colonialism, neo-colonialism and imperialism, from policies tending to divide the world into
spheres of influence, from the arms race, from foreign
domination and occupation, from aggression and threats
against national sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity, from refusal to recognize the fundamental rights of peoples to self-determination and of every
nation to the exercise of full sovereignty over its wealth
and natural resources, from intervention and interference in the internal affairs of States, particularly with
reference to developing countries, as well as from the
existence of the unjust system of international economic
relations, taking also into account the conclusions of the
seminar mentioned in paragraph 10 above;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the present resolution to the specialized agencies concerned and to all United Nations bodies that deal with
human rights;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a
progress report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms".
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34 / 4 7.

Services of the Secretariat concerned with
human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and
in the equal rights of men and women and of nations
large and small,
Recalling especially that one of the most important
purposes of the United Nations is to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of
an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character,
