A/RES/63/21

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 December 2008

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 69

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 11 November 2008
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.19 and Add.1)]

63/21.

Report of the International Criminal Court

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/12 of 26 November 2007, and all its previous
relevant resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
0F

Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute and
its tenth anniversary, which was celebrated on 17 July 2008,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and postconflict societies, is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential if a society in conflict or
recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past abuses committed against
civilians affected by armed conflict and to prevent future such abuses,
Noting with satisfaction the fact that the International Criminal Court has
achieved considerable progress in its analyses, investigations and judicial
proceedings in various situations and cases which were referred to it by States
parties to the Rome Statute and by the Security Council, in accordance with the
Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all
aspects of its mandate by States, the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations remains essential for the International Criminal Court to
carry out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective
and efficient assistance to the International Criminal Court in accordance with the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court (“Relationship Agreement”), 2
1F

_______________
1
2

08-47205

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
See A/58/874 and Add.1.

A/RES/63/21

Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of 13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of
the resolution with respect to the payment in full of expenses accruing to the United
Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement, 3 which
provides a framework for continued cooperation between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations, which could include the facilitation by the United
Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of
supplementary arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
2F

Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International
Criminal Court,
Recognizing the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights and achieve sustainable peace, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Criminal Court for providing
assistance to the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2007/08; 4
3F

2.
Welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court1 in the past year, and calls upon all States in all regions
of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider ratifying or
acceding to it without delay;
Welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the Rome
3.
Statute that have become parties to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court, 5 and calls upon all States that have not yet done
so to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4F

4.
Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to
adopt national legislation to implement obligations emanating from the Statute and
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the exercise of its functions,
and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this respect;
Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the
5.
International Criminal Court by States parties as well as States not parties, the
United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls upon
those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation
and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences;
Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties
6.
to the Rome Statute;
7.
Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation
agreements with the International Criminal Court;
8.
Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, a
State which is not a party to the Statute may, by declaration lodged with the
_______________
3

Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
See A/63/323.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
4

2

A/RES/63/21

Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of jurisdiction by
the Court with respect to specific crimes that are mentioned in paragraph 2 of that
article;
Encourages all States parties to take the interests, needs for assistance
9.
and mandate of the International Criminal Court into account when relevant matters
are being discussed in the United Nations;
10. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of the
Relationship Agreement,2 which forms a framework for close cooperation between
the two organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual interest pursuant to
the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for the
Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the
expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations in connection
with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
11. Notes the fact that the International Criminal Court liaison office to
United Nations Headquarters is now fully operational, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;
12. Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the
benefit of victims of crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to the Trust Fund thus far;
13. Notes the work of the Special Working Group on the Crime of
Aggression, which is open to all States on an equal footing, and encourages all
States to consider participating actively in the Working Group with a view to
elaborating proposals for a provision on the crime of aggression, in accordance with
article 123 of the Rome Statute;
14. Notes that the Review Conference to be held in 2010 may provide an
opportunity to address issues, in addition to those relating to the possible definition
of the crime of aggression, that have been identified by States, including States that
are not parties to the Rome Statute;
15. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute at its sixth session, while recalling that, according to article 112,
paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute, the Assembly of States Parties shall meet at the
seat of the International Criminal Court or at United Nations Headquarters, to hold
its seventh session at The Hague, looks forward to the seventh session of the
Assembly of States Parties, which is to be held at The Hague from 14 to
22 November 2008, as well as to the resumed seventh session, which is to be held in
New York from 19 to 23 January 2009 and from 9 to 13 February 2009, and requests
the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services and facilities in accordance
with the Relationship Agreement and resolution 58/318;
16. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assemblies
of States Parties, invites States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the participation
of the least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation contributions
made to the Trust Fund thus far;

3

A/RES/63/21

17. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, in accordance with
article 6 of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2008/09, for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
45th plenary meeting
11 November 2008

4
