A /76/PV.68

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

68th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 13 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Fatima
(Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/76/364/Add.2)
The Acting President: Pursuant to General
Assembly decision 42/450, of 17 December 1987,
and upon their nomination by the Economic and
Social Council, the Assembly elects the members of
the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Members will recall that, at its 30th plenary meeting,
on 11 November 2021, the General Assembly elected
five members to the Committee for a three-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2022 and expiring on
31 December 2024. Members will also recall that, at
its 52nd plenary meeting, on 16 December 2021, the
Assembly elected two members to the Committee: one
for a term of office beginning on 16 December 2021 and
expiring on 31 December 2023 and the other for a term
of office beginning on 1 January 2022 and expiring on
31 December 2024.
The Assembly has before it a note by the SecretaryGeneral circulated in document A/76/364/Add.2,
which contains a nomination by the Economic and
Social Council to fill an outstanding vacancy in the

Committee for Programme and Coordination for a term
of office beginning on the date of election and expiring
on 31 December 2024.
As indicated in the document, by its decision
2022/203B, of 13 April, the Economic and Social
Council nominated Belgium for election by the
General Assembly to fill an outstanding vacancy in the
Committee for Programme and Coordination for a term
of office beginning on the date of election and expiring
on 31 December 2024.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot. However,
I should like to recall paragraph 16 of decision 34/401,
whereby the practice of dispensing with the secret ballot
for elections to subsidiary organs when the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on a
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Since there is one State
nominated from among the Western European and
other States for the one seat to be filled by that group,
may I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes to
declare Belgium elected as a member of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination for a term of office
beginning on the date of election and expiring on
31 December 2024?
It was so decided (decision 76/404 B).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31688 (E)

*2231688*

A/76/PV.68

The Acting President: I congratulate Belgium
on its election as a member of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on
agenda items 136, 137, 138 and 144.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Kavoy Anthony Ashley of Jamaica, to introduce the
reports of the Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Ashley (Jamaica), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee containing
recommendations on the issues considered during the
first part of the resumed seventy-sixth session.
The Fifth Committee met formally and remotely
owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic between
4 to 31 March 2022, holding three plenary meetings and
numerous informal and informal-informal consultations.
Let me now present the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues that
require action by the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 137, entitled “Programme budget
for 2021”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/76/779, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of one draft resolution,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 138, entitled “Programme budget
for 2022”, the Committee considered two draft
resolutions. The Committee first took action on draft
resolution A/C.5/76/L.24, submitted by Ethiopia, which
was not adopted by a recorded vote. The Committee
then proceeded to take action on draft resolution
A/C.5/76/L.27. A recorded vote on section III of the
draft resolution was requested, which was adopted
by a recorded vote. In its report A/76/633/Add.1, the
Committee subsequently adopted the draft resolution
as a whole without a vote.
On agenda item 144, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/76/778, the Committee recommends to the General
2/5

13/04/2022

Assembly the adoption of one draft resolution, which
was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Finally, under agenda item 136, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 6 of
its report contained in document A/76/634/Add.1, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of one draft decision, entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation and the
spirit of compromise which enabled the Committee to
finish its work on time. Allow me to also express sincere
gratitude to the Secretariat of the Fifth Committee for
its continued and tireless efforts in supporting our work.
I would also like to thank the Chair of the Fifth
Committee, Ambassador Mher Margaryan, and his
team, and in particular Mr. Andranik Grigoryan, for
the dedicated way in which they guided us through our
difficult work, as well as to my colleagues in the Bureau,
Mr. Ahmed Mohamed Ismail Elmahs, Mr. Mohammed
Abdulaziz Alateek and Mr. Mike Martin Ammann. It
has been my honour to serve as the Rapporteur for this
second resumed session. I look forward to working with
the Assembly to ensure the success of the second part
of the resumed session that will take place in May, in
which the Committee will focus on the financing of
peacekeeping operations.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Fifth Committee.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position. May I
remind Members that, in accordance with decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
22-31688

13/04/2022

in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of vote
or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we will proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. That means that, where
a separate vote was taken, we will do the same. I also
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Fifth Committee.
The results of the voting will be uploaded to the
e-deleGATE portal, under plenary announcements.
Agenda item 137 (continued)
Programme budget for 2021
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/76/779)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
entitled “Progress on the implementation of a flexible
workplace at the United Nations Headquarters”. The
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 76/260).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Proposed programme budget for 2022
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/76/633/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 14 of its report.
I give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia,
who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before
the voting.

A/76/PV.68

Ms. Minale (Ethiopia): Ethiopia would like to put
to the vote section III of draft resolution A/C.5/76/L.27,
on the programme budget for 2022, entitled “Revised
estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions
adopted by the Human Rights Council at its thirty-third
special session”.
The Commission of Human Rights Experts on
Ethiopia was established with clear political objectives
and purposes. The Commission and its staff will not
have any relations with or access to Ethiopia. The
justifications are the following.
On 4 November 2020, the Northern Command of
the Ethiopian National Defense Force was attacked.
That was followed by a state of emergency and
law-enforcement measures to contain the attack
and apprehend the perpetrators. Following that
unprecedented experience, allegations about violations
of human rights emerged. Immediately thereafter,
several complementary investigation mechanisms were
created. They include a federal police investigation over
individual cases, a regional police investigation over
matters falling under the jurisdiction of States of the
region, and an investigation by the Ethiopian Human
Rights Commission.
We also put in place an interministerial inquiry
committee that was in charge of investigations into
alleged crimes committed by security officers. All
those mechanisms resulted in the prosecution and
conviction of several perpetrators. In addition, a joint
investigation was launched by the Ethiopian Human
Rights Commission and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). That
investigation, published in November 2021, on the
one hand disproved the atrocious accusations against
Ethiopia and, on the other, proved the commission of
some serious crimes, on which recommendations for
accountability and redress were forwarded.
By December 2021, the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights were in discussions
to expand the scope of the joint investigations to places
and times not covered under the first report. It is at
this juncture that initiatives were reintroduced in the
Human Rights Council to establish a Commission of
Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia.
The Government of Ethiopia and the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission tried to reason with the
proponents to allow and give space to the successful
joint work of OHCHR and the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission to see it to its conclusion. The proponents

22-316883/5

A/76/PV.68

of Human Rights Council resolution S-33/1, of
17 December 2021, refused. The resolution establishing
the Commission was established with no support from
any African country in the Human Rights Council.
The Commission is yet another instance that proves
the politicization of human rights, and the application
of a double standard and selectivity is becoming the
hallmark of the multilateral human rights system,
especially against countries of the Global South.
Considering the prevailing dynamics in the
multilateral human rights system, we do not expect
improvement from that sad reality. It is regrettable that
the productive relations we have with OHCHR have
been undermined and rendered complicated by the
Commission. It is unfortunate that our experience will
be a lesson for States to decide not to pursue cooperation
with the United Nations system. We believe that this
plenary of the General Assembly has a responsibility to
see to it that the United Nations budget and its scarce
resources go to a lawful cause and not a political agenda
disguised as human rights.
Accordingly, we ask delegations to vote against
the allocation of any resources — to vote against the
budget draft resolution presented under section III of
draft resolution A/C.5/76/L.27.
The Acting President: We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution entitled “Special subjects relating
to the programme budget for 2022”.
A separate recorded vote has been requested on
section III of the draft resolution.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
4/5

13/04/2022

Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay
Against:
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Lesotho, Mauritius, Nicaragua, Sri
Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Egypt,
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sudan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zambia
Section III of the draft resolution was retained by
67 votes to 17, with 44 abstentions.
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution, as a whole, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 76/246 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 138.
Agenda item 144
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/76/778)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
76/261).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 144.
22-31688

13/04/2022

Agenda item 136 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/76/634/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft decision entitled “Questions deferred for
future consideration”. The Committee adopted the draft

A/76/PV.68

decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 76/548 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 136.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

22-316885/5
