Resolutions adopted on the reports 0£ the Fifth Committee

be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund.
559th plenary meeting,
16 Decemher 1955.

982 (X). Permanent headquarters of the International Telecommunication Union and the
World Meteorological Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling the conclusion reached at its ninth session 84
concernin~ proposals made, subject to certain conditions,
to the International Telecommunication Union and the
World Meteorological Organization for the construction at United Nations cost of permanent headquarters
for these two agencies on United Nations grounds at
Geneva,
Having considered the reports 8~ of the SecretaryGeneral and the report 86 of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
Having noted the offer made by the Republic and
Canton of Geneva to the two aforementioned agencies
concerning the construction of permanent headquarters
buildings outside United Nations grounds in Geneva,
Having note.d the statement ma"cle by the Acting Observer of Switzerland at the 510th meeti11:g of the Fifth
Committee87 to the effect that the Go.,-ernment of Switzerland is ready to conside.r the question of financial
participation in the extensic_m of th~ Pal~is des ~ations
if a proposal from the Umted Nations 1s submitted to
it,
·Recalling its steadfast policy in favour of the promotion of common services between the United Nations and
the specialized agencies, and considering that such services can most effectively be organized by housing the
pai:ticipating organizations in one and the same building,
1. Decides that the Secretary-General be authorized
to inform the International Telecommunication Union
and the World Meteorological Organization that the
United Nations is prepared to construct a new wing
to the Palais des Nations in Geneva to provide permanent headquarters for these agencies, subject to the following conditions :
(a) That the Secretary-General is able to find ways
and means of financing the construction costs in such a
: manner that any charge falling on the United Nations
budget in the years 1957-1961 does not exceed $200,000
Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth SPSsion,
Fifth Committee, 482nd meeting.
as Ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 38, <locnments
A/C.5/627/Rev.1 and A/C.5/L.353.
ae Ibid., document A/3025.
a1 Ibid., Tenth Session, Fifth Committee, 510th meeting, para.
H

37.

43

per annum, no charge to be made thereafter;
( b) That the agencies shall repay, without interest,
over a period not exceeding fifty years, the costs to be
borne by the United Nations in connexion with the
construction of the building, the title to the building remaining vested in the United Nations ;
( c) That the cost of alterations to an existing conference room for the exclusive use of the International
Telt>communication Union and the World Meteorological Organization shall be borne by those organizations,
the title to the premises remaining vested in the United
Nations;
(d) That the United Nations shall be solely responsible for the management and maintenance of the building together with its annexes and grounds; repairs to
the building to be executed by the United Nations; the
cost of minor repairs necessary to ensure normal use
shall be borne by the two agencies; the cost of major
repairs shall be borne by the United Nations in accordance with local custom;
( c) That the building shall be leased for an indefinite
period to the two organizations at a rental of one dollar
per annum;
U) That the rates of reimbursement in respect of any
services provided by the United Nations to the two organizations should be negotiated in accordance with the
principles agreed by the Fifth Committee at its 510th
meeting ;38

.Z. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
negotiations with the International Telecommunication
Union and the World Meteorological Organization for
the construction of a suitable extension of the Palais des
Nations;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
negotiations with the Government of Switzerland in consultation with the Secretaries-General of the International Telecommunication Union and the World Meteorological Organization, with a view to ascertaining the
possibilities of Swiss financial assistance towards the
extension of the Palais des Nations;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in the event that
he should make an offer under the authority granted to
him by paragraph 1 above and that this offer should be
accepted, to incur the necessary commitments and to
advance from the Working Capital Fund, in 1956, a sum
not exceeding $100,000 to finance preliminary work in
connexion with the construction;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on these negotiations and their outcome to the General
Assembly at its eleventh session.
559th plenary meeting,.
16 December J9"5.
38

Ibid., para. 20.
