S/2007/499*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 August 2007
English
Original: French

Letter dated 13 August 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter from the President of the
African Union Commission, Alpha Oumar Konaré, on the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia and United Nations support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

* Reissued for technical reasons.

07-46254* (E) 220807

*0746254*

S/2007/499

Annex
Letter dated 4 August 2007 from the President of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
The situation in Somalia is a matter of utmost concern to the African Union.
On 18 July 2007, our Peace and Security Council met to review the developments in
that country, and decided, among other things, to renew the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for another period of six months. I am
forwarding, herewith, the communiqué adopted by the Peace and Security Council
for your information.
This decision by the Peace and Security Council came at a time of renewed
efforts regarding the political process in Somalia, as shown by the opening, a few
weeks ago, in Mogadishu, of the National Reconciliation Congress. While many and
daunting challenges lie ahead, there is no doubt that the opening of the Congress
constitutes a significant step towards an all-inclusive and genuine reconciliation
process, which deserves the full support of the international community.
When, towards the end of 2006, the Transitional Federal Government returned
to Mogadishu and regained control of large parts of the country, the international
community as a whole agreed that this represented an unprecedented opportunity to
restore structures of governance in the country, as well as to bring to a definite end
the violence that Somalia witnessed for more than a decade and the untold suffering
inflicted on its people. The decision by the Peace and Security Council, in January
2007, to authorize the deployment of AMISOM was aimed at seizing that unique
opportunity. The extension of the mandate of the Mission is an act of faith in the
determination of the people of Somalia to open a new chapter in the history of their
country and a testimony of our conviction that the objective referred to above can be
achieved.
Due to the serious financial and logistical constraints facing the African
Union, we have to date been able to deploy only two battalions out of the nine
authorized by the Peace and Security Council. Against this background, and given
the volatile security situation on the ground, the performance of the Ugandan troops
is clearly remarkable. We intend to take advantage of the coming weeks to mobilize
additional support for AMISOM, accelerate the deployment of the already pledged
Burundian, Ghanaian and Nigerian contingents, and identify other troopcontributing countries in order to reach, as soon as possible, the authorized strength
of the Mission.
While these efforts are under way, I would like to, once again, stress the need
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia that
would take over AMISOM and support the long-term stabilization and post-conflict
reconstruction of Somalia. Indeed, the task at hand goes far beyond the capacity of
the African Union; it requires urgent action by the United Nations Security Council,
which has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Should the international community fail to act swiftly in support of the
ongoing process, there is a real risk that the modest progress already achieved in
Somalia may be reversed, with far-reaching regional implications and further

2

07-46254

S/2007/499

suffering for the Somali people. Clearly, this is a prospect that the international
community should avoid at all cost.
As you rightly pointed out in your last report on Somalia, a United Nations
operation would only succeed if it is deployed in support of a political process, not
as a substitution for one. Now that the Somalis have embarked on such a process
within the framework of the National Reconciliation Congress, it is the duty of the
international community to encourage them and provide further support in order to
enhance the prospects of lasting peace and reconciliation. It is our hope that the
United Nations will look at the situation with the required flexibility, bearing in
mind that the political and peacekeeping aspects are closely interrelated and
mutually reinforcing.
In the meantime, and given that the African Union is acting on behalf of the
larger international community in Somalia, it is crucial that AMISOM receive all the
support it needs to enable it to create, in the coming months, as conducive
conditions as possible for the speedy deployment of a United Nations operation. It is
in this context that the Peace and Security Council, in its communiqué, called on the
United Nations, pending a decision of the Security Council authorizing the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, to put in place,
in consultation with the Commission of the African Union, a financial, logistical and
technical support package for AMISOM, within the context of the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. To this end, therefore, I propose
that experts from the African Union Commission and the United Nations Secretariat
meet as soon as possible in Addis Ababa to work out the details of such a package,
which would then be submitted to the relevant United Nations organs for
consideration.
I would like to seize this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to you
and the United Nations for the support already rendered, through the deployment of
several planning and other staff to support the AMISOM Strategic, Planning and
Management Unit. I am confident that our joint and determined efforts will
contribute decisively to the restoration of enduring peace and reconciliation in
Somalia.
(Signed) Alpha Oumar Konaré

07-46254

3
