A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/206
9 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 100
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/631)]
52/206. United Nations Institute for Training and Research
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/227 of 8 April 1993, 48/207 of 21 December 1993, 49/125 of 19 December
1994, 50/121 of 20 December 1995 and 51/188 of 16 December 1996,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,1 the report of the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research on the activities of the Institute2 and the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit,3
Welcoming the successful restructuring of the Institute and the recent progress made by the Institute in
its various programmes and activities, including the improved cooperation that has been established with other
organizations of the United Nations system and with regional and national institutions,
Expressing its appreciation to the Governments and private institutions that have made or pledged
financial and other contributions to the Institute,
Reiterating that the funding of training programmes offered at the specific request of States or
departments and units of the Organization and other organs of the United Nations system and the specialized
agencies should be arranged by the requesting parties,

1

A/52/492.

2

A/52/367, annex.

3

A/52/559, annex.

98-77167

/...

A/RES/52/206
Page 2

Recognizing that training activities should be accorded a more visible and larger role in support of the
management of international affairs and in the execution of the economic and social development
programmes of the United Nations system,
1. Reaffirms the relevance of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research in view of the
growing importance of training within the United Nations and the training requirements of States, and the
pertinence of research activities related to training undertaken by the Institute within its mandate;
2. Invites the Institute to strengthen further its cooperation with other United Nations institutes and
relevant national, regional and international institutes, as well as with projects;
3. Renews its appeal to all Governments and to private institutions that have not yet contributed
financially or otherwise to the Institute to give it their generous financial and other support, and urges the
States that interrupted their voluntary contributions to consider resuming them in the light of the successful
restructuring and revitalization of the Institute;
4. Stresses the need for an effective division of labour among the main training and research
institutions of the United Nations system, taking into account the distinct and complementary mandates of
the United Nations University, the United Nations Institute for Training and Research and the United Nations
Staff College Project, and in this regard notes the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit;
5. Also stresses the need for better coordination among the main training and research institutions of
the United Nations system, and in this regard notes the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit;
6. Further stresses in this regard the need for the General Assembly to consider all major training
issues in a coherent manner without prejudice to its resolution 50/227 of 24 May 1996;
7. Welcomes the initiative of the Board of Trustees and the Executive Director to explore the
possibilities for the Institute to become a partner of the agencies and bodies of the United Nations system
with respect to their training programmes, especially for developing countries and countries with economies
in transition, consistent with the division of labour;
8. Requests the Board of Trustees to attract, to the extent possible, experts from developing countries
and countries with economies in transition for the preparation of the relevant training materials for the
programmes and activities of the Institute;
9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to explore all possible ways and means to provide additional
facilities to the Institute for conducting programmes and training courses that are provided at no cost to States
and to their representatives accredited to United Nations offices in New York, Nairobi, Geneva and Vienna;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Institute, as well as with the United Nations
funds and programmes, to explore ways and modalities to utilize systematically the Institute in the execution
of training and capacity-building programmes;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
