S/PV.9130

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9130th meeting

Wednesday, 14 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mrs Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-59060 (E)
*2259060*

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Najat Rochdi,
Deputy Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. Mazen Darwish, Director of the
Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Rochdi.
Ms. Rochdi (spoke in French): It is truly an honour
for me to address the Security Council today as Deputy
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
(spoke in English)
The Special Envoy briefed the Council two weeks
ago (see S/PV.9117) on his most recent engagements
to move the political process forward. Since then, he
has engaged with Arab, European, Iranian, Russian,
Turkish and United States representatives in Geneva,
and he appreciates their support. He also engaged with
the Syrian Negotiations Committee in Geneva and
looks forward to visiting Damascus as soon as possible
to engage with the Government of Syria. He remains
focused on addressing the substantive challenges that
have faced the Constitutional Committee and on seeing
it reconvened at the earliest possible time in Geneva.
In parallel, he continues his consultations to advance a
wider confidence-building step-for-step process.
Let me take a step back today and touch on the
immediate concerns that cause so much suffering for
so many Syrians and tell Council members what we are
doing to ensure that those issues are front and centre of
any political process. Those concerns are, first, civilian
safety and security and a consolidated ceasefire;
2/21

14/09/2022

secondly, the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian
people and its exacerbation by the country’s economic
collapse; thirdly, the tens of thousands of arbitrarily
detained, abducted, forcibly disappeared and missing
persons; and, fourthly, the specific ways in which the
conflict impacts women and girls and our efforts to
ensure the meaningful participation of Syrian women,
equally and together with men, in its resolution.
Two weeks ago, the Special Envoy called for
restraint in the face of a troubling escalation of violent
incidents, but Syrian civilians are still being killed.
Men are being detained and displaced and are unable
to return home in safety. Their infrastructure and
livelihoods are still being destroyed. Even in the past
two weeks of relative calm, we have seen not only
ongoing exchanges of rocket and artillery fire and other
security incidents, but we have also heard continuous
reports of sporadic air and drone strikes in various
areas of northern Syria, as well as reports of Israeli air
strikes, including some that temporarily took Aleppo
airport out of service. Of course, there have also been
violent incidents carried out by illicit terrorist groups,
including fresh violence in Al-Hol.
It remains clear that the political process will not
advance meaningfully or sustainably until the violence
is curtailed and, ultimately, ends. Resolution 2254 (2015)
itself recognizes the close link between a ceasefire and a
parallel political process. Of course, we take note of the
ongoing efforts by various international stakeholders
to preserve different ceasefire arrangements, which
have contributed to freezing front lines for more than
two years. We are fully aware of the myriad challenges
in further de-escalating violence and in dealing with
the presence of illicit terrorist groups in a manner that
complies with obligations to protect civilians. However,
a nationwide ceasefire remains a fundamental goal of
the political process, which we continue to underline
to ceasefire task force participants in Geneva. We
also strongly underline the obligation of all parties to
strictly adhere to international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
I commend the work of humanitarian colleagues
who continue to work to meet the needs of Syrian
civilians, and those needs skyrocket as access remains
constrained and threatened and resources dwindle. We
support them practically through the humanitarian task
force in Geneva. We need to use all the tools available to
us to ensure the full implementation of resolution 2642
(2022) through all modalities, whether cross-border or
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

cross-line, with increased support for life-saving aid
and early recovery. However, we must look not only
at how to meet the humanitarian needs of Syrians, but
how to stem the sources of those needs. De-escalating
violence will take us a long way in that regard, as would
addressing the factors driving displacement or fear of
return, which must be safe, dignified and voluntary.
Addressing all those factors is part of creating a safe,
calm and neutral environment in which a political
process can unfold.
Action is also needed to deal with Syria’s economic
collapse — a major source of needs. Stabilizing
the conflict and advancing a sustainable political
solution are the best ways to stop the economic
collapse. Meanwhile, Syrians are struggling with
the essentials — food on the table, fuel for warmth,
basic services and livelihoods. The economic crisis is
complex, which goes without saying, and a decade of
conflict, compounded by the impact of mismanagement,
sanctions and, more recently, the de facto division of the
country, the Lebanese financial crisis, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the reverberations of the war
in Ukraine, have all contributed to leaving the Syrian
economy in dire straits. To end the economic collapse,
we need step-for-step confidence-building measures
within the political process, across a range of issues, as
we continue our humanitarian work.
Every month, we stress the priority of addressing
issues concerning detainees and abducted and
missing persons. The relatives of those whose fates
and whereabouts are unknown — mothers, wives and
daughters in particular — bear the brunt of supporting
families financially, physically and emotionally,
while also leading an unfathomable search for their
loved ones. That search puts them at higher risk of
exploitation, harassment, violence and stigma, on top
of exhaustion to secure ransom or bribes in times of
incredible economic hardship. They are often in the
impossible situation of having to declare a loved one
missing, as that is the only way to support their families
in terms of, for instance, the right to inheritance,
custody or property.
We are greatly concerned about reports that the
practices of arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance,
abduction and kidnapping for ransom, including of
women and children, continue. However, the families
of the missing recently achieved a milestone. In the
past few years they have been working alongside civilsociety organizations, as well as the Office of the High

S/PV.9130

Commissioner for Human Rights, our Office and other
organizations, and their voices are now reflected in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (A/76/890), in
which the Secretary-General called for Member States’
support for a new international body to address those
issues in a humanitarian and holistic manner that is
victim-, survivor- and family-centric and grounded in
the right to know, which is the only way to start the
healing process for those families.
Syrian women are suffering as a result of the
detentions, torture and abductions, as are their family
members, and yet those are definitely not the only
ones who need our help. Syrian women in general
have carried a special burden throughout the conflict.
Many are managing and sustaining households and
holding communities together in the absence of men.
Yet just when they need livelihoods, many women find
themselves unable to secure jobs or advancement due to
the conflict and its impact on the economy.
Like my predecessor, the Special Envoy and I
attach great importance to hearing the voices of Syrian
women in the political process. Syrian women can and
must play an active role in shaping a political solution
and ensuring that it translates into reality on the ground.
Two weeks ago, I consulted extensively with the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board in Geneva, as did the Special
Envoy. We held a series of discussions that brought
home the realities of the conflict, which they framed as
increasingly compounded by factors beyond the control
of Syrians. They underscored the effects of the economic
crisis and the dangers of a youth exodus hollowing out
society, the economy and State institutions. They also
highlighted the dangers faced by Syrian adults and
children alike, including in the refugee and internally
displaced communities, such as sexual abuse and forced
labour at the expense of an education as humanitarian
needs grow and humanitarian budgets are stretched to
their limits. They reminded me that Syrian children are
growing up without their health, education or living
standards assured and with gaping uncertainties in
their futures. They are developing an ambitious work
plan and we will continue to facilitate their meetings
and amplify their diverse voices.
Meanwhile, the two new Thematic Working
Groups of the Civil Society Support Room will
convene in Geneva very soon to support the political
process. Those dialogues are part of the facilitation
and engagement of our Office with a broad range of
Syrians, allowing us to keep in close contact with those

22-590603/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

who see the situation on the ground, allowing insights
into Syrians’ evolving views and providing us with
advice on creative openings for the political process.
Above all, the women who meet within the framework
of the Women’s Advisory Board, and the participants
in the wider civil-society dialogues, demonstrate to
all of us that despite the many differences between
them, common ground can be found. That is the
most important insight I have gathered so far in this
job — that progress is possible and that Syrians can
come together to rescue their country and focus on its
future. They are committed and willing to engage and
their fight is one for a peaceful future for Syria.
We must advance a sustainable, inclusive political
solution to keep up the hopes of those who are fighting
every day and correct Syria’s trajectory on all fronts.
The President: I thank Ms. Rochdi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Since Ms. Joyce Msuya, the Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, briefed the Council two
weeks ago (see S/PV.9117), the hostilities in Syria have
continued. During this period, air strikes and shelling
along front lines have caused civilian death and
injury and interrupted livelihoods. One particularly
devastating incident that I want to draw the Council’s
attention to took place on 12 September, when three
children were reportedly killed and four people injured
by an improvised explosive device attached to a
motorcycle that detonated close to a medical facility in
a camp near Al-Hasakah city. It is one more tragic story
in a 10-year war.
I am also particularly concerned about the news of a
cholera outbreak in northern Syria. The United Nations
and partners are supporting the relevant authorities in
responding to cases. The outbreak is a stark reminder
of how critical our continued support remains to the
people of Syria, given that the health system has been
devastated by those 10 years of conflict. The outbreak is
also an indicator of severe water shortages throughout
Syria, which are the result of low water levels in the
Euphrates, which we have frequently discussed in the
Council, as well as drought-like conditions and the
destruction of water infrastructure. In the north-east,
amid the cholera outbreak, critical water shortages have
been reported in Al-Hasakah governorate, as water
remains inaccessible for the population through the
Allouk water station, which, as we have also discussed,
has been shut down since 11 August. In that context,
4/21

14/09/2022

access to safe water is more important than ever. Of
course, I call on all the relevant parties to facilitate
reliable access to safe water, or we will see more cholera
cases, more damage to the health system and more
problems arising from the absence of reliable electricity.
Today I will cover three important issues — earlyrecovery efforts, funding and humanitarian access.
As members know, I regularly brief the Council
on our work strengthening the resilience of affected
communities. The focus on that issue responds to
the realities of a changing context and allows us to
concentrate our collective efforts on driving down the
need for humanitarian assistance in Syria. Ms. Rochdi
also referred to the economic basis, which is the cause
of many of our humanitarian problems. Resilience and
early recovery are a major priority, as I believe I have
often pointed out.
With the support of donors and in line with the
global humanitarian approach to early recovery, more
than 4 million Syrians have benefited from projects that
contribute to early recovery and resilience already this
year. We also continue to contribute to the provision
of electricity, which as I said is essential for running
basic services. The bimonthly report (S/2022/635) of
the Secretary-General provides many examples in that
regard. For our programme to succeed in improving
people’s access to livelihood opportunities and basic
services, we need the continued commitment, support
and generosity of donors, as well as their focus on
early-recovery opportunities.
That brings me to my second point, which is on
funding. The annual humanitarian response plan for
Syria is among the largest appeals in the world. For
2022, $4.4 billion is needed. That is a lot of money. In
addition, the regional refugee and resilience plan, which
caters to refugee needs in the region outside Syria,
amounts to $6.1 billion for this year, bringing the total
needed up to $10.5 billion, an eye-watering amount of
money. However, the amount reflects the severity of
humanitarian needs in Syria and in the region following
a decade of crisis. At the sixth Brussels conference, in
May, which many of us — including the Permanent
Representative of the United States — attended, donors
pledged $4.3 billion for Syria and the region. To date,
only approximately a quarter of the humanitarian
response plan is funded. That is very low even in a
difficult year globally, compared to other major crises,
and the regional plan to which I referred, which requires
$6.1 billion, is only 20 per cent funded.
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Engagement with donors in the region indicates
that we may not even reach half of the funding
requirements for the humanitarian response plan by the
end of this year, which obviously has a direct impact
on the plight of many Syrians. Some 14.6 million
people in Syria, more than half of them children, need
humanitarian assistance. That is the highest level
of need since the crisis began. And as I have said on
previous occasions, we seem to fail the people of Syrian
more each year. As each year passes, the needs grow
and the gap increases, further worsening the Syrian
people’s stress and suffering from the crisis. I want to
thank the donors that have come through quickly on
their pledges and urge those that are perhaps slightly
slower to please put the money in the bank. I also hope
that funding for early-recovery and resilience and
livelihood programming will be increased. If we do not
get funding, rations will be drastically reduced, as we
are seeing in Yemen and elsewhere. As I just said, there
are straightforward consequences.
Regarding humanitarian access, since I last briefed
the Council air strikes have disrupted the operations of
the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS)
at Aleppo airport. UNHAS is a critical service for the
humanitarian operation. It is the basis through which
staff are deployed and move and it also occasionally
moves supplies. Our ability to provide humanitarian
assistance in Al-Hol camp was limited during the
reporting period, particularly by the search operation
carried out from 25 August. Only life-saving assistance
such as bread and water distributions were and are
currently allowed. Ensuring continuity in the provision
of aid and basic protection services during those kinds
of operations is of critical importance — but it is not
being done. We would like to see all humanitarian
activities resumed as soon as possible.
The United Nations continues to do its utmost to
expand cross-line operations in all parts of Syria. In
the north-west, we have finalized a revised cross-line
plan to incrementally ensure further access to people
in need of assistance. In order for that to happen, we
need to carry out many unimpeded cross-line convoys,
with an increased number of trucks in each convoy.
That is common sense. The next cross-line convoy to
the north-west is scheduled to take place in the coming
days to deliver 16 truckloads. We expect, want and need
more to follow.
I want to assure you, Mr. President, that the United
Nations and its partners will make every effort to ensure

S/PV.9130

that the cross-line operations in the north-west and the
north-east are pursued with vigour. They are necessary
and, if successful, will complement the cross-border
operation, which is of course of a different order of
scale. In the north-east, we and our partners continue to
assist on average 900,000 people every month through
cross-line operations. We will continue to pursue that
elusive cross-line mission to Ras Al-Ayn as soon as
security conditions allow.
I want to conclude with an anecdote that has been
brought to my attention. It also echoes a point made
by Ms. Najat Rochdi. It is the story of Rasha, a mother
of four and a community leader in Idlib. She lives in a
displacement camp with 1,200 other families, many of
whom have special needs, disabilities and war injuries.
Rasha herself had her spine badly damaged in 2019
when she, her husband and her children were nearly
buried alive under rubble during a bombing until local
responders — the White Helmets and others — pulled
them out. She is now permanently in a wheelchair.
Despite that, however, and with financial support from
donors and sponsors, Rasha was instrumental in setting
up a kindergarten and a physical therapy centre in the
camp where she lives.
The centre provides services to about 20 surrounding
camps. Imagine the will, energy and determination of
that mother, crippled by the war, still providing a daily
service to 20 camps near the one where she continues
to live with her family. She sees about 50 patients
every day. That, we need to remember, is the kind of
light that the people of Syria pursue. The centre now
needs additional support, and we will all see what we
can do to make that happen. In that context, we asked
her whether she remained optimistic — and let me now
echo Ms. Rochdi’s point — and she said that nothing
is impossible when there is will and action — which,
I would add, she shows on a daily basis — the kind of
will and action that, naturally, we also need to see from
the members of the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Darwish.
Mr. Darwish (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council on behalf of ordinary Syrians.
As members of the Council know, the local forces
sharing Syrian territory are nothing but de-facto

22-590605/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

forces that do not have any political, national or moral
legitimacy. However, to be fair, they are trying their
best to represent the interests of the regional and
international Powers that created them. Despite that,
I would ask the States active in Syria to withdraw
their Ambassadors from my country and to stop using
it as an arena for settling scores, and instead start a
real strategic partnership with the Syrian people,
especially given that Members of the United Nations,
at the beginning of every resolution on Syria, stress
the importance of respecting Syria’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. Even the Russian
Federation is consistently associating the delivery of
humanitarian aid with respect for sovereignty — the
same sovereignty that is violated on a daily basis.
Let me remind Council members that the term
“sovereignty” is part and parcel of all of their
Constitutions. Even the Charter of the United Nations
begins with the words “We the peoples.” Is Syria’s
therefore an exception? Why are the Syrian people
deprived of their sovereignty? Sovereignty should be
given to the Syrian people and not to any usurper of
authority, whether a Member of the United Nations, a
leader of a fighting group, a head of a coalition or an
interim or democratic or rescue Government. Only then
will Syria be able to stop exporting drugs, mercenaries,
extremism and crises and live in peace alongside its
neighbours as an economic, political and cultural link
in the region and the world.
I do not know how useful it would be to repeat the
number of civilian victims to the Council, because we
have heard enough. There is no doubt that everyone
regularly takes note of all the updates and reports of
United Nations agencies and that they have accessed
the Caesar file, the newly leaked photos from Aleppo
Central Prison or perhaps video documentation of the
Tadamon massacre.
I believe that everyone is fully aware of the extent
of the severity of the humanitarian catastrophe in Syria.
Unfortunately, the catastrophe is still haunting those
who we thought had escaped by fleeing Syria. While
we highly appreciate the efforts of the countries hosting
refugees, especially Syria’s neighbours, we can no
longer remain silent or pay compliments for violations,
racism, persecution and discrimination faced by Syrian
refugees in some of those countries.
Every day, the politicians of the host countries are
in competition with each other as they announce their
6/21

14/09/2022

plans and intentions to return the refugees to Syria,
absurdly proclaiming the notion of their voluntary,
dignified and safe return — a return that we are
convinced is arbitrary, forced and very dangerous.
I am one of those refugees who sincerely want
to return to Syria. But without legal guarantees and
the implementation of international resolutions, my
request to return is nothing but asking for another
opportunity to get killed after I survived the first time.
In that regard, I hope that, after having failed to protect
Syrians in Syria, they will be afforded protection under
international law as refugees fleeing the scourge of
grave human rights violations.
Notwithstanding the bleak picture in Syria, this is
the first time that I am addressing the Security Council,
and I can offer some hope, as the ongoing efforts of
victims and their families have enabled the issue of the
disappeared and missing to be highlighted as a priority
on United Nations organs’ agendas. That is why I
greatly appreciate the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on missing people in Syria (A/76/890), which
calls for the creation of an international independent
mechanism to clarify the fate of disappeared persons
in Syria. For the first time that could provide a real
road map for beginning to look into one of the most
pressing humanitarian issues in Syria. I therefore call
on all countries to follow the Secretary-General’s
recommendation and implement it without delay. I feel
there is nothing more to discuss in that regard, and any
delay is unacceptable.
The majority of Syrians are dreaming of a peaceful
settlement on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and other
relevant decisions. However, only a settlement based
on national transitional justice can be sustainable and
brings justice and fairness to the victims. In that regard, I
would like to point to the Franco-Mexican initiative and
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, submitted by Switzerland,
which call on Council members to renounce their right
to veto resolutions that are aimed at preventing mass
atrocities and violations.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore and recall
the situation that resulted in the Dayton peace process
in the former Yugoslavia and the fate of Slobodan
Milošević, who was a killer and was ultimately tried
before the International Criminal Court. I call on the
Council members to bear in mind in every action that
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

they take to advance peace in Syria that the only virtue
in war is the war’s end, and any political agreement
that does not include justice will, even in the best-case
scenario, lead to nothing but a temporary ceasefire.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Darwish for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I deliever this statement on
behalf of Ireland and Norway, the co-penholders on the
Syria humanitarian file. Let me first thank the briefers
for their presentations.
As we have heard so many times, the humanitarian
situation in Syria remains alarming. Conflict, food
insecurity, drought, the coronavirus disease and a
collapsing economy have all contributed to a heavy toll
on the Syrian people, one that they have been carrying
for too long. Ninety per cent of people in Syria live
in poverty. We are particularly concerned about the
gendered impact of the conflict, including an increased
risk of early marriage for girls and boys, and about the
risk of recruitment to armed groups. That underlines the
need for a holistic and broader humanitarian response,
one that is sufficiently funded to deliver life-saving aid
and that protects against violence and abuse such as
sexual and gender-based violence. It also underlines the
need for early recovery, including electricity, to support
access to essential services.
With the school year now starting, it is particularly
worrying that across Syria some 2.4 million children
are not in school. As UNICEF has reported, one in
three schools in Syria are no longer used for educational
purposes. Some have been destroyed and damaged.
Some function as shelters for displaced families, and
others are being used for military purposes. We reiterate
the Council’s expression of deep concern about attacks
and threats of attacks on schools. We urge all the
parties to refrain from actions that impede safe access
to education. That includes refraining from using
schools and other educational institutions for military
purposes. The right to education and the continuation
of education, including for displaced children, must be
safeguarded.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights released a report in
June estimating that 306,000 civilians have been killed
since the conflict erupted in 2010. We deplore the recent

S/PV.9130

escalation of hostilities. Civilians must be protected. The
high estimated numbers of those who have disappeared
over the years of conflict, including humanitarian
workers, are equally concerning. It will be important
to make progress in identifying and recovering missing
persons, and appropriate humanitarian actors must be
given unhindered access to all places of detention.
The recent outbreak of cholera in Syria is also of
serious concern and further underlines the importance
of ensuring safe, rapid and unhindered access for
delivery of medical items and other life-saving aid to
the people in humanitarian need throughout Syria. As
co-penholders, we have consistently been supportive
of all modalities for the delivery of humanitarian aid,
both cross-border and cross-line. That is not a question
of either/or. The United Nations and its humanitarian
partners must be allowed to use both modalities to
deliver protection and assistance in accordance with
the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. We want to see further
progress on cross-line humanitarian deliveries, and we
encourage all involved actors to facilitate that. But it
is also crystal clear that the humanitarian cross-border
mechanism is an essential lifeline for the many millions
in need in the north-west. With winter coming, we, as
a Council, must take responsibility to ensure that this
lifeline continues.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their
briefings. I also deeply appreciate the briefing by
Mr. Darwish, whose advocacy in promoting freedom
of expression and dialogue in Syria is admirable and an
important reminder for all of us. The Syrian Center for
Media and Freedom of Expression holds the distinction
of being the first Syrian non-governmental organization
ever granted United Nations accreditation. We are all
grateful for the work he continues to do.
As our briefers have outlined, the Syrian people
remain in peril. The Al-Assad regime and others have
made little progress in addressing the political situation
as envisioned in resolution 2254 (2015). It is painful to
hear about the continuing deteriorating humanitarian
situation on the ground. The new cholera outbreak just
reported by Mr. Griffiths and recently also by United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator Riza
poses a grave threat to Syria’s people. It is yet another
crisis facing the Syrian people, who have had to endure
more than 11 years of conflict — conflict that has killed

22-590607/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

more than 350,000 people, displaced 13 million and
pushed more than 2 million into severe food insecurity.
The United States has been a committed supporter of
the Syrian people. That is why we have pushed so hard,
over the past year, for a one-year renewal and expansion
of the Syrian cross-border mechanism to address this
and other crises faced by the Syrian people, and that
is why we must extend the mechanism in January for
another 12 months.
At the Brussels Conference in May, I announced
more than $800 million in additional United States aid
for the Syrian humanitarian response, and today I am
proud to make a new additional funding announcement
of more than $756 million in humanitarian assistance
for the Syrian people. This new assistance will bring
immediate relief to millions of refugees and displaced
persons. It will help humanitarian partners provide
clean water, food, hygiene and relief supplies, shelter,
protection services and critical health and nutrition
assistance. It will also include support for earlyrecovery programmes across the entire country. In case
it is not clear, let me say it directly: this funding shows
just how urgent and dire we believe the situation is and
how committed we are to the full implementation of
resolution 2642 (2022).
The assistance will touch the lives of Syrians in
all 14 governorates. It responds directly to the United
Nations humanitarian response plan, in which early
recovery accounts for over one quarter of its activities.
We remain the world’s largest donor to Syria because
we are committed. As I said in San Francisco last week,
we are committed to serving the people of the world. We
have not, and will not forget, about the people of Syria.
The United States commitment to the Syrian people
and the full implementation of 2642 (2022) is beyond
question, but we cannot do that work alone. The needs
in Syria are simply too great. We therefore call on other
countries to join us in doing more and giving more.
Even as we work to galvanize more international
assistance, we know that only a durable political solution
to the conflict will allow the Syrian people to rebuild
and recover. A just, enduring peace is the only answer.
The Council clearly outlined a pathway to such a peace
in resolution 2254 (2015). Unfortunately, the Al-Assad
regime, aided by Russia, has consistently stalled and
subverted these processes, sowing more instability and
violence. The unfounded and unnecessary delays in the
Constitutional Committee’s work must end.
8/21

14/09/2022

While Russia has repeatedly told the Council that
the political process in Syria must be Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led, it continues to obstruct the process
of the Constitutional Committee for reasons entirely
unrelated to Syria. Such delays have a human cost.
Instability and violence have robbed Syrian refugees of
the dream of returning home. We commend the Member
States that continue to host large numbers of Syrian
refugees. While many refugees hold out hope that they
will return to Syria, no one should pressure them to risk
their lives to do so. After all, more than 130,000 people
are still arbitrarily detained and are missing inside
Syria. The vast majority of the detentions are forced
disappearances at the hands of the Al-Assad regime.
As the recent report of the Secretary-General
(A/76/890) on this issue spells out, the Al-Assad regime
has made little progress in addressing detentions and
disappearances. That is not a welcoming environment.
Until all those missing or arbitrarily detained are
accounted for, we will not, and we cannot, be silent.
Internally displaced persons and refugees will not
return home as long as they fear for their own safety
and that of their loved ones.
It is beyond frustrating to have the same meeting
month after month and not see progress towards a longterm peace. It is past time for the Al-Assad regime
and Russia to meet their commitments. It is past time
for them to take responsibility for the violence and
instability. It is past time to do right by the Syrian
people. In the meantime, I commit that we will keep
up the pressure, we will push for progress, and we
will continue to do everything in our power, as we
have done today with the new $756 million funding
announcement, to support meeting the dire needs of the
Syrian people.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rochdi, Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Darwish for their
updates on the situation in Syria.
(spoke in English)
The situation in Syria has not improved since our
previous meeting (see S/PV.9117). It remains a dark
festival of the horrible and the unacceptable. I will
try not to repeat things that we have said at our many
past meetings, and I will limit my remarks to a few
key points.
First, with regard to the situation on the ground,
ongoing hostilities, including air strikes and shelling
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

across the country, continue with their usual lot of
casualties, displacement of civilians and destruction
of civilian infrastructure. Conflict remains intense in
front-line areas and other pockets across the country,
with an enduring acute risk of major escalation. It
goes without saying that hostilities and, in general, the
continued multidimensional crisis, are exacerbating an
already-terrible humanitarian situation.
Secondly, as we heard once again from UnderSecretary-General Griffiths, humanitarian aid needs to
reach everyone, everywhere, and, as we just heard from
the United States delegation, it should bring relief to
those in need in Syria. We support the implementation
of all aspects of cross-border resolution 2642 (2022)
over the coming months, as well as early-recovery
initiatives and humanitarian access through all
modalities, including cross-line deliveries, and remain
convinced of the crucial need for the mechanism as the
only lifeline for millions in the north-east. We also call
for its renewal for at least 12 months in January 2023.
Thirdly, with regard to the political track, we wish
that we were hearing more news about the Syrian-led
Constitutional Committee under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva rather than the records of its
successive meetings when they happen or are allowed
to happen by the regime sponsors. We strongly support
the efforts of the Special Envoy and his step-for-step
approach, but he cannot walk alone. The lack of trust
undermines his and others’ genuine efforts. Without
the will and true efforts, the current deadlock will
continue, prolonging the agony of a country in dire
need of hope. We welcome the involvement of civil
society in that process.
Fourthly, the past 11 long years of war, marred
by the worst atrocities and grave and widely spread
human rights violations, have inflicted untold pain on
Syria’s civilian population. Among countries, Syria
today has one of the highest number of detainees and
missing persons. We have repeatedly called in this
Chamber for the creation of an independent mechanism
with a strong international mandate to clarify the fate
and whereabouts of missing people. We commend the
Secretary-General’s study on how to bolster efforts,
including through existing measures and mechanisms,
to clarify the fate and whereabouts of missing people in
Syria and provide support for their families. Delivering
concrete results in order to bring relief to families and
build trust and confidence among the Syrians should be
a key priority, as we heard Mr. Darwish rightfully say.

S/PV.9130

Fifthly, the overall security situation in the Al-Hol
camp remains dire, with reports of an increased number
of sexual violence. In addition, the situation of women
and children in the “widow camps” in north-west Syria
remains largely under the radar. Women and children
are living under the threat of violence, with no means
to earn a living and with no access to basic services.
Children are particularly at risk, and many are involved
in child labour in the camps. We wonder what kind
of adults children raised in such horrible conditions
will become.
Lastly, I wish to highlight the issue of impunity for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights. Accountability for serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law is
crucial to achieving sustainable peace in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2105). No just and sustainable
future can be built sitting on top of the mountain of
crimes committed in Syria. Syrians need a future that
they can build themselves, but it must be in freedom
and with justice.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.
We thank the Deputy Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Ms. Najat Rochdi, and
Under-Secretary-General of the Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths for their briefings and updates on the
political and humanitarian situation in Syria. We also
take note of the remarks made by Mr. Darwish and
welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran and Türkiye
to this meeting.
It is regrettable that there has been no
meaningful positive change on the situation in Syria,
notwithstanding the Council’s monthly meetings. It
is still marked by political instability and violence,
which have created an ever-worsening humanitarian
crisis of an unprecedented proportion. Our intervention
this morning will focus on the political, security and
humanitarian aspects of the matter.
There is no military solution to the inordinately
protracted crisis in Syria. We reiterate that the most
viable avenue for sustainable peace and stability is a
Syrian-led and-owned political process that meets the
aspirations of the Syrian people and is undertaken with
the support of the international community, particularly
the facilitative role of the United Nations. Today we

22-590609/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

14/09/2022

implore the parties and stakeholders to inject a new
lease of life into the fragile political process, including
through the following three elements.

and relevant United Nations resolutions. As the
Special Envoy has repeatedly stated and has become
increasingly clear, military options will not end the war.

First, there must be a return to the meetings of the
ninth session of the Syrian-led and -owned, United
Nations-facilitated small body of the Constitutional
Committee. The parties need to agree on the modalities
for the resumption of the talks as soon as possible in
order to help lay a foundation for the resumption of the
much-awaited political process. They must demonstrate
political will and commitment through constructive
engagements that will lead to tangible outcomes.

In addition, the A3 underscores the need for
decisive collective action in order to combat Security
Council-listed groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in a manner that ensures that
victims who have suffered from this menace get justice.

Secondly, they must engage in confidence-building
measures. That means addressing the situation of
detainees, including facilitating the release of detained
vulnerable groups, such as the elderly, women and
children. In addition, clarifying the status of missing
persons would also be a significant confidence-building
measure. The proposals outlined by the SecretaryGeneral in his recent report on that issue (A/76/890)
would be a good starting point. Progress in that area
will also contribute to the Special Envoy’s stepfor-step approach in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, regional stakeholders and the international
community must enhance their role in support of the
political process. That should be in line with resolution
2254 (2015), which remains the best road map to achieve
the desired political solution in a manner that takes
into account the interests of the widest spectrum of the
Syrian population’s, including women and civil society.
In that regard, the recent statements of commitments by
the like-minded envoys on Syria on 31 August, as well
as the Special Envoy’s recent international engagements
as part of his quest to find a lasting solution to the
Syrian conflict, are encouraging.
On the security situation, the A3 is alarmed by the
continued indiscriminate air strikes, mutual shelling
and rocket attacks, as well as use of explosive devices on
the front lines. The victims of that unrelenting violence
are largely civilians, including women, children and
humanitarian workers. We condemn that unnecessary
violence, which will only undermine peace efforts. The
need for the nationwide ceasefire to be honoured and
adhered to by all parties is critical. It is also imperative
that the parties commit to the protection of civilians,
humanitarian workers and civilian infrastructure,
in accordance with international humanitarian law
10/21

Moving to the dire humanitarian situation, the
A3 notes with concern that it has been compounded
significantly by the deteriorating state of the economy.
Consequently, more than 4 million Syrians are food
insecure, while as many as 5.5 million people require
nutrition assistance and have no reliable access to
water. The situation has become a driver of other social
ills, including early marriage and recruitment into
armed groups.
The cross-border aid mechanism, complemented
by cross-line deliveries, is therefore a vital avenue for
humanitarian assistance. It must be sustained even as
efforts to expand the cross-line deliveries continue.
To ease the colossal humanitarian burden in camps,
we call on States to repatriate their citizens, particularly
women, children and the elderly, from camps in Syria,
such as the Al-Hol camp, where they have been subjected
to severe insecurity and inhumane conditions.
The A3 also encourages more support to the
early-recovery and livelihood activities under the
Organization’s humanitarian response plan. That will
greatly help to build resilience and assist Syrians in
getting back to normalcy.
In conclusion, the A3 urges the Council to put aside
the multiple competing interests, deal objectively with
the Syrian file and demonstrate that the multilateral
system can still be relied on to mediate global peace
and security. The A3 countries stand in solidarity with
the people of Syria in their quest for peace and reaffirm
our respect for Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Deputy Special Envoy Najat Rochdi and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for their briefings,
as well as Mr. Mazen Darwish for his insightful
remarks. I would like in particular, through Deputy
Special Envoy Rochdi, to thank Special Envoy Pedersen
and his team for their ongoing efforts to facilitate a
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

sustainable resolution to the conflict in Syria through
the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That
includes a nationwide ceasefire; unhindered aid access;
the release of the arbitrarily detained; conditions for
safe, voluntary and dignified refugee return; and free
and fair elections pursuant to a new constitution.
They have our full support, as does the call of UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for will and action. The
United Kingdom remains a committed provider of
humanitarian aid and early-recovery support for the
Syrian people.
Against that background, it is disappointing that
Russia continues to stall the Constitutional Committee
process. Geneva is the agreed venue for what should be
Syrian-led and -owned Constitutional Committee talks.
It is time to move beyond talking about a location and
into the substance.
But we agree with Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi
that, despite obstructions, progress is possible. In that
context, we welcome the Secretary-General’s recently
released report on the missing (A/76/890). Tens of
thousands of Syrians have been forcibly disappeared
or detained during the conflict, and thousands of
families are waiting to hear about loved ones. They
deserve answers.
We are also pleased to hear of the recent convening
of the Women’s Advisory Board — an important step in
encouraging the meaningful participation and diverse
representation of women in the political process. And we
welcome the report released today by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic (A/HRC/48/70), which highlights the
conflict’s disproportionate impact on women and girls.
As the Commission’s report makes clear, the Syrian
regime and its allies bear the primary responsibility for
the devastation in Syria.
The data shared by Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has made clear the stark
humanitarian challenge, aggravated by increased
uncertainty for humanitarian providers. We should
ensure that the 14.6 million Syrians who need assistance
get it in the most efficient and effective way possible
and in accordance with international humanitarian law.
Despite the efforts on cross-line delivery set out by
Mr. Griffiths, there is clearly no substitute for the scope
and scale of the cross-border operation mandated by the
Council. We look forward to seeing the Council united
in its commitment to saving lives and avoiding any

S/PV.9130

disruption of that effort. Millions of civilians depend
on it.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I, too, thank the briefers for their briefings.
The recurring clashes in Syria, including artillery
fire, are worrisome. Mexico condemns the attacks on
Aleppo airport at the beginning of this month. We are
closely following the military presence and movements
on the northern border. We call for respect for Syria’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. It
is clear that we must urgently redouble our efforts to
ensure a nationwide ceasefire.
We commend the work of the Special Envoy in
coordinating the discussions of the Constitutional
Committee and regular dialogue with regional
stakeholders, the Women’s Advisory Board and civilsociety representatives. We regret that so far the
ninth session of the small body of the Constitutional
Committee has been unable to convene and especially
that the need to change the location for the talks is being
used as an argument for halting its work.
We must work on confidence-building measures,
as well as on the issue of detainees, missing persons
and accountability, as the whereabouts of at least
100,000 people are unknown. Mexico notes the
recent report of the Secretary-General (A/76/890)
and agrees on the importance of making progress in
determining the facts, identifying remains and offering
full support to victims and to the families of missing
persons and those who have been arbitrarily detained.
Accountability must also be strengthened. Given the
fact that we cannot refer the case to the International
Criminal Court, my country reiterates its call for
cooperation with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic and ongoing investigations
under the principle of universal jurisdiction.
We note the lack of progress in Syria on the
political and chemical-weapon tracks. The progress, or
lack of it, on the humanitarian front also leaves much
to be desired against the current backdrop of food
insecurity, which is exacerbated by the volatility of
fuel and commodity price on the international market,
as well as adverse climate-related conditions such as

22-5906011/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

water shortages. The situation compels us to make
efficient use of all the mechanisms available for the
distribution of humanitarian assistance. In the space
of more than a year, six humanitarian convoys have
crossed conflict lines towards the north-west. We hope
that the Ras Al-Ayn mission in the north-east, which
was suspended due to increased insecurity, will soon
resume. Lastly, the cross-border mechanism benefits
more than 2.4 million people every month, which
attests to the fact that there is no substitute, either in
scale or scope, for that mechanism, and that cross-line
operations are complementary.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Ms. Rochdi for her first briefing to the
Council since taking up her new post and Mr. Griffiths
for his thorough briefing. We also listened carefully to
the briefing by Mr. Darwish.
At the outset, we would like to emphasize the
importance of ensuring that the Syrian crisis remains
at the forefront of our discussions on urgent issues.
Joint efforts must focus on supporting the political
track in Syria, reconciling international positions on
the issue and calling for a comprehensive ceasefire
throughout Syria, thereby helping to restore calm and
create an environment that encourages Syrians to find
a political solution. We reaffirm our support for the
Special Envoy’s efforts to build confidence among the
parties and hope that additional steps will be taken in
that direction. We also hope that the Constitutional
Committee, which remains an essential component of
the political track, will resume its meetings.
In the light of the current alarming escalation, we
reiterate our position against foreign interference in
Syria with a view to protecting its unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The increase in the number of
attacks conducted by the terrorist organization Da’esh
in various areas reflects the ongoing threat it poses to
security and stability in Syria and the wider region. It
also highlights the need for sustained efforts to combat
Da’esh.
As the economic situation continues to deteriorate,
the majority of Syrians lack basic daily necessities
and essential services, such as electricity. The awful
conditions in the Al-Hol camp require urgent attention
from the international community, especially as Da’esh
continues to exploit those conditions to spread its
extremist ideology. We note in particular the plight
of women and girls in the camp. According to United
12/21

14/09/2022

Nations reports, 75 per cent of the murders that occurred
in the camp this year were of women, with additional
reports of sexual violence, which emphasizes how
important it is to provide protection for women and
girls and respond to their needs.
We also want to highlight the dangers that mines and
other unexploded ordnance pose to the Syrian people.
One in every two people in Syria is at risk of death or
injury from explosive ordnance, which also obstructs
humanitarian operations. We must therefore continue
efforts to properly dispose of unexploded ordnance.
We commend the efforts made by the relevant bodies,
including the United Nations Mine Action Service,
to educate local communities in Syria about the risks
of mines.
Providing support for early-recovery projects
remains essential to improving the living conditions of
Syrians. Similarly, it is important to ensure access for
the delivery of unobstructed and impartial humanitarian
aid to all in need throughout Syria. We stress the
importance of creating the right security conditions
to enable the humanitarian convoy destined for Ras
Al-Ayn to reach its destination. We welcome the fact
that the Aleppo airport has resumed operations, as that
is essential to facilitating United Nations Humanitarian
Air Service flights.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its commitment to supporting efforts to find a political
solution to the Syrian crisis that restores desired
security and stability in Syria.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Deputy Special
Envoy Rochdi and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their briefings today. I would also like to thank our
civil-society briefer, Mazen Darwish, for his valuable
perspectives. I will focus on the political situation in my
intervention, as my Norwegian colleague has spoken on
behalf of Ireland on humanitarian issues.
Ireland supports the Special Envoy’s efforts to
de-escalate, both in the north and across Syria. Any
military escalation would only add to the horrors
endured by the Syrian people. However, the appalling
loss of human life, including children’s, continues. In
2021 alone, nearly 900 children died or were injured,
bringing the total number of children killed or injured
since 2011 to almost 13,000.
Ireland also supports the Special Envoy in restoring
momentum to the political process. We renew our calls
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015)
and urge Damascus to engage fully and meaningfully
in the Constitutional Committee. Ireland endorses
the ongoing engagement with the Women’s Advisory
Board and civil society. Any new Constitution and
related political process must be fully inclusive and
must benefit from the full, equal and meaningful
engagement of women. Ireland is open to step-for-step
confidence-building measures, provided that Damascus
engages meaningfully.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s study on
missing people in Syria. We echo his message of
appreciation to the victims and their families and to
civil society for their valuable input. We believe that
the proposed mechanism and support to the families of
those missing can provide some answers on the fate of
their loved ones. Ireland calls on Damascus to be much
more transparent on the release of arbitrarily detained
persons, in particular on the implementation of the
amnesty decree announced in April.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for their briefings. I also
listened very carefully to the statement delivered by
Mr. Darwish.
A Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process is
the only way to resolve the Syrian issue. China welcomes
the sustained efforts of the Special Envoy and his team
to promote the political process in Syria. We hope
that the parties concerned will engage constructively
with the United Nations to properly resolve the
differences relating to the session of the small body of
the Constitutional Committee with a view to holding
a meeting at an early date and making substantial
progress. Special Envoy Pedersen proposed the stepfor-step approach, which is conducive to creating
favourable conditions for the political process. China
supports the Special Envoy’s continued communication
with the parties in that regard.
At present, Syria still faces a complex security
situation. The international community should adopt a
unified standard on the basis of international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions to combat all
terrorist forces in Syria with a zero-tolerance approach.
Any actions that condone, harbour or politically exploit
terrorist forces must cease.
The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria
must be respected. In the absence of the consent of the

S/PV.9130

Syrian Government, illegally stationing troops, or even
setting up military bases, in Syria constitutes a serious
violation of the country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Such acts are in no way in line with defending
and acting strictly in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Resolution 2642 (2022) was adopted over two
months ago. Since then, only one cross-line delivery
has been completed in north-western Syria, with no
improvement in terms of efficiency or scale. I would
like to reiterate that the cross-border relief modality is
only a temporary arrangement made under exceptional
circumstances. The transition to cross-line relief
operations needs to be accelerated, and clear timetable
should be set out for the eventual termination of crossborder delivery.
The Permanent Representative of Syria twice
sent letters to the President of the Council, on 2 and
7 September, condemning the attacks on Damascus and
Aleppo airports. Those airports are important cross-line
transfer hubs for humanitarian supplies. All attacks on
humanitarian infrastructure must cease immediately.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I join others in thanking
Ms. Rochdi for her briefing and wish her every success
in her new assignment. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Mr. Darwish for their updates on
the humanitarian situation.
It is our view that the stalemate in the political
process has become unsustainable. The small body of the
Constitutional Committee has not met since May and,
as evident from today’s briefing, uncertainty over the
next round continues. While the Special Envoy’s efforts
to engage with all stakeholders are commendable, any
positive impact on the political track is yet to be seen.
The reasons are obvious: external factors are impeding
the political process in Syria; the stakeholders have
not shown any indication of flexibility or compromise.
We hope that all sides will engage constructively and
purposefully with the Special Envoy in his pursuit to
facilitate the political process in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We continue to believe that his efforts,
in particular the step-for-step approach, need to be
supported by the Council.
We hope that regional players will continue to play an
important role, supplementing the efforts of the Special
Envoy. In that context, the continuing normalization of
Syria’s relations with its Arab neighbours is a reassuring
development. At the same time, we are concerned

22-5906013/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

by the acts of external players compromising Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. That cannot be
conducive for the political process.
On the security front, we remain concerned by the
overall situation in Syria. There is an urgent need for
serious attempts towards a comprehensive nationwide
ceasefire in Syria. We believe that the withdrawal
of all foreign forces is essential towards realizing
that objective.
India has been consistently cautioning against the
looming threat posed by the resurgence of terrorist
groups in Syria. United Nations-designated terrorist
groups continue to gain in strength in the country. The
global fight against terrorism cannot and should not be
compromised for narrow political gains. The credibility
of the international community’s collective fight
against terrorism can be strengthened only by ensuring
accountability for terrorists and terrorist groups.
India continues to call for enhanced and effective
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians throughout
the country without discrimination, politicization
or preconditions. While cross-border operations are
predictable and important, they cannot operate in
perpetuity. Concrete steps need to be taken to address
the hurdles that are obstructing the functioning of
cross-line operations.
India believes that humanitarian assistance
cannot be a matter of political expediency. Linking
humanitarian and developmental assistance with
progress in the political process will only exacerbate
humanitarian suffering. Syria is undergoing an acute
fuel and power shortage. The international community
also needs to look constructively at promoting projects
that will bring much-needed jobs and economic
opportunities for the Syrian people.
In conclusion, let me underline India’s sustained
commitment to extending development assistance
and human resource development support to Syria.
Our continued support to the people of Syria in their
endeavour to seek lasting peace and stability will
remain steadfast and unwavering.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank the briefers for
their presentations.
Special Envoy Pedersen told us last month (see
S/PV.9117) that we needed to be honest about the
mismatch between the scale of our collective political
efforts and the scale of the challenge at hand — we agree.
14/21

14/09/2022

Troubling signs of military escalation are appearing,
with additional civilian casualties and the destruction of
essential civilian infrastructure. We once again call on
all parties to comply with international humanitarian
law, including the prohibition on indiscriminate attacks
and the obligation to take all feasible precautions to
avoid harm to civilians and civilian infrastructure.
In relation to the political process established by
resolution 2254 (2015), we regret the lack of progress
since the postponement of the ninth session of the
small body of the Constitutional Committee. We thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Rochdi for their efforts to resolve
the issues that are preventing the planned meetings from
happening and hope that the Constitutional Committee
will soon be able to reconvene, possibly with fresh
ideas and renewed political will. On a positive note,
we welcome the recent meeting of the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board.
Brazil supports the implementation of resolution
2642 (2022) in all its aspects. Humanitarian assistance
must continue to reach all those in need via all
modalities — cross-border and cross-line — and with
the indispensable support of early-recovery projects. It is
worrisome that overall funding for Syria’s humanitarian
response plan currently stands at approximately only
25 per cent of the requested funds. The progress on
early recovery must continue, and we recognize the
commitment of the United Nations in that regard.
The fact that violence impedes the ability of the
United Nations to operate is a serious concern. Brazil
reminds all parties of their obligation to facilitate rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access to civilians in
need across Syria.
We also want to reiterate that the humanitarian
effects of sanctions must not be overlooked. The World
Food Programme’s early-warning report on hunger
hotspots not only portrays a very difficult scenario for
Syria but also says that sanctions can be blamed. Brazil
reiterates the importance of conducting a thorough
assessment of the potential harmful consequences of
unilateral sanctions for the civilian population.
The first round of the informal interactive dialogue
foreseen in resolution 2642 (2022) will soon take
place. We look forward to a frank and non-politicized
discussion. Brazil deems very important the
strengthening of principled and technically informed
dialogue on humanitarian issues. In times of heightened
geopolitical tensions and overlapping systemic crises,
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the risk of humanitarian operations becoming part
of the political give-and-take is very concrete and
maybe even inevitable. We must give diplomacy and
principles an opportunity to mitigate that trend. We
know that while predictable cross-border operations are
indispensable at the moment, they cannot continue in
perpetuity. Concrete steps must be taken to address the
hurdles that are obstructing the functioning of crossline operations. We see the interactive dialogue as an
opportunity to obtain more detailed information about
the concerns of all parties in relation to humanitarian
operations in Syria.
In conclusion, Brazil once more thanks the Special
Envoy for his attempts to engage with all sides, facilitate
the political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and propose confidence-building measures. Brazil’s
position remains unchanged. Only a Syrian-owned and
-led United Nations-facilitated political process, with
due regard for the preservation of Syria’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty, can offer a lasting solution
to the conflict.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Deputy Special
Envoy Najat Rochdi and Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Martin Griffiths for their
briefings on the political and humanitarian situations
in Syria.
We see no alternative for making progress on the
situation in Syria other than through a Syrian-owned
and -led United Nations-facilitated political process,
in strict compliance with resolution 2254 (2015). The
meeting in Geneva on 7 September between Russia’s
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey Vershinin,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Geir Pedersen, reinforced that understanding. In that
context, we believe in the importance of resuming the
work of the Constitutional Committee, which is the best
format for direct inter-Syrian dialogue and not tied to
a specific location. For our part, we will continue to
facilitate the smooth operation of the Constitutional
Committee in order to ensure that the Syrians
themselves, without outside interference, can reach
agreement on all outstanding issues concerning the
future of their country. Together with Iran and Türkiye,
our partners in the Astana format, we will continue to
facilitate long-term normalization in Syria.
Against that background, the situation on the
ground remains reliably tense. The continuing threat of

S/PV.9130

yet another military operation in northern Syria, as well
as the growing number of arbitrary attacks by the Israeli
air force and the continued illegal foreign military
presence of the United States and its allies on the upper
Euphrates and in Al-Tanf are exacerbating an already
volatile situation. It is especially regrettable that the
international community, including the United Nations
leadership, has ignored the many appeals by Damascus
concerning violations of the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international humanitarian
law, and in particular those related to the United States’
occupation of parts of Syria and its plundering of
the country’s natural resources. According to Syria’s
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources, our
energy-sector losses since 2011 as a result of the actions
of the United States and the Kurdish administration
amount to more than $107 billion.
Considering current realities, the Western States,
especially the United States, should rethink their
approaches and abandon their flawed insistence on
isolating Syria internationally. In particular, they need
to stop obstructing the process of Syria’s return to
the Arab family. A speedy normalization of relations
between Damascus and the region, as well as the
establishment of dialogue and interaction with the
Syrian leadership, is in the interests of a long-term
settlement in Syria and the overall stabilization of
the region. In practical terms, it would also enhance
the effectiveness of our collective efforts to combat
terrorism, thereby strengthening regional security, as
well as help incentivize the process of returning Syrian
refugees to their homeland.
We regret that instruments of a purely humanitarian
nature are also being used to entrench the territorial
divisions in the country and undermine the sovereignty
of Damascus. A clear example of that is the cross-border
humanitarian aid mechanism, whose establishment as a
special and temporary measure in 2014 circumvented
the Government of Syria and violated the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance stipulated in
General Assembly resolution 46/182. Under the guise
of their supposed concern for the alleged 4 million
people in need in Idlib, the Western countries are
actually ignoring the needs of the remaining millions of
Syrians, most of whom live in Government-controlled
territories. They are not only depriving them of urgent
assistance but also politicizing the early recovery of
critical civilian infrastructure, which is on the verge
of collapse. Meanwhile, the United States and its allies

22-5906015/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

are strangling Syrians with illegal unilateral sanctions
while at the same time making clear concessions in the
areas outside Damascus’s control.
What is also clear is the desire of host countries
to hold onto Syrian refugees at all costs, as well as
the continued existence of the Al-Hol and Rukban
camps, where the humanitarian situation is notoriously
dismal. The security situation at Al-Hol, for example,
is out of control. Premeditated murders have become
commonplace there. We emphasize that all responsibility
for what is happening north of the Euphrates, as well
as in the artificial, Washington-created Al-Tanf zone,
which is flooded with fighters of all kinds, lies entirely
with the United States.
We consider the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022)
not only a difficult compromise, but also an urgent
measure for depoliticizing and expanding international
humanitarian assistance to Syria. That includes
establishing sustained cross-line access to all parts of
the country out of Damascus and the rapid restoration
of water and electricity supplies, medical and education
facilities and housing. We also attach great importance
to the opportunity provided for the first time in this
resolution for an open exchange of views in New York
on specific modalities of humanitarian activity within
the framework of an informal interactive dialogue. We
look forward to participating constructively in the first
round of discussions, planned for this month.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Norway has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I make this statement on the
political situation in Syria in my national capacity as the
representative of Norway. I once again thank the Deputy
Special Envoy and Mr. Darwish for their remarks.
The issue of missing and arbitrarily detained
persons in Syria is vitally important, and Norway
welcomes the Secretary-General’s report to the General
Assembly on missing persons in Syria (A/76/890).
Progress on the issue is essential to the wider political
process and, eventually, reconciliation in Syria. That
is why we welcomed the Syrian authorities’ amnesty
announced in April. However, we regret that there has
been little progress in implementing it. We will continue
to urge the Syrian authorities to step up their efforts to
implement the amnesty and to share more information.
16/21

14/09/2022

We are disappointed with the continued lack of
progress on the political track, including the stalled
process in the Constitutional Committee. Norway fully
supports the work of the Special Envoy in implementing
all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015). We will continue
to urge the parties to contribute constructively and
in good faith to the political process, including the
Constitutional Committee. The escalation of violence,
especially in northern Syria, is worrying. Attacks
on civilians are unacceptable and only exacerbate
an already dire situation. We reiterate our call on all
the parties to abide by their obligations to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Those negative
developments further highlight the overall need for a
national ceasefire.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Ms. Rochdi, Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Darwish
for their briefings.
Clearly, there will be no lasting peace in Syria
without a political resolution. The situation on the
ground remains volatile because the war is still
not over. The political process has stalled. The
Constitutional Committee is no longer meeting. The
regime has not agreed to share any information about
the implementation of the most recent amnesty decree.
After 11 years of conflict, Syrians have the right to
enjoy peace according to the conditions established in
resolution 2254 (2015), which I would like to remind
the Council was adopted unanimously. One of its
provisions acknowledges that the ceasefire and the
implementation of a tangible political process go hand
in hand. France supports the Special Envoy in pursuing
that goal.
Although the number of missing persons in Syria is
estimated at more than 100,000, the regime still refuses
to publish lists of prisoners or issue death certificates.
That attitude is one of many examples that clearly
demonstrate the regime’s lack of respect for human
rights and, more cruelly, for its own people. Against
that bleak landscape, I want to thank in particular
Mr. Darwish for his courage and his work for the
cause of missing persons and freedom of expression in
Syria. We also welcome the publication of the report
of the Secretary-General on missing persons in Syria
(A/76/890). I repeat, the fight against impunity remains
a priority for France, and those responsible for the crimes
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

committed in Syria must be held accountable for their
actions. In the absence of any progress in the political
process, the French and European positions on the
lifting of sanctions, normalization and reconstruction
remain unchanged.
A few weeks after the renewal of the cross-border
humanitarian mechanism for six months only, we are
seeing the operational difficulties that it is creating
on the ground. Costs have increased owing both to
inflation and the reduced length of the mechanism’s
renewal, as well as uncertainty among the humanitarian
actors. As winter approaches, we need to ensure that
the humanitarian community will be able to respond
to people’s needs. Progress on cross-line access
must continue, but it is not enough. The cross-border
operations represent an average of 800 truckloads
of aid crossing the Turkish border each month. It is
therefore imperative that the cross-border mechanism
be renewed in January for at least one year. I also want
to emphasize that all parties, in particular the Syrian
regime, must protect civilians and guarantee full
humanitarian access. We must all respect international
humanitarian law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At a time when the Syrian Government is
sparing no effort to restore security and stability and
eliminate all pockets of terrorism, Israel’s aggression
continues unabated against my country and its
sovereignty and is systematically and deliberately
targeting civilian facilities and infrastructure in Syria.
In just one week the Israeli occupying forces targeted
Aleppo’s international airport twice with rockets, which
disrupted operations at the airport by damaging the
runway and navigational instruments. As Mr. Griffiths
noted, that has adversely affected the humanitarian
operations of the United Nations.
The crimes of aggression and war crimes
perpetrated by Israel in Syria are worsening and have
become dangerously systematic, and that demands
condemnation and denunciation by the Security
Council. Israel should be held accountable for those
acts. My country therefore reiterates its appeal to the
Security Council and the entire Secretariat to fulfil the
mandates conferred on them under the Charter of the

S/PV.9130

United Nations and to condemn the Israeli hostilities,
which are exacerbating the already heightened tensions
in the region and threatening international peace
and security. Conflicts and disputes among Israeli
officials should not serve as pretexts for launching such
hostilities. There will be no condemnation of Israel’s
aggression by the Security Council until the United
States and its Western allies stop protecting Israel in
the Council, put an end to the double standards in their
practices and, most importantly, recognize that if the
United Nations does not put an immediate stop to those
aggressions, they will become uncontainable dangers
in the future.
In addition to the Israeli attacks on Syria, the
United States troops illegitimately present in Syria
continue to violate Syria’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity through their continuing support
of separatist militias and terrorist groups and their
looting of Syrian oil, natural resources and other
agricultural products of the Syrian people, as well as
their imposition of unilateral coercive measures, which
are illegitimate, inhumane and exacerbate the suffering
of the Syrian people.
Over the past 10 years we have witnessed certain
Western countries, including what is called the
international coalition, misinterpreting and wrongly
applying Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations as they use unfounded pretexts and misleading
interpretations to justify attacks on the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of other countries.
In that regard, I would like to draw Council members’
attention to my letter dated 6 September, addressed to
the Council on behalf of my Government, responding
to the statement of the Permanent Representative of
the United States justifying her country’s aggression
against my country on a pretext of Article 51 of the
Charter. In my letter I stress that the only de facto and
de jure description of the actions and activities of the
illegitimate United States troops present in Syria is the
crime of aggression.
The efforts of the Syrian Government and its
partners at the United Nations and United Nations
humanitarian and development agencies to promote and
advance the livelihoods of Syrians continue to face real
challenges and difficulties owing to the politicization
of humanitarian aid by Western donors, the unilateral
coercive measures imposed by the United States and
the European Union on the Syrian people, the ongoing
illegitimate presence of foreign troops and the disruption

22-5906017/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

by terrorist groups of delivery of humanitarian aid to
those in need. The full implementation of resolution
2642 (2022), including the progress achieved on the
early-recovery plans, shows that we are on the right
track. However, the disruption in the delivery of aid
to the Syrian people and the failure of donor countries
to honour their pledges to fund the humanitarian
response plan in Syria are not promising. My delegation
therefore looks forward to the informal, interactive
dialogue before the end of this month, which will
enable us to assess the progress made in implementing
the resolution’s requirements and to identify the gaps
and evaluate the ways in which we can overcome them.
Another aspect of the humanitarian suffering is
the recurrent cuts and interruptions to the water supply
in north-eastern Syria. For a second time, terrorist
groups supported by Türkiye targeted the Tal Tamr
power plant with rockets, hindering the operation of
the Allouk water station, and that was after Türkiye
had already reduced the level of water flowing to the
Euphrates and Tigris Rivers. Water is the lifeline of
citizens in Al-Hasakah governorate. However, we have
heard no denunciation or condemnation of those who
are responsible for the recurring interruptions of water
supplies for the civilian population, and we deplore
anyone turning a blind eye to their suffering.
With regard to the humanitarian suffering in
Rukban camp, it is the occupying Power, the United
States, that is responsible. Ending the suffering can be
achieved only by closing the camp. The same applies
to Al-Hol camp in the north-east, which is under the
control of separatist militias backed by the occupying
United States troops. That camp should also be closed
after facilitating the repatriation of nationals from third
countries detained there. Syria is sparing no effort to
achieve that goal.
Certain Western countries have launched a
systematic campaign to raise awareness on the issue of
missing persons in the Syrian Arab Republic with a view
to establish an international mechanism to clarify their
fate. However, those countries’ actual goal is certainly
not to clarify the fate of persons who have gone missing
through the actions of armed terrorist groups, including
Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
during these years of crisis. They do not even want to
clarify the fate of people who have gone missing, died
or been killed as a result of the actions of the so-called
global coalition and the documented barbaric shelling
of Syrian regions such as Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor and
18/21

14/09/2022

especially Al-Baghouz. The real goal of those Western
countries is to launch a new mechanism no different
from every other politicized and biased international
mechanism used to put additional pressure on Syria and
its people.
In conclusion, restoring security and stability in
Syria will continue to hinge on Western States ending
their hostile policies and interference in Syria’s internal
affairs, lifting the immoral economic embargo, ceasing
their support of terrorist groups, irrevocably and
unconditionally declaring the unconditional closure
of foreign terrorists and their affiliates’ file and
ensuring the final exit of the illegitimate foreign troops
occupying Syria.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate France on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September and thank
the briefers for their briefings.
We reiterate our consistent position that there can
be no military solution to the crisis in Syria. It must be
resolved peacefully in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, as well as with
full respect for the independence, national sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Ending the occupation and ongoing violations of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria is essential
to such a solution and the political process. The fight
against terrorism must not be used to undermine Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The illegal presence of foreign forces in parts of
Syria, which has created ideal conditions for terrorist
activities, must be ended. The recent air strikes in
north-eastern Syria by illegal foreign forces cannot
be justified under Article 51 of the Charter or through
an arbitrary interpretation of self-defence. The attacks
constitute a flagrant violation of international law
and the Charter. The free movement of terrorist
organizations within Syrian territory where foreign
forces are illegally present endangers regional and
international peace and security. We strongly condemn
the repeated aerial military aggression and violations
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Syrian
Arab Republic by the Israeli regime. Israel’s ongoing
attacks, particularly its systematic and deliberate
targeting of civilians and critical infrastructure in Syria,
22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9130

including the recent attack on Aleppo’s international
airport on 31 August, are a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and constitute an act of
aggression and a war crime. We call on the Security
Council to hold the Israeli regime accountable for such
violations and atrocities, which threaten regional and
international peace and security.

sovereignty, the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Charter. We support Syria’s standing in the
region and its improved bilateral relations. The Syrian
Arab Republic has always played a significant role
in regional peace and security. A secure, stable and
prosperous Syria benefits the Syrian people, the region
and the international community.

With regard to the political process, we support
the convening of the next Constitutional Committee
meeting, as the Committee’s ongoing work is critical
to reaching a political solution. We are maintaining
contact with the Syrian Government, the Special Envoy
and our Astana format partners in order to ensure that
the next meeting of the Committee is held, and we
support the Special Envoy’s efforts in that regard. We
also emphasize once again that the Committee must
work in strict accordance with its terms of reference and
rules of procedure, free of outside influence or pressure
and any imposition of artificial deadlines. This must be
a truly Syrian-led and Syrian-owned effort, with the
role of the United Nations limited to facilitation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.

Given the dire situation in Syria, the provision
of humanitarian aid is essential, and political
circumstances should not prevent humanitarian aid
from reaching people in need. The continuation of
illegal unilateral sanctions on the Syrian people is
having disastrous consequences for every aspect of
their lives and runs counter to various provisions
of resolution 2642 (2022), particularly those related
to the implementation of early-recovery projects,
which are critical to strengthening Syrian resilience
and enabling displaced people to return home. Those
unlawful measures have also had a negative impact on
the international and national efforts of humanitarian
organizations in Syria. We reiterate our call for
ending such illegal and disruptive measures. It is selfcontradictory to voice concern about the difficult
humanitarian situation in Syria while supporting
unilateral sanctions against the Syrian people. The
Security Council must work diligently to ensure that
resolution 2642 (2022) is properly implemented in a
balanced and effective manner, particularly in terms
of early-recovery projects and enhancing the cross-line
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We once again condemn the robbery in areas
occupied by foreign forces of Syrians’ natural
resources, particularly oil products, which are critical
to supporting the Syrian economy and saving lives.
That criminal act clearly violates Syria’s territorial

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): I thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Deputy Special Envoy
Rochdi for their briefings.
After more than a decade, the war in Syria continues
to be a major threat to regional and international peace
and security. It is also the fundamental breeding ground
for one of the gravest humanitarian and displacement
crises since the Second World War.
Humanitarian needs in Syria are today at their
highest level since the beginning of the conflict, more
than 11 years ago. We cannot afford the humanitarian
situation in Syria to be sidelined on our global agenda.
Even though 11 years have passed, we do not — and
should not — have the luxury of becoming desensitized.
We owe that much to the Syrian people, to future
generations and to humankind.
In the face of an ongoing and extremely complex
humanitarian crisis, the cross-border aid mechanism
of the United Nations continues to be an irreplaceable
lifeline for millions of Syrians. The mechanism is
also a reflection of the international community’s
commitment to maintain accountability, as well as to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. It is
crucial that humanitarian considerations prevail in the
coming months and that the cross-border mechanism
be extended for 12 months in January. This is not
business as usual. If the cross-border mechanism is
not extended, the hope of the Syrian people who are
impatiently waiting for help will be further dashed.
In the meantime, Türkiye will continue its
constructive engagement for the implementation of
resolution 2642 (2022), including by continuing to
facilitate the cross-line missions to Idlib. However, we
reject arbitrary interpretations or implementation of
the resolution, which would undermine its integrity.
Cross-line aid should continue, but it cannot be an
end in itself. It is essential that humanitarian aid be
delivered through the safest and most direct route and

22-5906019/21

S/PV.9130

The situation in the Middle East

that humanitarian planning be based on independentneeds assessments and not one-sided preferences.
We also find it inexplicable to unilaterally focus
on north-western Syria while ignoring the problems
of cross-line access to Rukban camp and other parts
of Syria, such as Ras Al-Ayn and Tal Abyad. The
fundamental issue and overall objective concerning
north-western Syria is the protection of millions of
vulnerable civilians, as well as civilian facilities
and infrastructure. In Idlib, ceasefire violations by
the regime and its backers continue unabated. Those
non-stop violations also constitute the most important
obstacle to regularizing the cross-line activities in
the region.
Similarly, despite the support extended by Türkiye
and the relevant actors on the ground, the two cross-line
deliveries planned to be carried out before the expiry of
resolution 2585 (2021) — one to Idlib and another to
Ras Al-Ayn — could not be realized due to the negative
attitude of the regime and its backers. We expect the
United Nations to accurately reflect those facts in its
reporting to the Security Council.
We would also like to caution against unrealistic
plans developed without consulting the Syrian
opposition or local actors, which, in our assessment,
cannot yield the desired results.
Regarding the water disruption from the Allouk
water station, the reasons behind the problem are well
known to United Nations agencies. Water is supplied
from the Allouk station to the south through water
pumps that operate on electrical power coming from
the Al-Dirbasiyah substation. The electrical power
from that substation is being deliberately cut on a
regular basis by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s
Protection Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization.

14/09/2022

(2015), and it has to be agreed upon by all segments
of the Syrian people, while meeting their legitimate
aspirations. The Constitutional Committee is the only
mechanism in place to advance that political track,
but it can make progress only if the regime starts to
reciprocate the positive approach of the opposition.
We hope that the ninth round of the Constitutional
Committee will be held as soon as possible under
United Nations-facilitation and with a results-oriented
approach. Türkiye will continue to support every effort,
including those of the United Nations and the Special
Envoy, towards a political solution that will ensure a
united, free, safe and democratic Syria.
The fate of tens of thousands of missing persons
and detainees remains an open wound in the hearts
of the Syrian people. Hardly any Syrian family is left
untouched by this scourge. There is an urgent need to
ensure that they be informed of the fate and whereabouts
of their loved ones.
Türkiye is doing its part in order to reach that
objective. The Astana platform includes the Working
Group on the Release of Detainees/Abductees, the
Handover of Bodies and the Identification of Missing
Persons. We are working hard to ensure that the Working
Group is results-oriented. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report (A/76/890) on missing
persons in Syria and take note of his recommendations.
We will continue to work together with the United
Nations and the international community with a
view to facilitating progress on this — first and
foremost — humanitarian issue.

While addressing the humanitarian crisis in
Syria, we should not forget that the actual cause of
the crisis is the 11-year war waged against the people
of Syria. Therefore, while humanitarian action can
address these symptoms, it alone cannot solve the
problem. As we reiterate every month in the Chamber,
a sustainable solution to the Syrian conf lict can be
achieved only through political means, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).

Protecting the territorial integrity and unity of
neighbouring Syria, as well as the elimination of the
threat posed by terrorist organizations operating in that
country, are vital for us. The PKK/YPG is a terrorist
organization that indiscriminately targets Syrian
civilians, as well as our citizens within our borders,
using similar tactics as Da’esh. The so-called Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) is in reality nothing but the
PKK/YPG terrorist organization itself. It follows a
separatist terrorist agenda contrary to resolution 2254
(2015). As has been well documented by now, this
terrorist organization is responsible for gross human
rights violations in the areas under its control in northeastern Syria.

There is no way to end the conflict other than
through United Nations-supervised elections. That
is the political solution defined in resolution 2254

The approximately half a million Syrian Kurds
hosted by Türkiye and the Kurdistan Regional
Government in Iraq have not been able to return to

20/21

22-59060

14/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

their homes in north-eastern Syria because of PKK/
YPG operations. The PKK/YPG/SDF uses force to
recruit minors and seize people’s property, imposes
a controversial curriculum in schools and imprisons
teachers who refuse to use that curriculum, attempts
social and demographic engineering in line with its
separatist terrorist agenda and impedes the freedom of
movement of those who want to return to their homes.
The so-called SDF carries out, on average, 100
terrorist attacks every month in northern Syria. In
the past two years, around 500 Syrians lost their lives
in those attacks. No one should expect us to remain
indifferent to growing separatist terrorism in Syria. We
cannot stand by and watch the PKK/YPG/Democratic
Union Party terrorist organizations attacks that target
not only Syrian civilians, but also Turkish security
forces and civilians inside our borders.
Türkiye will continue its resolute fight against all
terrorist organizations threatening its national security
in exercise of its inherent right of self-defence, as
reflected in Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, and in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the fight against terrorism.
Our determination in that sense is also a guarantee for
Syria’s territorial integrity and political unity. Those
suggesting that we avoid escalation and instability
in the region should review their own positions and
demonstrate genuine solidarity in the fight against
terrorism, which is, in itself, a major source of
escalation, instability, human rights violations and
humanitarian suffering.

S/PV.9130

In providing temporary protection to close to
4 million Syrians, we, as neighbours, have been proud
to stand by our Syrian sisters and brothers in their most
difficult time. Needless to say, our solidarity remains
intact. At the same time, it is also crucial that Syrians
be able to return to their homes in safety and peace,
play a role in the future of their country and contribute
to its reconstruction and the re-establishment of
lasting peace in Syria. While addressing the needs
of the Syrian refugees, we should also seek to create
conditions conducive to their return in a safe, voluntary
and dignified manner. That must be an integral part of
the overall efforts for the settlement of the Syrian crisis.
We will continue the efforts under way to increase
collaboration with other neighbouring countries, as
well as with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on this issue.
Syrians need our support. Turkey will continue to
do its utmost to bring lasting peace to the brave people
of Syria, and we urge the members of the Council to do
what is right and to preserve the indispensable United
Nations cross-border mechanism. The Council should
not allow thousands of innocent people to freeze and
starve to death in harsh winter conditions.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-5906021/21
