S/PV.7268

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7268th meeting

Thursday, 18 September 2014, 2.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power/Mr. Dunn .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Maksimychev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Ebola

14-53861 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1453861*

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 2.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Ebola
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Armenia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, the Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, the Marshall Islands, Mauritius, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen and Zambia to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Dr. David Nabarro,
Senior United Nations System Senior Coordinator for
Ebola; Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the
World Health Organization; and Mr. Jackson Niamah,
from Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF).
It is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Niamah,
who is joining us today via video-teleconference from
Monrovia. Let me note that Mr. Niamah will be with us
2/50

18/09/2014

through part of this meeting only, so that he can return
to his lifesaving work in MSF’s Ebola treatment centre
in Monrovia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
Ambassador Power and the United States for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on
Ebola virus disease. Only twice before has the Security
Council met to discuss the security implications of a
public-health issue, both times on the AIDS epidemic.
Like those meetings, today’s meeting on the outbreak
of Ebola in West Africa is timely and clearly warranted.
The Ebola crisis has evolved into a complex
emergency with significant political, social, economic,
humanitarian and security dimensions. The suffering
and spillover effects in the region and beyond demand
the attention of the entire world. Ebola matters to us all.
The outbreak is the largest the world has ever seen.
The number of cases is doubling every three weeks.
There will soon be more cases in Liberia alone than
in the four-decade history of the disease. In the three
countries most affected — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone — the disease is destroying health systems. More
people are now dying in Liberia from treatable ailments
and common medical conditions than from Ebola.
The virus is also taking an economic toll. Inflation
and food prices are rising. Transport and social services
are being disrupted. The situation is especially tragic
given the remarkable strides that Liberia and Sierra
Leone have made in putting conflict behind them.
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

National Governments are doing everything
they can. I applaud the courageous actions of the
Governments, communities and individuals on the
front lines, including local health workers, Médecins
Sans Frontières, the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and United Nations
entities. The gravity and scale of the situation now
require a level of international action unprecedented
for a health emergency.
The leaders of the countries affected have asked
the United Nations to coordinate the global response.
We are committed to doing what is needed, with the
speed and scale required. Under the leadership of
Dr. Margaret Chan, the World Health Organization
(WHO) is working to identify the best epidemiological
ways to address the outbreak.
I have activated, for the first time, the system-wide
organizational crisis response mechanism. Under the
leadership of Anthony Banbury, an Ebola response
centre is operational.
With the support of the Government of Ghana and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations peacekeeping mission in Liberia, an air
bridge has been established in Accra to facilitate the
influx of key health responders and equipment. The
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service is operating
between the countries. UNMIL is adapting its tasks to
the current context, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous, visited
Monrovia last week to assure Liberia’s leaders of the
Mission’s support.
In addition to the many local and international
workers already on the ground, WHO, the United
Nations Development Programme, UNICEF, the World
Food Programme and others are actively delivering
emergency assistance. The United Nations Volunteers
programme has identified more than 200 health-care
professionals and other experts willing to be trained
and deployed.
Despite these wide-ranging efforts, the spread
of the disease is outpacing the response. No single
Government can manage the crisis on its own. The
United Nations cannot do it alone.
This unprecedented situation requires unprecedented
steps to save lives and safeguard peace and security.
Therefore, I have decided to establish a United Nations
emergency health mission combining the World Health
Organization’s strategic perspective with a very strong

S/PV.7268

logistics and operational capability. This international
mission, to be known as the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), will have five
priorities: stopping the outbreak, treating the infected,
ensuring essential services, preserving stability and
preventing further outbreaks.
Under the leadership of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the Mission will bring together
the full range of United Nations actors and expertise in
support of national efforts. It will draw on the capacities
of many international partners and work in close
coordination with regional organizations such as the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). It will strive to ensure
that these wide-ranging efforts avoid duplication, fill
gaps and are aligned with the overall strategy. Our goal
is to have the Mission’s advance team on the ground
before the end of the month.
I have written to both the Security Council and the
General Assembly with further details. I thank them in
advance for their support.
Dr. David Nabarro will continue in his vital role
as my Special Envoy for Ebola, providing strategic
direction and galvanizing international support.
My colleagues and I will do everything we can
to ensure the success of the new Mission. But its
effectiveness will depend crucially on support from
the international community. Our best estimate is that
we need a 20-fold increase in assistance. Earlier this
week, the United Nations outlined a set of critical needs
totalling almost $1 billion over the next six months.
One key enabler is medevac capacity, which is essential
if we are to be able to give assurances to the heroic
international health and aid workers who are placing
themselves at personal risk while serving others.
I applaud the leadership of United States
President Barack Obama, and warmly welcome his
announcement that the United States will deploy 3,000
troops to provide expertise in logistics, training and
engineering. I also thank the many Governments that
have made contributions, including Canada, China,
Cuba, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia,
France, Germany, Ghana, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Norway, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, South
Africa, Switzerland, Uganda and the United Kingdom.
I hope that other countries with the means will follow
suit. Airports in Senegal and Spain are serving as
logistical hubs. The AU, ECOWAS, the European

14-538613/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

Union, the World Bank, the African Development
Bank, the Gates Foundation and the Global Fund are
also engaged. We are looking to all those in a position
to do so to help. The business community, for example,
is well placed to contribute in the health, transport,
communications and information sectors. I also appeal
again to major airlines and shipping companies to
resume services to the affected countries. Isolation only
hampers international efforts to reach people in need.
I welcome the draft resolution to be adopted today
by the Security Council. Tomorrow I will speak to
the General Assembly. One week from today, we will
gather at the highest level to mobilize political will to
meet this extraordinary challenge. We cannot afford
delays. The penalty for inaction is high. We must race
ahead of the outbreak and then turn and face it with
all our energy and strength. I count on the Security
Council’s support and that of the General Assembly and
all Member States in meeting this test.
The President: I now give the floor to Dr. Nabarro.
Dr. Nabarro: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to be here this afternoon to talk about the
outbreak of Ebola virus disease in West Africa. I had
the honour to be appointed the Secretary-General’s
Senior Coordinator for Ebola on 12 August, just over a
month ago. Since then, I have visited the countries most
affected twice, and I have also travelled to a number
of capitals to describe my findings. I have had many
meetings with the Secretary-General and his senior
team, and I have also had the opportunity to brief the
President of the World Bank and other agency chiefs,
particularly the President of the African Development
Bank. My findings are as follows.
This is a disease outbreak that is advancing in
an exponential fashion. To be precise, that means
it is doubling at a particular time interval. When the
incidence is plotted on a graph, it shows a curve of rapid
upward acceleration. We heard from the SecretaryGeneral that most believe that the doubling speed is
about every three weeks. That means that the outbreak
has doubled in extent since I was appointed.
The response is also increasing, and we heard from
the Secretary-General that not only are Governments
themselves doing a great deal, but many excellent
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
are also putting in additional resources. But the response
is increasing at more like a linear speed; its graph would
look like a straight line. What that means is that the

4/50

18/09/2014

outbreak is accelerating away from the control effort,
and the longer it does that, the harder it is to get it under
control and, most importantly, to enable the people of
the countries affected to return to the prosperity and
development they have been enjoying so much in the
past 10 years.
So, given the acceleration of the outbreak and the
difficulty in catching up with it, there is an increased
likelihood of societal and economic challenges for
the people affected. I estimate that to get ahead of
the outbreak, the level of the response has to be about
20 times greater than what it is at the moment. That
calculation is based on an assessment of the rate at
which it is extending, but also on the recognition that
any scale-up takes between one and two months to put
in place.
Increasing the scale-up at that rate would be
challenging enough if this were a straightforward
medical problem for which the solution involved were,
perhaps, a vaccine or the administration of a particular
therapy. But this disease is a bit more complicated, and
there are in fact about 12 different critical actions that
have to be put in place for control to be properly effected.
The Secretary-General outlined the five elements of the
strategy, and I do not want to waste time by repeating
them. But the medical part is one important element.
There is also a lot of work to be done to restore basic
services — health care for pregnant women, and food
for people who at the moment are finding it hard to
ensure that they and their families get nutrition, or
even income support, because so many households, as
a result of this outbreak, have experienced huge drops
in their income.
So an effective, efficient and massively scaled-up
response is vital for the affected countries. It is also
vital for the rest of Africa and, as I think Dr. Margaret
Chan will say in a minute, it is vital for the world. I
am convinced that if it is properly organized, the
massive scale-up can happen in the coming weeks and
could in fact achieve a rapid end to the outbreak. And
I am delighted that, since I returned from Conakry on
Sunday afternoon, there has been incredible progress.
First, there was a strong announcement on Monday
in Brussels by the European Union about its collective
commitment. On Tuesday, we heard the powerful
statement of support by the United States, along the
lines that the Secretary-General identified. A further
major set of commitments was outlined at an event
in Geneva chaired by Emergency Relief Coordinator
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Valerie Amos. On Wednesday, there was a strong
statement from the British Government. Offers began
coming in from Cuba, from China and from other
Governments.
But the challenge is to make sure that all those
different offers are coordinated effectively, with a very
powerful platform that enables everybody to work
safely in the region and not in turn become infected
with the virus. There needs to be a strong backbone
of support that enables all its different providers to
work in synergy and in a very clear direction so that the
assistance provided supports people, communities and
Governments to respond effectively. As one President
said to me on Saturday, “We want people to come work
with our nation and its citizens, and not just to come to
get rid of the virus”. Lastly, a very big tent is absolutely
vital, because this requires the whole world to come in
behind the countries and behind their people to achieve
a rapid outcome.
The President: I thank Dr. Nabarro for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Chan.
Ms. Chan (World Health Organization): Many of
the Governments represented here have been helping
with treatment facilities, mobile laboratories, hundreds
of medical staff and money. I thank them.
This virus, this deadly and dreaded Ebola virus,
got ahead of us in a fast-moving outbreak, as described
by Dr. Nabarro, that keeps delivering one surprise after
another. Now we must catch up in the most urgent and
pragmatic way possible. In the hardest hit countries,
an exponentially rising caseload threatens to push
Governments to the brink of State failure.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has
successfully managed many big outbreaks in recent
years, but this Ebola event is different — very different.
This is likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the
United Nations and its agencies have ever faced. None
of us experienced in containing outbreaks has ever seen
in our lifetimes an emergency on this scale, with such a
degree of suffering and such a magnitude of cascading
consequences. This is not just an outbreak; this is not
just a public health crisis. This is a social crisis, a
humanitarian crisis, an economic crisis and a threat to
national security well beyond the outbreak zones. This
week, the World Bank Group warned of a potentially
catastrophic blow to the economies of the hardest-hit
countries.

S/PV.7268

In some areas, hunger has become an even greater
concern than the virus. For example, the fertile fields
of Lofa county, once Liberia’s breadbasket, are now
fallow. In that county alone, nearly 170 farmers and
their family members have died from Ebola. For these
reasons, the Secretary-General and I are calling for a
United Nations-wide initiative that draws together all
the assets of all relevant United Nations agencies. In my
talks with the Presidents of the three affected countries
and in my recent speeches in the United States and
Europe, I have consistently called for an immediate and
massive increase in international support, as described
by Dr. David Nabarro.
We have spelled out our most urgent needs
in the WHO Ebola response road map and in the
12 mission-critical actions appeal launched last week by
Valerie Amos. I and my staff wholeheartedly welcome
announcements like those from the United States and
the United Kingdom Governments earlier this week.
This is a massive ramp-up of support that entails a
transformative change to our collective capacity to get
a grip on this outbreak and bring it under control. These
announcements are statement of concern at the highest
level of Government, but also a clarion call for other
countries to follow. Many are doing so, and we look
forward to hearing from many more.
The fact that the United States, the United Kingdom,
China, Cuba and other countries are using a variety of
assets, including military, speaks to the complexity of
the challenge. This surge of support could help turn
things around for the roughly 22 million people in the
hardest-hit countries, whose lives and societies have
been shattered by one of the most horrific diseases on
the planet. The support of the United Nations and its
agencies is also undergoing a transformative ramp-up
under the leadership of the Secretary-General. The scale
of deployment to Africa of WHO and international staff
under this outbreak umbrella is unprecedented in the
history of the WHO.
Everything now is unprecedented. Everything
now is happening faster than ever before. The needs
are immense, and we know it. Reports show that
more than 5,500 people have been infected. Well over
2,500 have died. And those shocking figures are vast
underestimates. Health, medical, and clinical care
issues must remain the heart, the soul and the spirit
of this response. It will take some time, but the Ebola
outbreak can be contained.

14-538615/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

Let us consider the stable situation in Nigeria and
Senegal. When the first imported cases occurred in
those two countries, we knew very well what we were
dealing with. Governments’ ownership and leadership,
supported by the United States Centers for Disease
Control, Doctors without Borders and WHO, responded
immediately with the right emergency actions. And
let us remember that people crisscross West Africa’s
porous borders all the time. Other countries will have
to deal in the same aggressive way with imported cases.
As support for the United Nations-coordinated response
continues to pour in, I am confident that we can do so.
The President: I thank Ms. Chan for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Niamah.
Mr. Niamah (Médecins Sans Frontières): I wish to
thank Ambassador Power for inviting my organization,
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), to address the nations
who can help my people, my country and my region.
I am honoured to represent MSF. We welcome
President Obama’s Ebola response plan and hope for
its immediate implementation. We also call upon all
States Members of the United Nations to similarly
mobilize their capacities. With every day that passes,
the epidemic spreads and destroys more lives.
I first heard about cases of Ebola in March; soon
after, the disease came here to Monrovia. From then on,
people began dying. My niece, Francila Kollie, and my
cousin, Jounpu Lowea, both nurses, became infected at
work. While they were being treated, they died in late
July. So many of my friends, university classmates and
colleagues have died in recent months.
Since I have a medical background, I felt that
I had the responsibility to help my country. I am a
team leader in Médecins Sans Frontières’s Monrovia
treatment centre. I have worked in the triage section,
assessing patients prior to admission, in the suspectedcases tent and with patients confirmed to be carrying
the Ebola virus. Because there is no cure, we can only
provide supportive care to our patients in the form of
food, hydration and the basic treatment of symptoms.
If treated early enough, chances of survival are much
better.
I cannot stand aside to watch my people die. But
I, along with my colleagues, cannot fight Ebola alone.
We need the international community; the international
community must help us. I wish to illustrate the battle
we face.

6/50

18/09/2014

We have seen so many patients die. They die alone,
terrified and without their loved ones at their side. As
medics, we must have a different way of coping. When
I go inside the Ebola treatment centre, I keep my focus
on my patients’ needs. We try to attend and help first
those who are much weaker, those who need the most
help — food and water — and those who want to talk
to our counsellors because they are so traumatized and
frightened.
We are trying to treat as many as we can, but there
are not nearly enough treatment centres and beds. We
have to turn people away, and many are dying at our front
gate. Right now, as I speak, there are patients sitting at
our front gates, literally begging for life. They rightly
feel isolated, neglected, alone and denied. They are left
alone; they die a horrible death, an undignified death.
We are failing the sick because there is not enough help
on the ground. We are failing those who will inevitably
become infected, because we cannot care properly for
the sick in a safe, protected environment to prevent the
spread of the virus.
One day this week, I sat outside the treatment
centre eating my lunch. I met a boy who approached the
gate. His father had died from Ebola a week ago. I saw
him with blood at his mouth. We had no space, so we
could not to take him in. We could see that his mouth
was bloody. When he turned away to walk into town, I
thought to myself that that boy is going to take a taxi,
and he is going to go home to see his family, be at home
and infect his family. He will also infect other people.
On my night shift, I saw a patient who was driven in an
ambulance about 12 hours because there was no other
treatment centre.
We urgently need to get the disease under control,
and we need the Council’s help. We need what is
referred to as “contact tracing” in order to follow up
every person who has been in contact with someone
who is sick with Ebola or has died from Ebola. We need
to raise awareness about the disease, because there has
been so much denial even now and despite international
attention.
We need more care centres so that everyone can
find a bed and not have to stay at home and infect other
people. We need to get our medical staff trained in
proper procedures, so that they can keep the centres
running. We also need to get health services running
and to ensure that workers and ambulances are safe
for the health staff. We have seen too many health
workers and ambulance drivers come into our centres
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

as patients, facing the same fate. So we plead for
helicopters, centres, beds and expert personnel, but we
also need the basics. There are still homes in Monrovia
that do not have soap, water and buckets. Even those
simple things could help curb the spread of the virus.
Ebola has affected all aspects of our lives. Schools and
universities have shut down, along with public services.
I feel that the fate of my country, the future of my
country, is hanging in the balance.
My wife works at the John Fitzgerald Kennedy
Hospital in Monrovia. We are educating our children;
they serve as an example for their peers. We ask the
United Nations to be an example for peers, as nations
with the resources, assets and skills required to stop
this catastrophe. We do not have the capacity to respond
to the crisis on our own. If the international community
does not stand up, we will be wiped out. We need
Member States’ help. We need it now.
The President: I thank Mr. Niamah for his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/673, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Afghanistan, Albania,
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malawi, Mali,
Maldives, Mauritius, Marshall Islands, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova Romania,
the Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,

S/PV.7268

Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, and Zambia.
It is my understanding that Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2177 (2014).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
I thank Secretary-General Ban for his briefing and
Dr. Nabarro and Ms. Chan for their remarks and for
the essential role that the United Nations is playing
in confronting the Ebola epidemic. I would also like
to recognize all the people on the front lines in this
battle — people like Mr. Jackson Niamah who are
risking their lives to curb this deadly virus. Their
dedication and compassion humble us.
Today the Security Council is holding an emergency
meeting on a health crisis for the first time in the history
of the United Nations. The Security Council has just
issued a call to action. We have called on all nations
to take swift and decisive action to contain the further
spread of Ebola, and we have declared the current
outbreak a threat to international peace and security.
As we heard unequivocally from the experts today,
the scale of this outbreak is unprecedented. By next
week, more people will have died from Ebola in Liberia
alone than in the 20 previous Ebola outbreaks combined.
The director of the United States-based Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention told United Nations
representatives earlier this week: “I have never seen an
infectious diseases of this lethality spreading so fast”.
Without a dramatic shift in the scale of our response,
the number of infected individuals is projected to
double every three weeks. Looking away will not make
this go away.

14-538617/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

One of the main reasons this outbreak has spread
so dramatically is because up to now we have not
come together sufficiently to confront it. Over the past
10 months as the deadly virus spread across Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone we relied on tactics that
worked to contain past outbreaks. But West Africa had
never been hit by Ebola before, so the affected countries
had no prior knowledge or experience dealing with
Ebola. The virus jumped across borders and penetrated
urban areas, and local burial customs aided its spread.
Picking up speed, it has overwhelmed clinics and
hospitals, shuttered schools and businesses and sowed
fear in communities.
Precisely at the moment when a robust, united
intervention was needed, some countries started to
seal their borders. This reaction, driven by a mix of
fear and the desire to protect one’s own citizens from
the virus’s spread, was understandable. The problem is
that while isolation is effective and indeed necessary of
dealing with individuals who may have been exposed to
Ebola, it is utterly counterproductive when applied to
entire countries. It deprives them of the very resources
they need to bring the virus under control. Thus,
when Governments in the region tell over 70 disease
investigators that if they travel to the affected areas
to volunteer they will not be allowed back into their
own countries, they put not only the currently affected
countries at greater risk, but also their own countries.
Today, instead of isolating the affected countries,
we call for flooding them with the resources that are
desperately needed to turn the tide in this fight. On
Tuesday, President Obama announced that the United
States was going to establish a military command
centre in Liberia to support civilian efforts across the
region, involving an estimated 3,000 United States
forces. Supporting United Nations, regional and
national efforts, we are gong to create an air bridge
to get health workers and medical supplies into West
Africa faster. We are going to build a new training site
to prepare thousands of local health workers so they
can effectively and safely care for more patients. We are
going to stand up additional treatment units, including
new isolation spaces and more than 1,000 beds. We are
going to work with partners to distribute supplies and
information kits to hundreds of thousands of families
so they can better protect themselves.
Today several other Governments — many other
Governments, we hope — will announce commitments,
joining a growing cadre of countries that have already

8/50

18/09/2014

stepped up, such as the troop- and police-contributing
countries that serve commendably in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s announcement of the new United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which will
lead a historic effort to mobilize commitments and
direct them where they are most needed.
This challenge far surpasses the abilities of any one
nation or even any region to tackle alone. This must
be an all-hands-on-deck operation. The private sector,
foundations and non-governmental organizations also
have a crucial role to play, and some, like Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF) and the Gates Foundation, are
already leading the charge. One MSF staff member,
Pierre Trbovic, was deployed last month to Monrovia,
to the biggest Ebola treatment centre ever built. But by
the time he arrived, it was completely full, just like the
clinics Jackson Niamah described today. Pierre had the
devastating job of telling patients and their relatives
that MSF could not take them in. Pierre wrote:
“The first person I had to turn away was a
father who had brought his sick daughter in the
trunk of his car. He was an educated man and he
pleaded with me to take his teenage daughter,
saying that while he knew he could not save her
life, at least we could save the rest of his family
from her. Other families just pulled up in cars, let
the sick person out, and then drove off abandoning
them. One mother tried to leave her baby on a chair
hoping that if she did, we would have no choice but
to care for the child.”
That scene is playing itself out right now in clinics
across the region. We do not want to live in a world
where a father burying his sick daughter is turned away
from treatment. It is against everything that we believe
in and stand for. It is wrong, and it is dangerous because
people we turn away are all but certain, as we heard, to
infect others.
Today’s resolution is important. It is a call to
action, not just from the Security Council, but from
the entire United Nations family. Today’s resolution
has a 130 sponsors — the most sponsors ever for any
Security Council resolution in the history of the United
Nations. That means that the 2,176 resolutions that came
before this one had fewer sponsors. This is a degree of
unanimity and unity that we rarely see.
But if today’s resolution is not followed by action on
a scale and scope commensurate to the virus, it will be

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

cited years from now as evidence that we raised hopes
that we did not deliver on. Knowing what we know now
about the exponential spread of this deadly virus, we
will have no excuse if we still fail to come together to
do what is needed — if we do not dig deep. Nobody will
be able to say, “We did not realize it could get so bad”.
The problem is solvable. We know how to give
people who are infected with Ebola a fighting chance
and how to care for them with dignity. We know how
to prevent new outbreaks and how to prepare countries
to find and stop them when cases occur. While our
response will take time to ramp up, and the epidemic
will get worse before it gets better, our actions can save
countless lives. The math is simple; the sooner we act,
the more lives we will save.
I would ask the representatives of every country
represented here, especially those that are still figuring
out how they will respond, to please take this message
back to their capitals. The math is simple — the sooner
we act, the more of us that contribute, the more lives
we will save. We can bend the curve. We must bend the
curve. I would ask those who are skeptical to just look
at Nigeria. Two outbreaks were detected there during
the epidemic; one was in Lagos, which has a population
of over 21 million. In just a few weeks, over 1,000
professionals were mobilized and conducted more than
18,000 home visits. They tracked down 20 cases of
infected people, as well as 890 people with whom the
infected people had come into contact. As a result of
that swift, methodical effort, so far Nigeria’s outbreaks
seem to have been contained.
I would urge them to look also to Ghanaian
President John Dramani Mahama, who visited Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone this week and warned that
panicking and isolating affected countries will only
make the outbreak worse. The United States also wants
to express its gratitude to Senegal for allowing its
main airport to serve as a regional hub for emergency
personnel and supplies.
We have all been alarmed by the models of the
Ebola trajectory that we have seen — models in which
infections rise in steep, terrifying curves. We have
seen those kinds of things in Hollywood movies, but
not in real life in recent history. Those models show
what could happen if we continue to let fear, in action
or indifference drive our response. We have to find
resources that, right now, many think they cannot
afford to spare.

S/PV.7268

Every country represented in this Chamber today
can contribute something that will save a life: doctors,
nurses, hospital beds and, as we have heard, food, soap
and buckets. Models are forecasts of the future. But it is
what we do — by “we” I mean all of the countries that
we here represent, and those beyond — that actually
determines our future. Individuals make history,
not models. The United Nations was built for global
challenges like this one. That is why we are here. Let us
rise, together, to confront this challenge head on.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Nigeria commends you,
Madam President, for your leadership here in New
York and that of your President on the world stage in
response to the threat posed by the Ebola virus disease
to the entire globe. Today’s open debate underscores
the seriousness with which the Ebola virus disease
outbreak is viewed by the international community.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
leadership and for marshalling global action against
the outbreak. We also thank Ms. Margaret Chan of the
World Health Organization (WHO), Dr. Nabarro and
Mr. Jackson Niamah for their briefings.
The unanimity showed by the Council today in the
adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) sends a clear message
that the world will, indeed, react in concert and with
the determination to halt the spread of this apocalyptic
virus and to find a lasting cure for it.
As we speak at this very moment, the Ebola virus
is said to be spreading exponentially. Each passing day
brings with its fresh infections and challenges in the
fight against the disease. Indeed, the world has yet to
see the spread of a killer disease at such a rapid rate. We
could not agree more with what the Secretary-General
concerning the various ramifications of the spread of
this deadly disease in the affected countries. The gravity
and scale of the emergency call for speed, coordination
and innovative responses. It is no ordinary crisis. It is
a global wake-up call about an invisible enemy that we
hardly know and which is spreading faster than all of
our responses.
Three countries — Guinea, Sierra Leone and
Liberia — are in the eye of the storm, literally. They
are now faced with a grave threat that, even at the best

14-538619/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

of times, would prove too daunting for any nation to
deal with single-handedly. Those countries desperately
all assistance that the rest of the world can render. Their
health systems cannot cope with the overwhelming
emergency. Their people need food, water and other
necessities. Their hospitals urgently require the supply
of personnel, protective gear, drugs, beds, specialized
laboratory equipment, technicians, doctors, nurses
and other essential facilities, including generators,
ambulances and fuel.
Time is of the essence. Already, some see the battle
against Ebola as unwinnable because of the rate at
which it is spreading. We, on the other hand, want to
take a more optimistic view of the situation from our
experience in controlling and, indeed, in reversing the
outbreak in Nigeria. We therefore welcome with much
appreciation the announced support given or to be given
by several Governments around the world.
We also welcome the suggested initiative of the
Secretary-General for the establishment for a special
mission on Ebola. We support the idea and will assist in
any way we can to assist its success. Nigeria has already
provided bilateral assistance to the three affected
countries. For instance, we gave $3.5 million towards
meeting their urgent essential needs and supporting
the Ebola Coordination Centre in Conakry. We are also
training laboratory technicians and other specialists
from Liberia at this moment.
We note that some countries have imposed travel
bans and other measures against the countries affected
by the outbreak. We believe that is not the right way
to go about meeting the challenge. We believe it is
important that the affected countries be given all the
assistance they need to overcome the calamity, rather
than being injudiciously punished.
Nigeria will continue to support the protocols
approved by WHO, which do not advocate border
closures, travel restrictions or the stigmatization of any
individual on the basis of his or her nationality or the
passport he or she carries. We also have obligations
in the context of the Economic Community of West
African States to observe and to respect regarding the
free movement of persons. We shall continue to remain
vigilant and strengthen screening at our ports of entry
and exit and to render all possible assistance to our
sister countries in the region to rid themselves of the
pestilence.

10/50

18/09/2014

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Resolution 2177 (2014), which we have just adopted,
describes the Ebola epidemic as a threat to international
peace and security. This is the first time in history that
the Security Council has defined a health crisis in that
manner.
On the one hand, the epidemic represents an
international threat due to its unprecedented scale;
several thousand people have already died, with the
possibly of tens or even hundreds of thousands more
deaths in future. West Africa has suffered dramatically,
but we know that the epidemic could spread far beyond
the region. Moreover, as a threat to peace and security
the health crisis has become an economic and social
crisis that could also generate a political crisis. Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea are all on the path towards
peace after years of bloodshed. The Ebola virus is
threatening to erase the peace dividends and to reignite
chaos in those countries.
This is an emergency. It is our obligation to halt the
outbreak before it spreads out of control. Our collective
responsibility is focused on three priorities: to act, to
coordinate and to prevent. With regard to our action,
the President of the Republic has made combating
Ebola a priority. France stands side by side with African
countries in that fight. By unanimously adopting the
unprecedented resolution 2177 (2014), the Security
Council calls on all relevant stakeholders, in particular
States, to provide resources to combat the epidemic.
Since the outbreak of the Ebola epidemic, France
has taken the lead in supporting the actions of the World
Health Organization (WHO) and non-governmental
organizations in the affected countries. The French
laboratory experts of the National Institute of Health and
Medical Research and the Pasteur Institute identified
the presence of the virus in April and were the first
to be present on the ground in Guinea. Their experts
are today helping to diagnose and monitor the disease
and to train doctors. Today, the assistance of France in
combating Ebola amounts to more than €60 million,
that is, more than $90 million, through various relevant
channels.
Bilaterally, France will provide a total of €35 million,
that is, $45 million, to the affected countries and their
neighbours. The greater part of that assistance, that is,
more than €20 million or $26 million, will be provided
to Guinea. It will take a number of forms. We have
started to deploy 25 medical specialists on the ground

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7268

to help to strengthen health-care facilities, in particular
the Donka hospital in Conakry.

at the epicentre of the outbreak. We need to live up to
the courage of those men and women.

In Conakry, we have funded the establishment
of a centre of expertise by the Pasteur Institute. In
Guinée forestière, we are financing the setting up of
a treatment centre and strengthening the entire healthcare system. In addition, the President of the Republic
has just announced that, within the next few days, a
military hospital will be set up in Guinée forestière, the
epicentre of the epidemic. The hospital will be provided
with military doctors and civilian protection, as well as
air resources.

Mr. Albert Schweitzer, Nobel Peace laureate, who
devoted his life to saving the lives of others, described
our moral duty as follows:

On cooperation, we will not be able to contain the
epidemic without closely coordinating the resources
provided by all actors. At the European level, on
France’s initiative, the European Union will very soon
have a mechanism for coordinating medical evacuations
for European nationals and the international teams on
the ground. The European Union will also allocate
more than €150 million, that is, nearly $200 million,
to the affected countries, in particular to support their
health-care services, to establish mobile laboratories
and to train health personnel. France will provide a
significant part of that assistance. At the level of the
United Nations, we are working in close cooperation
with the WHO and Dr. David Nabarro, Senior United
Nations System Coordinator for Ebola, by focusing our
efforts on Guinea, as he has requested. We will provide
our full support, including personnel, to the United
Nations Operations and Crisis Centre, based in New
York.

Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this open debate on
Ebola and for having introduced resolution 2177 (2014),
which was unanimously adopted and sponsored by
more than 130 Member States, including all 15 Security
Council members. I join those who have spoken
before me in thanking our briefers today, namely,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Dr. David Nabarro,
Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola;
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization (WHO); and Mr. Jackson Niamah,
the representative of Médecins Sans Frontières, for their
insightful briefings and updates on the Ebola epidemic
in West Africa.

Regarding prevention, in the resolution that we
have adopted the Security Council sends a strong and
clear message that Ebola is not a divine scourge against
which humankind is powerless. We can contain Ebola
if the simple and strict health and protection guidelines
are implemented. Beyond that, we will find a lasting
solution only by helping the affected countries to
strengthen their health systems. As we know, those
countries that are already most vulnerable have been
struck.
The courage of the health personnel of the affected
countries and the international health workers who are
fighting against the epidemic on the ground commands
our admiration. I would like to commend, in particular,
the dedication of the Médecins Sans Frontières teams,
to which the Security Council pays tribute in the
resolution. For months, those teams have been working

“Everyone in his own environment must strive to
practice true humanity towards others. The future
of the world depends on it.”
Today, we call on the humanity of all. Men, women and
children are suffering from and dying of Ebola. For
them, let us act now.

First and foremost, allow me to pay our respects to
the 500 victims of Ebola, including the medical staff.
We wish a quick recovery to those patients who are
still fighting that disease. I take this opportunity to all
medical and non-medical personnel, such as Jackson
Niamah, for their selfless dedication to the service of
the affected people.
Rwanda commends the United Nations system for
its prompt mobilization against the Ebola virus. The
WHO, which declared the Ebola epidemic as a public
health emergency of international concern, has launched
an Ebola response road map to guide international
support efforts. Earlier this week, the United Nations
system, as a whole, published an overview of needs and
requirements, which outlines the necessary resources
to effectively address the crisis in the next six months.
In addition to those efforts, we welcome the decision
of the Secretary-General to establish a United Nations
mission for the Ebola emergency response, which will
be critical to mobilizing resources in the fight against
Ebola, as well as for the much needed prevention of that
disease in the future.

14-5386111/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

The efforts of the Security Council in support of
the peace processes and post-conflict peacebuilding
in the three affetced countries, as well as the obvious
security implications of the Ebola outbreak, justify its
due attention and the decision to hold this open debate.
In that respect, Rwanda cannot but agree with the sober
assessement of the Ebola threat contained in the letter
from the Presidents of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone
to the Secretary-General (S/2014/669, annex), warning
that the gains achieved since the end of the civil war,
conflict and stability, impressive as they have been, are
fragile and reversible. We all agree that the impact of
Ebola in the affected countries goes beyond a health
and humanitarian issue, as it has security, political and
socioeconomic implications.
In addition to the efforts of the United Nations
system, we welcome the mobilization by regional
and subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union, as well as bilateral and multilateral partners,
such as the African Development Bank, in the fight
against the scourge. We welcome the pledges from
around the world to support the response road map, be it
with financial, human or other resources. As mentioned
by the Secretary-General, Rwanda has contributed to
that global effort.
We in particular thank your country, Madam
President, for the deployment of 3,000 troops to Liberia
to support the containment of Ebola, the establishment
of additional Ebola treatment units in the affected areas
and the assistance of the United States Government in
recruiting, training and organizing medical personnel
in the affected countries.
In order to succeed in curbing the spread
of the disease, there is a need to strengthen the
awareness-raising of the public to avoid the continued
stigmatization of the affected countries and peoples.
In that context, we recall the decision of the Executive
Council of the African Union to urge all countries that
have suspended or cancelled flights to the affected
countries to reconsider their decision, as the SecretaryGeneral reiterated this afternoon. The decision has
in fact contributed to the further deterioration of
the economies of those countries and a decrease in
humanitarian assistance.
Allow me to conclude by expressing Rwanda’s
appreciation to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the troop- and police-contributing countries for

12/50

18/09/2014

supporting Liberians in the implementation of its
mandate at this challenging time.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We, too, would of course like to convey
our gratitude to the Secretary-General, the Senior
United Nations Coordinator for Ebola and the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization (WHO), as
well as the representative of Médecins Sans Frontières,
for their very comprehensive statements.
The rapid spread of the Ebola virus on the African
continent and its dire consequences are a cause for
growing concern, which Russia fully shares. The huge
challenge facing Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and a
number of other States in the region cannot continue
without the coordinated response of the international
community. In that respect, we believe that the Council’s
discussion of this topic is justified and welcome the
adoption of resolution 2177 (2014).
We highly value the selfless efforts of the three
States most affected by Ebola, their partners, other
Member States and non-governmental organizations
aimed at eradicating the disease and providing medical
and other assistance to the population. In that respect,
we would like to underscore the contributions of Cuba
and Médecins Sans Frontières, which were among the
very first to join the ranks of those fighting Ebola
directly in West Africa.
Guided by the principles of solidarity, friendship
with African States and humaneness, from the very first
manifestations of the disease, the Russian Federation
has been actively involved in providing financial
and technical assistance to suffering countries, both
multilaterally and on a bilateral basis. To strengthen
the public health-care system in Guinea and Sierra
Leone during the Ebola outbreak, Russia financed the
purchase and supply to those countries through the
WHO of medical modules with a selection of drugs
and medical equipment capable of treating 60,000
individuals. Similar modules will be provided over the
next few days to Albania, which is one of the States at
high risk.
In the Donka hospital in Guinea, where those
infected with Ebola are hospitalized, a Russian
specialized anti-epidemic brigade is deployed. It is
composed of highly trained experts and specialists,
who, in cooperation with the WHO and Médecins
Sans Frontières, provides assistance to the Ministry of
Health of Guinea in organizing activities to counter the

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

epidemic and diagnose Ebola in Russian biological and
mobile laboratories. Its operating costs are fully covered
by our country at an estimated cost of $3 million. We
are also preparing to dispatch to Guinea personal
protection equipment for health-care personnel and
volunteers.
Mindful of the broader consequences of the
epidemic, including the threat to food security, Russia,
in cooperation with the World Food Programme,
is preparing to provide food assistance to the three
countries most affected to the tune of over $1 million.
Our support has made a significant contribution to
scientific study of the Ebola virus. Russian experts and
specialists have successfully conducted pre-clinical
vaccination trials against Ebola. WHO certification
is expected, after which, if our assistance is required,
we will be ready to provide it. Furthermore, Russia has
developed high-sensitivity test systems for diagnosing
Ebola that we are ready to supply to all laboratories
operational in the area of the epidemic, under the
auspices of the WHO.
Help for the sick is quite clearly of primary
importance, but that is only part of the problem. At the
same time, the main reason why this deadly disease
continues to spread is the lack of effective prophylactic
and health-awareness systems in the affected countries,
due to a lack of epidemiologists and specialists in
biosafety, as well as managers in the field of sanitary
and epidemiological health. In that respect, the Russian
Federation is prepared to earmark a $2.5 million
contribution to the WHO budget for 2014-2015 to
promote the implementation of international health
protocols, which are the very basis of the global response
to threats such as the Ebola epidemic. We will also
provide direct technical assistance to countries in need
for implementing international health protocols to the
tune of $4 million. Furthermore, we plan to contribute
$3.5 million to the WHO to step up the organization’s
readiness to respond to emergency situations.
We deem it important to inform the Council that
efforts to combat the epidemic have also come from
Russia’s private sector. For example, the Russian
corporation Rusal financed the acquisition of personal
protection equipment for the Ministry of Health of
Guinea.
We welcome the energetic efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in organizing a coordinated and effective
response by the international community to the Ebola
epidemic. We deem it important that all participants

S/PV.7268

closely follow the main areas elaborated by the WHO
in its publication “Ebola response road map”. The
Russian Federation’s assistance is fully in keeping
with the main provisions of that document, and we
stand ready to continue to participate in implementing
the international strategy for combating the disease in
coordination with the Governments of affected States,
United Nations system entities and, of course, other
partners.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates the United States’ initiative
in convening this open debate and in adopting the
resolution on the Ebola crisis (resolution 2117 (2014)).
We also thank the briefers, who provided us with a
comprehensive picture of how grave the situation
is. We would like to commend the leadership of the
Secretary-General and welcome his timely proposal
on the establishment of the United Nations mission
for Ebola emergency response. We also pay tribute to
the WHO and all those who are on the front lines of
the fight against Ebola, especially the noble work of
aid personnel operating in an extremely challenging
environment.
The spread of a disease may not normally fall
within the domain of our traditional understanding
of peace and security. However, this Ebola crisis is
unravelling the very fabric of the affected societies and
threatening the gains made through our international
peacebuilding activities in those countries. As such,
peace and security are under serious threat nationally,
regionally and globally. In that light, allow me to share
with the Council some observations on this matter.
First, a substantial and coordinated international
response is required to tackle the Ebola epidemic. We
believe the disease, while a formidable threat, is both
preventable and controllable. Before the situation gets
out of control, with devastating results, we must heed
the risks and respond at the international level. The
United Nations, which is the best platform to coordinate
international efforts, should help strengthen response
systems and direct the many different streams of aid
flowing in to curb this epidemic.
Secondly, the current Ebola epidemic, which is
regional at this stage, requires proactive regional
cooperation. We urge all countries, including those in
the region, to refrain from closing their borders and
thus isolating the affected countries, which only causes
further harm and delays efforts to stop the spread of
Ebola. In that regard, we welcome the fact that Ghana

14-5386113/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

was made an Ebola logistics hub for West Africa. It will
serve as a vital corridor to get urgently needed supplies
and health personnel into the affected countries.
Thirdly, we also need to take a serious look at how
United Nations peacekeeping missions can further
support country efforts in facing the Ebola threat. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has shown
great resilience and has proved to be instrumental in
assisting the ongoing efforts to cope with the crisis.
While we have ensured a technical rollover of the
Mission’s mandate, we need to enhance UNMIL’s
supporting role in its mandate. The continued and
strengthened operation of the peacekeeping Mission
in itself is a reassuring reminder of the United Nations
commitment to standing by those affected.
Indeed, fighting the unprecedented epidemic
disease is one of the most urgent challenges facing us
all today. We should be united in rising to the challenge.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its commitment to this
international coalition. We are providing humanitarian
assistance to the affected countries and also considering
additional contributions to support the work of the
United Nations and the WHO at this critical stage.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank the United
States presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this emergency debate on the unprecedented outbreak
of Ebola. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union.
My delegation commends the leadership of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations quick and
focused response to the crisis, including the plans to
set up an emergency health mission to coordinate
the international community’s response to the Ebola
outbreak.
We express our full support to the senior United
Nations system coordinator for Ebola, Dr. David
Nabarro, and the Deputy Ebola Coordinator and
Operation Crisis Manager, Anthony Banbury. We
also thank the Director General of the World Health
Organization (WHO), Ms. Margaret Chan, for her
briefing today and for all the efforts the WHO is taking
to address the spread of Ebola.
Our thoughts are with the families of the victims
and the patients, as well as with the courageous and
dedicated doctors and health-care workers, such as

14/50

18/09/2014

those of Médecins Sans Frontières, who, at a risk to
their own lives, have been doing all within their power
to stop the further spread of the disease and help the
patients.
The economic, social and security implications, as
others have said, of the health crisis will fall heavily
on the countries concerned. The exponential outbreak
of Ebola has struck countries, which only a short
decade or so ago emerged out of devastating conflicts,
threatening now to cripple their economies, instilling
fear and tearing apart the fragile social fabric, reversing
the gains of a peaceful development.
Fear spreads like fire. We have already seen the
closures of airports, which prevent the delivery of aid
where it is most needed. We have seen suspected patients
denied access and travelled bans imposed. The Ebola
outbreak is a test of international solidarity and our
readiness to respond to unconventional threats which, if
unchecked, can be as devastating as any conflict, with
far-reaching consequences. As the Secretary-General
has noted elsewhere, “Every day we delay, the cost and
the suffering will grow exponentially.”
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) on the ground, including
communicating information to the Liberian public on
the safety and health protocols and other measures for
preventing the transmission of Ebola. Clear, accurate
and effective public communication on prevention
measures and well-coordinated preventive actions are
of utmost priority. It warms my heart to know that
there’s a modest Lithuanian footprint in UNMIL, as it
carries the vital work of helping a country stricken by
such an unprecedented outbreak.
My delegation welcomes the strong political
commitment to combating the Ebola outbreak expressed
by the Heads of State of the Mano River Union — Côte
d’Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — at their
Extraordinary Summit held in Guinea on 1 August. We
also commend the commitment of the African Union,
whose Peace and Security Council recently authorized
its first ever humanitarian mission to the region, and
the Economic Community of West African States for
their efforts in combatting the further spread of this
deadly disease.
On its part, as our French colleague has mentioned,
the European Union is working on a comprehensive
response to the Ebola epidemic and has already

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

pledged some €150 million of funding for West African
countries affected by Ebola virus.
Within a generation, the people of Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea have gone through conflict and
tragedy, which have left multiple human scars that
inevitably take time to fully recover and heal. We
must all work together to ensure that the response of
the international community and the United Nations
system is prompt, focused and lasting enough to stop
the spread of the disease and keep the hard-won gains
of those nations.
We commend the efforts and contributions by
various countries, including those announced today.
My country’s decisions on our national contribution are
being finalized.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of this open debate on the
Ebola crisis. We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-Moon, Dr. Nabarro and Director General
Margaret Chan for their respective briefings. China also
listened carefully to the statement of the representative
of Médecins Sans Frontières.
At present, the Ebola pandemic is rapidly spreading
throughout countries in western Africa, including
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea, seriously threatening
the health and life of their populations. The Ebola crisis
has already transformed from a public health issue into
a complicated and multifaceted problem, impacting
the politics, security, economies and societies of the
countries concerned and threatening the security of
international public health. Therefore, fighting the
Ebola pandemic is not only a task of African countries
and their peoples, but also a common responsibility of
all countries in the world. .
China believes that efforts should be made in
the following three areas. First, the international
community should respond to the Ebola outbreak
with a heightened sense of urgency by expeditiously
providing assistance to the affected countries. Time is
of the essence in the current Ebola crisis, as the disease
has been spreading rapidly, widely and deeply. The
longer it is allowed to continue, the more difficult and
costly it will be for those countries to contain it. China
appeals to the international community to address
the crisis with utmost attention and offer immediate
assistance to the countries in the affected areas.
Diseases do not heed national borders, and adversity is
the touchstone of genuine friendship. We hope that the

S/PV.7268

international community’s assistance will bring hope
to the populations in the affected areas; help alleviate
the sense of helplessness, panic and isolation; and build
confidence to tackle the Ebola pandemic.
Secondly, the international community should
further coordinate various responses to the crisis.
China supports the United Nations leading role in
coordinating international responses to the pandemic,
and welcomes the initiative of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to establish in West Africa the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which we
believe will help mobilize various parties to integrate
international assistance efforts and will form a synergy
in the whole process. China supports the World Health
Organization (WHO) in further using its expertise to
monitor the pandemic, to facilitate the expeditious
research and development of treatment plans and
vaccines, and at the same time to step up prevention
campaigns. Other United Nations organs and agencies
should play their own parts, coordinate their efforts
and establish a reasonable labour division among them,
working together to contribute to the fight against the
Ebola pandemic.
Thirdly, the international community should
address both the root causes and symptoms of the
problem by assisting African countries in accelerating
their economic and social development. The current
Ebola outbreak has overwhelmed the public health
systems of the three countries, further hampering
the already fragile economic and social development
in those countries and their neighbours. When
providing emergency medical relief and assistance
to those countries to help them cope with the current
pandemic, the international community should keep
their long-term needs in mind, actively increase input
in and support for the development of their medical and
health-care systems and help them to establish as soon
as possible comprehensive health systems and systems
for pandemic prevention and control. In the meantime,
the international community should vigorously help
those countries advance their economic and social
development and strengthen their capacity-building
ininfrastructure and public administration, so as to
enhance their capacity for pandemic prevention and
control.
China was hit by the severe acute respiratory
syndrome epidemic in 2003, so we greatly sympathize
with the people of the African countries concerned, who
are suffering from the current pandemic. The Chinese

14-5386115/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

leadership and Government attach deep importance
to the problem of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa
and have, since the very beginning of the epidemic,
provided assistance to the countries concerned and
shared with them China’s experience in pandemic
control. To support African countries in their response
to the Ebola outbreak, China provided assistance in cash
and kind as early as April and, in August, we assembled
and immediately sent to the three countries materials
for pandemic control and relief valued at ¥30 million.
China also dispatched two groups of public health
experts and clinicians to the affected areas to provide
guidance and assistance.
Since the outbreak of the crisis, the Chinese
medical team on the ground has stayed on to actively
help the local people in preventing and controlling the
epidemic. Recently, China dispatched to Sierra Leone a
medical team of 59 members and a biological security
laboratory for lab testing and the management of
patients kept for observation. To date, China has sent
174 medical experts and workers serving in affected
areas in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea.
Earlier today, Chinese President Xi Jinping, who
is on a visit to India, announced that the Chinese
Government has decided that, in addition to the two
previous contributions, another contribution valued at
¥200 million in cash, food and material will be sent
to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea. China will also
provide $2 million dollars in cash respectively to the
WHO and the African Union in support of their efforts
aimed at fighting the pandemic.
China will continue to work with all the countries
of the world and join hands with the West African
countries concerned to help them weather the current
crisis. We hope that with the all-out support of the
international community, the West African countries
and peoples will defeat the crisis at any early date,
restore national stability and resume economic and
social development as soon as possible.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): As we now recognize,
almost too late, the Ebola outbreak in West Africa is
unprecedented in its scale, its geographic reach and its
impact. We have heard that the already high numbers
of infections and deaths are multiplying exponentially,
doubling every three weeks. Health systems in affected
countries have been stretched to the point of collapse.
Sick, infected people — “begging for life”, as Jackson
Niamah of Médecins Sans Frontières has just said — are

16/50

18/09/2014

being turned away from overflowing treatment centres
to die. That is clearly appalling in itself, but it is also
worsening the spread of the disease. Health systems
cannot cope with other endemic disease or even simple
treatments. We have heard again today the dire forecasts
if Ebola is left to continue its alarming spread.
I welcome the United States leadership in
convening today’s historic emergency session, and
we are particularly indebted to President Obama for
his announcement this week of unprecedented United
States efforts to help stop the epidemic.
We know that the Ebola outbreak has been
transformed into much more than a health crisis; it has
grave humanitarian, economic and social consequences
that could spread far beyond the affected countries.
Women are disproportionately affected, as always,
accounting for as much as 70 per cent of Ebola cases.
Female nurses represent the majority of medical
personnel killed. Ebola risks rolling back peacebuilding
and development gains. Economic growth forecasts
are already being slashed, and it is already having an
impact on stability in a region emerging from conflict
and grappling with chronic conflict risks, such as high
youth unemployment. It is self-evident that the crisis is
a threat to international peace and security.
We have much catching up to do if we are to succeed
in bending down the epidemiological curve from its
current explosive trajectory. The effects of the outbreak
are still reversible, but only if the response — and
particularly isolation and treatment capacity — is
scaled up massively, quickly. There is no time to waste.
It is absolutely vital that there is an urgent,
coordinated response. Australia strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s efforts, through Dr. Nabarro, and
working closely with Ms. Chan and the World Health
Organisation (WHO), to ensure that the United Nations
system makes an immediate, effective and coordinated
contribution to the global effort to control the outbreak.
We recognize that we are faced with an unprecedented
challenge that requires an equally unprecedented
response. Australia therefore welcomes and supports
the Secretary-General’s initiative to immediately
establish the first-ever United Nations international
public health mission, the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response.
United Nations peacekeeping missions, in particular
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), can
also support efforts to combat the outbreak, as far as

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

their capacities and mandates allow. We know that
peacekeepers cannot be transformed into front-line
health care workers, but as UNMIL is demonstrating,
they can play a crucial role to communicate Ebola
preventive measures to the public, and importantly,
to dispel fear and misinformation. United Nations
missions support the maintenance of law and order, and
they also have logistical and organizational capabilities,
which are desperately needed.
The blanket border and travel restrictions being
imposed across the region to contain the outbreak are,
as we have heard, having a paradoxical effect, making
it more difficult to fly in medical staff and supplies and
restricting trade and transportation links. We thank
Ghana for retaining the crucial UNMIL air bridge into
Monrovia. We can and indeed must maintain open
borders prudently, while at the same time heightening
our vigilance to stop Ebola’s spread.
Australia is committed to supporting the international
response. Our Foreign Minister announced this week
that Australia would immediately provide a further
$7 million, including for the WHO consolidated
regional response and to support the provision of
front-line medical services. We have heard today that
the international response must increase by 20 times
if we are to get ahead of the epidemic. Australia will
continue to assess very quickly areas where we can best
contribute.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the health
care workers, 90 per cent of whom are national staff,
who were at the coalface of the response to this
terrible, but still beatable, disease. They are working
tirelessly at great personal risk to save lives and reduce
suffering. Many have died. All urgently need our full
and unwavering support.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Secretary-General, Dr. Nabarro, Ms. Chan and
Mr. Niamah for their powerful and moving briefings
today. I extend my thanks to you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting on a health crisis that has
profound implications for us all.
The current Ebola epidemic has become a
humanitarian, social and economic crisis for the
three most affected West African countries and their
22 million people. It constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. If we fail to act now, it threatens
to become a catastrophe, which will destroy economies
and neutralize the post-conflict gains of recent years.

S/PV.7268

It is crucial that the international community
work together to fight and stop the epidemic, both by
assisting the three most affected countries, but also by
helping other countries in the region to be ready if the
disease spreads to them. It is important to remember
that Ebola is a preventable and containable disease, but
only if we all work together to stop it and confront the
fear and stigma associated with the disease. We must
not let fear dictate the response; instead, we must act.
We therefore welcome the initiative of holding this
meeting and wholeheartedly support resolution 2177
(2014), which injects new urgency into the fight.
The United Nations has a vital role to play in
bringing Ebola under control. We therefore welcome
the efforts made so far to coordinate the United Nations
system’s response, in particular the announcement made
by the Secretary-General today on the establishment of
a special United Nations emergency response mission.
The United Kingdom is also playing its part. Work
has already started on a special $60 million health
centre in Freetown. The centre will give confidence
to health workers bravely joining the effort. British
military experts and staff from Save the Children UK
have already joined them on the ground to get the centre
operational.
Yesterday, my Foreign Secretary announced a
significantly increased package of support. At the heart
of the package is a commitment to lead and underwrite
the provision of a total of 700 treatment beds for Sierra
Leone. More than 200 of those beds are already in the
delivery pipeline. We will now deliver a further 500
beds, working with partners to provide and train the
international staff needed to operate them.
There is simply no time to waste. Every day that
goes by means more Ebola cases and more Ebola
deaths. That is why we have joined the current effort,
by committing support to partners, including the World
Health Organization, the Red Cross, Médecins Sans
Frontières, the International Rescue Committee, the
Ebola Response Consortium, UNICEF and other parts
of the United Nations system in their monumental
effort to scale up the response. We are also helping to
contain Ebola through our long-standing commitments
to multilateral institutions, such as the African
Development Bank, the World Bank and, in particular,
the European Union (EU), where we are working
closely with our EU partners to make the most of our
collective expertise.

14-5386117/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

As my Australian colleague has just recalled,
women are increasingly more at risk from Ebola than
men. We therefore need initiatives that promote practical
collective action at the community and national levels
to protect women. Women must also be central to any
discussions on the response to the outbreak.
We welcome announcements of support from
others, such as the generous new United States
assistance to Liberia, this week’s announcement that
France will step up its support to Guinea, and pledges
of help from such countries as China, Canada and
Cuba. But we need a mammoth and sustainable global
effort if we are to beat this scourge. Current predictions
are that it could last for many months, even years, and
could impact the lives of millions of people. We must
not let that happen.
So today we call on all countries to join this global
coalition against Ebola without hesitation, without
doubt and with the determination that we will end this
terrible outbreak. Without an immediate and concerted
global push, Ebola will kill many thousands more,
affecting communities for a generation.
Now is the time for united action. I call on all
nations to join this clarion call without delay before this
crisis becomes a catastrophe.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the United States for having taken the initiative to
convene this special debate on an issue that is of concern
to all of us. I thank the Secretary-General; Dr. David
Nabarro, United Nations System Senior Coordinator
for Ebola Virus Disease; and the Director-General of
the World Health Organization (WHO), Dr. Margaret
Chan, for their briefings, and Mr. Jackson Niamah of
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) for his testimony on
the ground.
Luxembourg pays tribute to the heroic commitment
of MSF volunteers and of the thousands of health-care
workers, national and international, in Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Guinea and throughout West Africa. They must
be given every possible guarantee for their own safety.
I associate myself with the statement to be made
later by the observer of the European Union.
Luxembourg shares the deep concern about the
exponential growth of the Ebola epidemic. It is no
longer a simple humanitarian emergency, but, rather,
a multidimensional crisis that threatens institutions,
societies and the economies of the countries affected

18/50

18/09/2014

by the epidemic and of West Africa as a whole. As
a response, we need a general mobilization of the
international community. Resolution 2177 (2014),
which we have just adopted at the initiative of the
United States and which Luxembourg had the honour
to co-sponsor, reflects the commitment of the Security
Council to address this threat to peace and security.
To stop the Ebola epidemic, we must use all
means — public and private, civil and military — at
our disposal. The United Nations has a key role to play
in coordinating this global effort. That is the reason
for the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response, which has just been announced by the
Secretary-General. We fully support the launching of
the Mission as soon as possible.
The Mission must, on the one hand, support the
efforts of the countries stricken by the epidemic to
contain it, and must also, on the other, assist countries
in the region that are not yet affected by the Ebola virus
to prevent its outbreak. This health-promoting United
Nations Mission will also coordinate and channel the
contributions made by all.
For its part, in addition to the contributions it has
already made through the European Union, Luxembourg
has participated in the following undertakings: the
WHO regiоnal response programme to the Ebola virus,
the MSF treatment protection programme, the World
Food Programme special operation aimed at providing
humanitarian air service in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, and an initiative to fight Ebola in cooperation
with Lagos University Teaching Hospital.
In view of the High-level Meeting to be convened
by the Secretary-General on 25 September, we
are considering the possibility of making further
contributions, in close consultation with the countries
of West Africa and the United Nations.
Acting quickly to stop the Ebola virus must go hand
in hand with long-term efforts aimed at preventing the
recurrence of such a crisis in future. We must face up
to the structural challenges that condemn the greater
part of the citizens of West Africa to live in poverty and
precarity and that increase their vulnerability to shocks
such as the Ebola epidemic.
The Peacebuilding Commission will have a role
to play in this context by supporting the strengthening
of accountable and effective State institutions. The
Guinea configuration of the Commission, over which
I have the honour of presiding, is listening closely to
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

the authorities of the Republic of Guinea to review
peacebuilding priorities in the light of the current crisis,
and we are ready to work with our colleagues from the
Liberia and Sierra Leone configurations to strengthen
the regional approach in this context.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Secretary-General; Dr. David Nabarro,
United Nations System Senior Coordinator for Ebola
Virus Disease; Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General of
the World Health Organization (WHO); and Mr. Jackson
Niamah of Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) in Liberia
for their briefings.
We also commend the United States’ leadership in
its presidency of the Security Council in devoting this
special meeting to the Ebola epidemic. On top of the
civil wars, the dire effects of climate change, terrorism
and other scourges that often affect the African
continent, the Ebola epidemic represents a threat to
peace and security in African countries and in the rest
of the world.
Three countries on the continent are directly
involved: Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. The latest
WHO figures report that 2,600 persons have died out,
with at least 5,000 cases reported in all three countries.
Those figures may, unfortunately, be lower than the
actual ones, as many cases go unreported.
Liberia is by far the hardest hit country, judging
from the magnitude of the ravages caused by Ebola
in the country. As noted by the Secretary-General,
Ebola is not simply a public-health crisis; it has lasting
humanitarian, social and economic consequences
and could even threaten the economic stability of the
countries affected.
On the economic and social levels, the measures
taken by some international transportation companies
and some countries to limit air and sea traffic with
those countries affected by Ebola have dire effects
on the countries’ economies, because they lead to a
decrease in the activity level in many sectors and affect
the living conditions of the populations.
According to a forecast by the World Bank, a drop
of around 2.5 per cent in gross domestic product is to
be feared in the three countries affected. The deaths
caused by Ebola, the precarity of the basic health and
social services and the lack of organization of State
institutions, which includes hospital closures in some
countries, are just some of the many consequences of
the Ebola epidemic. The case of Liberia is an illustrative

S/PV.7268

one in that respect and broadly justifies the call made to
the Secretary-General on 29 August last by the leaders
of the three countries, calling for the lifting of the
aforementioned measures.
The Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, during its sixteenth special session held in
Addis Ababa on 8 September, also called for similar
measures to be taken so as to prevent isolation of the
affected countries. In response, Senegal decided to
open a humanitarian corridor to facilitate the delivery
of assistance to the countries affected, and Ghana
authorized the establishment of an air bridge with
Liberia for humanitarian flights.
In Africa as a whole, we are seeing the continued
spread of the Ebola epidemic, with recent cases in
Nigeria, which, fortunately, have been contained. That
trend shows clearly that the situation, is far from being
contained, and that the continent and even the rest of
the world are at risk.
We are pleased at the somewhat tardy response of the
international community, led by the Security Council.
Today’s meeting devoted to Ebola shows a collective
growing awareness of the gravity of the situation,
particularly through resolution 2177 (2014), which we
have just adopted unanimously and which calls for the
mobilization of the international community against
this scourge.
According to the United Nations, the cost of the
fight against the Ebola epidemic in West Africa will
total at least $1 billion, half of it for Liberia alone.
The gestures of solidarity from the African Union,
whose Peace and Security Council has decided to send
a military and civilian team to Liberia to fight Ebola,
are commendable, as are similar efforts on the part of
the Economic Community of West African States. We
also welcome the European Union’s decision to provide
€140 million in financial aid, and that of the World
Bank, which has announced that it will divide around
$105 million between the three countries.
At the bilateral level, we were pleased to note the
decision of the United States Government to release
the substantial amount of $250 million in financial
assistance, including sending a specialist team of
3,000 soldiers to combat the Ebola outbreak. We
thank bilateral partners such as China, France, Cuba,
the United Kingdom, Chile, Pakistan and others for
their contributions to the fight against Ebola. And the
ministerial meeting on Ebola to be held next week on the

14-5386119/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

margins of the general debate of the General Assembly
will undoubtedly enable us to improve our formulation
of the priorities and our coordination of international
aid in order to combat this epidemic more effectively.
In conclusion, as the Director General of the World
Health Organization said, we believe that the crisis we
are facing today is unprecedented in our era. That is
why we think it is possible to continue to reduce the
spread of the Ebola epidemic only if the international
community can react more quickly and effectively.
One of the priorities in this fight is focusing particular
attention on children, women and other vulnerable
sectors of society. My country is ready to make a
financial contribution whose amount we will announce
shortly.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
emergency open debate and enabling all United Nations
Member States to share their views on and concerns
about the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Its implications
and its threat it involves all of us and demands a global
response. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Dr. David Nabarro, Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola; Ms. Margaret Chan,
Director General of the World Health Organization;
and Mr. Jackson Niamah of Médecins Sans Frontières
for their thoughts, their knowledge and, above all, for
their commitment. I would like to express how deeply
we respect all the work they are doing to try to halt the
spread of this serious epidemic. On behalf of the people
and Government of the Republic of Argentina, I would
like to convey to the thousands of victims and their
Governments our deep sorrow and solidarity. There can
be no question that Argentina will also cooperate with
this new mission, whose cause belongs to the whole
world.
Unfortunately, this is not the first time that the
Security Council has met to deal with a situation that
has arisen owing to a public health crisis. We should
recall that the Council has dealt with the impact of
HIV/AIDS and its implications for public security
conditions in various societies. The gravity of the
current Ebola epidemic unquestionably justifies our
meeting today. If we do not respond with urgency
and from the heart, with health policies on treatment,
prevention and education, the living conditions of
peoples around the world may be dramatically affected,
as the lives of thousands of people in the countries of
West Africa are being affected. And, fundamentally, if

20/50

18/09/2014

we do not act with urgency and commitment, we will
have to answer to our consciences and our institutional
commitment.
Like the Secretary-General, Argentina believes
that Ebola is not merely a health problem. It is a
multidimensional reality, and it must be dealt with
accordingly. We recognize that this epidemic has the
potential to kill the present and wound the future,
eroding the possibilities of human social and economic
development, which is at the root of most of the
conflicts we deal with in the Council, and which may
have consequences for security. Indeed, the epidemic’s
epicentre is a region that has suffered from severe
conflicts, and where, after expending great effort,
courage and intelligence, the people have begun to have
better prospects for the future. Tragically, this outbreak
of Ebola is jeopardizing that progress, and if it is not
contained very soon it could have worse humanitarian,
economic and social consequences for the countries
affected, as well as for their stability, democracy and
security.
For that reason, we believe that in this time of despair,
uncertainty and fear for so many, we cannot be selfish.
We must pool all our efforts under the coordination of
the United Nations, and not compete among ourselves.
For that reason, Argentina supported and sponsored the
adoption today of resolution 2177 (2014) by a Council
that has been supporting the stabilization of some of the
most deeply affected countries and that cannot stand on
the sidelines as the international community responds.
Because while hunger, poverty and sickness do not
directly cause conflicts, it is also true that situations of
insecurity may arise in the wake of so many injustices.
Argentina believes that we should establish
appropriate cooperation between the various bodies
under the terms laid down in the Charter of the
United Nations. It is important to remember that the
responsibility for dealing substantively with the causes
and consequences of this epidemic is in the purview of
other entities and agencies within the United Nations
system, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and specialized agencies such as the
World Health Organization. For that reason, while we
support cooperation on the part of the Security Council,
we also believe that the General Assembly should have
the responsibility of responding to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to establish a special mission in the
region. I am certain that Argentina will work with all
the urgency and responsibility needed to ensure that the

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
will become a reality in the coming days.
In conclusion, I cannot fail to stress that an outbreak
of this nature could have been tackled more effectively
if the countries of the region had had more solid,
complete health-care systems with better infrastructure
and better-trained human resource capacities. But what
we are seeing is the reality of our developing countries.
It is the reality of poverty, not the inevitability of
destiny. A little less than three years ago, in this very
Chamber, Ms. Chan expressed her concern about the
differences between rich and poor countries, pointing
out that the gap in health-care spending between them
ranged from as little as $1 per person to nearly $7,000
(see S/PV.6668). The difference in life expectancy
between some countries exceeded 40 years.
What we are looking at is inequality and injustice.
The challenge facing us is about a fairer distribution of
wealth and reform of the international financial system
in order to create financing for development that is
based on solidarity and cooperation, not just handouts
to alleviate suffering. We must look at the weight of the
burden of sovereign debt. The United Nations agencies
should have adequate budgets that enable them to
operate effectively.
Finally, we would like to convey our respect for
all those who are working, with all their heart, at the
very heart of the epidemic, to halt this scourge, and to
highlight the support being provided by many countries
and organizations for that task. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his leadership and thank him
and the Organization’s agencies.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important meeting. I would also like
to express my appreciation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola, Dr. Nabarro; and to the
Director-General of the World Health Organization,
Ms. Margaret Chan; and the representative of Médecins
Sans Frontières, Mr. Jackson Niamah, for their
important briefings.
The spread of Ebola, which is ravaging in Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea and is spreading in an
unprecedented way, has drawn attention to the need to
adopt general methods to deal with major epidemics.
The international community has never seen this kind
of epidemic spread so quickly in cities and rural areas

S/PV.7268

with such an exponential, complicated impact. That
means that there is a crisis in the countries affected
and on the African continent as well. As that affects
the international community, the challenge of Ebola,
which is causing grave loss of human life, has appeared
at a time when Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone have
reached political stability after many years of suffering,
owing to drought, civil war and conflict. The crisis
has grown exponentially. Each contamination causes
new cases, and health care workers are dealing with
difficult challenges. Care for the sick and burial of
those who have died have themselves become extremely
dangerous.
The crisis, moreover, has had a serious economic
and social impact. Despite the dangers, given our
belief in regard to the principles of the United Nations,
Jordan is playing its role in Liberia. Therefore, we have
deployed over 200 trained police officers, as well as
12 observers. Three observers will depart next week and
three others have been appointed to depart. That is part
of our involvement in the international effort, because
Jordan is trying to protect the Jordanian contingent to
ensure that it is not contaminated, which is beyond the
protections given by the United Nations with respect to
health care personnel. To stop the epidemic, we need
to take exceptional and coordinated measures and to
coordinate our response with the United Nations. In that
regard, we appreciate the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to send a health mission to begin work on
29 September.
Finally, we would like to highlight the fact that we
need to give priority to preventive measures to stem
the spread of the epidemic. Jordan encourages the
international community to continue its immediate
assistance to the Governments affected in West Africa
in their efforts to resume the gains of development that
have been undermined by the spread of the epidemic.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency of the United States for convening
this debate and for presenting resolution 2177 (2014),
which we adopted today and which Chile co-sponsored.
I also wish to thank the other speakers and presenters
who have preceded me.
Chile regrets that this tragedy has cost thousands
of human lives and has affected West Africa, mainly
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Our solidarity goes
to the affected families and the Governments of those
countries. A “public health emergency of international
concern” was how the World Health Organization

14-5386121/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

identified Ebola a few days ago, and yesterday, a senior
official of that agency declared that the crisis that we
are facing is “unparalleled in modern times”, pointing
out that the numbers of those infected have doubled in
21 days.
The epidemic has been undermining the social
and economic stability of those countries, which
are emerging from conflict, at a time when they
have been pushing ahead with determination in their
respective peacebuilding processes. The threats to
international peace and security have extended beyond
the traditional borders of armed inter- and intra-State
conflicts. Therefore, whenever there is a genuine threat
of any type or origin to the stability, security and peace
in an area or region that is in the process of building
peace and supported by United Nations missions, the
Council, within the purview of its competencies and
representing the international community, must adopt
the necessary decisions that will ensure the conditions
needed in order for those affected countries to adopt
and implement the technical measures and specific
policies they need to tackle the emergency.
The international community must act with the
resources and institutions at its disposal, such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, since those three countries
are part of its agenda. There also must be the necessary
coordination among the affected States, the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
and between the States and donor agencies so as to
avoid duplication of efforts and to optimize the use of
resources.
Although Chile recognizes that a peace mission is
not a public health operation, we should look into how,
as in the case of Liberia, we can adjust the work of that
mission on the ground so as to afford the necessary
collaboration with the authorities of the affected
countries without overlooking the need to ensure the
protection and security of humanitarian workers for
health and peacekeeping.
One of the critical points that we need to address
in this crisis is to find effective mechanisms to break
the chain of transmission of the virus, which has
affected, to a large extent, women and vulnerable
groups. In that regard, we should place emphasis on the
education of the population and medical personnel so
as to eliminate erroneous prejudices about the virus,
avoid stigmatization and ensure that communities and
families play their rightful roles.

22/50

18/09/2014

Based on the study published yesterday by the
World Bank Group, if the virus continues to expand
in the most affected countries, the economic impact
in those countries could increase eight times over,
with potentially catastrophic consequences, and
the study recommends the implementation as soon
as possible of measures to contain and to provide
multi-sectoral responses that will at the same time
reduce the uncertainty. For that reason, it is necessary
to issue a call that no restrictions be imposed on the
flow of persons and trade, interrupting airline and
maritime services, which would cause a blockade that
would exacerbate the negative economic impact in
those countries and increase fear in the society with
unforeseen consequences. Such measures are not
supported by studies, which indicate the danger of such
operations.
Finally, Chile appreciates and underscores the
international solidarity of various countries, such as
Cuba, the United States and the United Kingdom, as
well as the African Union, among others, whose rapid
responses are contributing in this direction. Likewise,
we are pleased by the correct decision of the SecretaryGeneral to appoint Dr. David Nabarro as Coordinator
of the organization to tackle the virus, and we will
support his work and initiative to establish a global
coalition against the epidemic.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Liberia.
Mr. Ngafuan (Liberia): I bring greetings from Her
Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of
the Republic of Liberia, as well as from Liberians both
at home and abroad. Liberia commends you, Madam
President, and other members of the Council, for
elevating the ebola crisis onto the agenda of this body and
bringing into focus the urgency of international action.
We hope that today’s deliberations will spur a response
from the global community that is commensurate with
the speed and intensity of the Ebola challenge.
Until 22 March 2014 — when the Ebola virus disease
invaded our country and began to wreak havoc in Foya,
a small city in a tri-State area where Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone meet — the Liberian people, with the
unswerving support of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, had been enjoying the dividends of the peace
achieved in 2003, following 14 years of bloody civil
conflict. During those years of calm, we succeeded in
institutionalizing the democratic culture and had begun
to take some strong steps, with the support of the United
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7268

Nations and other international partners, to address the
legacy of socioeconomic devastation bequeathed by the
protracted Liberian civil war.

our ability to address them, with the attendant risk of
adversely affecting peace and security in our country
and our region.

Since the Ebola outbreak, the Government of
Liberia has taken a host of measures, including the
heightening of awareness and prevention campaigns
to address the crystallized denial and the deep-rooted
traditional practices that create fertile ground for the
spread of the disease. We declared a state of emergency,
and we are continuing to dedicate significant amounts
of our own paltry resources to the fight. We have also
enlisted the constructive involvement of our people in
the battle as we constantly review and revise strategies
to accommodate to the evolving nature of the crisis.

The impact of Ebola has been multidimensional. It
has negatively affected all sectors of our economy and
has effectively arrested the progress of our nation. A
preliminary assessment points to an estimated decline
in real growth of the gross domestic product of 3.4 per
cent, plummeting from an earlier projection of 5.9 per
cent to a low of 2.5 per cent. The mining, agriculture
and services sectors are expected to bear the greatest
brunt of the crisis. As we mourn daily the loss of a
family member, a friend or a fellow citizen as a result of
Ebola, we are becoming increasingly concerned about
the long-term socioeconomic difficulties that the Ebola
virus disease will occasion.

In spite of our efforts, buttressed by those of our
international partners — prominently the World Health
Organization (WHO), Médecins Sans Frontières and
the United States Center for Disease Control — the
Ebola virus disease continues to sprint faster than our
collective efforts to contain it. It has now extended its
deadly embrace to nearly 2,800 persons in Liberia,
leading to the loss of 1,500 precious lives. One hundred
and seventy of our small community of health-care
workers have already been infected, 80 of whom
have lost their lives. Unfortunately, given that women
constitute the bulk of our health-care workers and are
traditionally the ones who care for sick members of the
family, nearly 70 per cent of all those infected by the
Ebola virus disease in Liberia are women.
The huge toll that Ebola has taken on health-care
workers and on our general health system has seriously
undermined our ability to adequately respond to routine
illnesses such as malaria, typhoid fever, measles, and
diarrhoea. Moreover, an increasing number of pregnant
women are dying while trying to give life.
Even before the outbreak, we were grappling
with herculean challenges. They include finding
productive employment for a significant number of
our people — especially the youth, some of whom are
ex-combatants — strengthening the rule of law and
implementing measures for security sector reform.
We were fully involved in various peacebuilding
and peace consolidation activities through Liberia’s
engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission.
We were also making valiant efforts to comply with
regional protocols aimed at curbing the spread of
small arms and light weapons and transnational crime.
The Ebola outbreak has distracted our attention from
those national priorities and has gravely undermined

Liberia expresses its profound appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his many initiatives, including
his announcement today of a new United Nations
mission — the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response, or UNMEER — to scale up the
response and mobilize the international community
to deliver urgently needed support in a coordinated
manner. We thank the wider international community,
including the African Union, for all the effort and the
resources — financial, human, and material — that
have so far been dedicated to the fight against Ebola.
The Liberian Government and people offer deep
gratitude to President Barack Obama and the people of
the United States for the heart-warming announcement
that the United States Government will take a host of
bold and concrete initiatives, including the deployment
of engineers, military and medical personnel and
equipment to our region to establish new treatment
units and to train national staff. As a major Power, the
United States has made a major move, and it is our hope
that new, additional and complementary contributions
will be forthcoming to our region in a true expression
of international solidarity.
While we commend some members of the
international community for extending hands of
solidarity and empathy to us as we grapple with this
virus, we are shocked and remain concerned by the
actions of others in imposing travel and other restrictions
on Ebola-affected countries. Those actions, which run
counter to advice from the WHO, the International
Civil Aviation Authority and other experts, border on
blanket stigmatization and have now started to seriously
undermine humanitarian efforts in our countries. We

14-5386123/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

18/09/2014

therefore call upon the concerned Member States to
reconsider their policies in light of the expert advice
provided by the specialized international agencies.

Health Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan, and Dr. David
Nabarro, Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola.

The experts have put out a very gloomy prognosis
for what would happen in the next few weeks or months
if the global community fails to take bigger, bolder
and timely action to disrupt the further transmission
of Ebola. Just three weeks ago, WHO estimated that
20,000 persons run the risk of being infected, half of
whom may come from Liberia alone. Two days ago,
President Obama, while appropriately declaring the
Ebola epidemic a potential threat to global security,
expressed fears that if the current trend continues,
hundreds of thousands of people may be infected with
the virus.

My
delegation
welcomes
the
Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) and
the very impressive number of States — 130 — that
co-sponsored it. The Council has thereby demonstrated
its correct understanding of the urgent need for a global,
comprehensive solution to face an unprecedented
scourge that truly threatens peace and security in the
entire West African region — our collective security,
I would say.

The global community cannot remain passive and
allow those apocalyptic predictions to come to pass. We
cannot sit idly and watch, as if we were watching a movie
on our TV screens. The sobering reality is that we are not
watching a pre-recorded movie with a predetermined
climax. We, the affected countries, as well as countries,
institutions and individuals of good conscience across
the globe, are all actors in this evolving plot and can
effect the ultimate outcome, based on what we do or fail
to do. It would be tragically shameful if we failed to act
quickly, robustly and concertedly in putting an end to
the spread of this deadly disease.
We therefore thank the Security Council for the
forward-looking resolution 2177 (2014), adopted here
today, and encourage all Member States, to support the
resolution through concrete actions. Let us all join in
the Act Now campaign against Ebola.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. François
Louncény Fall, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Guineans Abroad of Guinea.
Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): It is my
pleasure at the outset to express to the United States
presidency the profound gratitude of the Guinean
people and Government, especially of His Excellency
Mr. Alpha Condé, President of the Republic, for
having granted the joint request of three States of our
Organization — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — to
include a crucial issue on the agenda of the Security
Council. I am speaking of the terrible epidemic of
haemorrhagic fever of the Ebola virus. I would also
like to thank all of the other members of the Council
and welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Director-General of the World

24/50

Beyond the health aspect and widespread panic
that has gripped our peoples, the economic and social
consequences of the disease have negatively affected
the development of our countries and the well-being of
our peoples. Ebolа is hampering economic activity and
affecting all sectors, particularly transportation, trade,
tourism and agriculture. That could result in a decline
in the gross domestic product by about 2.5 per cent,
suddenly undermining all of the development efforts
and strategies undertaken by our three countries.
Despite the courageous preventive measures taken
by our States to contain and stop the spread of the
disease, the scourge has continued its devastation and
continues to defy human intelligence. At this stage,
without appropriate measures, a humanitarian crisis is
just over the horizon. We must stop it. We must stop it
or risk jeopardizing the stability that was won at such
great cost by our three countries, which are emerging
from a long period of political and institutional crisis,
or from a fratricidal war.
It is important to stress that the three countries are
all on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. That
is why we applaud the mobilization of the international
community, which understands the need to take
ownership of the fight to eradicate the scourge, which
is truly an obstacle to the sustainable development to
which we aspire.
Also, the decision taken by the Executive Council
of the African Union in Addis Ababa on 8 September
is aimed at strengthening solidarity among our
States, because border closures, flight restrictions,
stigmatization of victims, isolation of affected
countries and repatriation of their citizens constitute a
weapon that is more dangerous than the scourge being
combatted. As highlighted recently by President Condé,
we should not isolate the countries affected by Ebola,

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

but all efforts should be implemented to isolate Ebola
and eradicate the epidemic.
The Security Council must provide oversight
and lend all its weight to ensure compliance with the
recommendations of the World Health Organization
and the International Air Transport Association to that
end. Similarly, all bilateral and multilateral partners, in
the same spirit of solidarity, will work to provide the
appropriate and necessary support to ensure care for
victims and prevention and eradication of the virus.
For its part, beginning with the declaration of
21 March 2014 on the outbreak of the Ebola virus, the
Guinean Government and its partners have been deeply
involved in the response to the disease. The outbreak
seemed to be under control by mid-May. However, a
resurgence in the number of confirmed cases and the
appearance of new areas of outbreak were reported in
early June. The epidemic also spread to Sierra Leone
and Liberia, countries that border Guinea, thereby
leading to a subregional crisis. Several thousand people
have already been affected. More than 2,400 deaths
have been recorded in the three affected countries,
including almost 600 in Guinea, the majority of whom
were women.
A national health-care emergency was immediately
declared by the President of the Republic, as part of the
response to the Ebola virus disease. Several days ago,
the national committee to manage the epidemic adopted
an accelerated plan to respond over two to six months.
A set of preventive measures has been implemented,
including the establishment of safety zones at all border
crossings and restrictions on movements of individuals
and screening them in bus stations and at all of the
country’s border crossings, including the Conakry
international airport. Those security and prevention
measures at the departure area of the Conakry airport
have proven reliable, and they justify maintaining the
flight timetables of the airline companies Air France,
Brussels Airlines and Royal Air Maroc.
Furthermore, there are many other actions on
the ground, particularly awareness-raising among
the population on preventive measures, strengthened
monitoring, tracking contacts, establishing a regulatory
committee, secure management of burials and
disinfection, and distribution of personal protection
and hygiene kits.
Today, the Government has focused on local
communications in order to influence the perception

S/PV.7268

that some communities have of the disease. Through
awareness messages in the national languages, more
people can be alerted, especially in the rural areas
where people are still reticent in the presence of healthcare workers involved in the fight against the Ebola
virus.
Despite all efforts by the Government and its
partners, many challenges remain and urgent needs to
address in order to check the spread of the epidemic. We
have ever-growing needs in terms of human, financial
and material resources. We need essential equipment:
protection and hygiene kits, medicines, mobile
hospitals, thermoflashes, stretchers, hospital beds, et
cetera. We particularly need ambulances and transport
vehicles for the medical personnel. The complete list of
our requests is available.
It is appropriate here to again thank France, the
United States, the Russian Federation, China, Japan,
the United Kingdom, the European Union and several
other bilateral and multilateral partners that — together
with the World Health Organization, Médecins
Sans Frontières, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in Atlanta and countries such as Morocco
and Mali — from the very outset have demonstrated the
principle of solidarity, fraternity and friendship.
Naturally, our dedicated Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, has again given, and continues
to give, the best of himself in this important period
to ensure the very future of some of our States. His
initiative in establishing the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response is evidence of that.
We are grateful to him for that and dare to hope that
the Security Council, as the guarantor of international
peace and security, will take a strong part in that
momentum and that the global scientific community
will be able to overcome the Ebola virus soon, as it has
succeeded in doing in the case of other, more deadly
viruses.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me at the outset
express, on behalf of President Ernest Bai Koroma and
the Government and the people of Sierra Leone, our
profound appreciation to you, Madam President, and
the members of the Security Council, for convening
this all-important meeting.

14-5386125/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

Our gathering at this crucial time, particularly as
the consequences of the unprecedented outbreak of the
Ebola virus unfold in our subregion, underscores the
heightened concern of the international community.
Clearly, the impact of the epidemic has not only been
frightening but also taken a toll on the entire fabric of
the three countries concerned. The need to understand
and to robustly respond to the worst-ever Ebola outbreak
in history therefore cannot be overemphasized.
Let me also convey the sincere appreciation of
President Koroma to all those who have, in turn,
expressed their sympathy to the people of Sierra
Leone either through telephone calls, in particular
the Secretary-General and President Obama, or by
high-level visits of United Nations agencies, including
Ms. Chan, who is sitting on my left. Mr. Jackson
Nabarro also visited. We appreciate all such visits,
most particularly the very recent visit of the President
of the Economic Community of West African States
Commission, President Mahama. They all came with
expressions of sympathy, good hope and good wishes.
We are in unfamiliar territory. To date, the origins,
symptoms, threat and contagion of Ebola are not only
baffling but also very confusing. Ebola is challenging
us as the human race. It is challenging our level of
preparedness at both the national and the international
levels. It is challenging our behavioural patterns and
our resolve to address such an epidemic. It is the very
first time that we have had such an epidemic. It is also
testing our resilience. We have heard today that it is
testing our level of coordination and our patience in
understanding one another.
Our people in Sierra Leone live in fear and cannot
understand the nature of a disease that claims a life and
then prevents family members from burying their loved
ones. Despite the deployment of all such measures, the
crisis has deepened and the virus remains one step,
or even many steps, ahead of our efforts. Ebola, as an
extraordinary disease, has precipitated extraordinary
actions by Sierra Leone, including a state of public
health emergency. There are various high-level
committees, jointly managed by development partners
and the national authorities.
From tomorrow, we will observe a three-day
curfew period. That is not to our liking, but since Ebola
is an extraordinary disease, it requires extraordinary
steps because there is no cure for the virus. We hope
that, after tomorrow, there will be a better sense of
understanding and appreciation given that, as of today,
26/50

18/09/2014

the sense of fear and, we believe, ignorance, denial
and misinformation are aspects that are diminishing.
However, we still have much more to do given the fact
that Ebola is spreading exponentially. As of today, the
cumulative figure of confirmed cases stands at 1,571
and of confirmed deaths at 483, 60 per cent of whom
are women. Children are greatly affected. Importantly,
even health facilities and personnel are impacted. We
have lost four doctors. Several nurses and health-care
workers have also died.
As the international community, and the United
Nations in particular, can testify, since they have been
fully involved in our post-conflict peace consolidation
and peacebuilding activities, in Sierra Leone we have
made tremendous progress in rebuilding the economy
and the lives of those who suffered during the war.
Last year, I was here to join the Security Council
in celebrating with Sierra Leone the successes that
we have made in that direction (see S/PV.7034).
We graduated from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and proudly from
the Peacebuilding Commission reconfiguration.
Today, we are here in a different capacity. It is a
sad story that is reversing all our gains and, more
particularly, if we are not careful, that has strong
global systemic challenges. If we do not act fast, it will
challenge our human capacities. That is why I fully
appreciate the unamimous adoption of resolution 2177
(2014). However, I agree with you, Madam President,
that adopting a resolution is not the end but a means to
an end. We therefore need to finance and implement the
resolution. In doing that, I must emphasize that speed
is of the essence. Accuracy, appropriateness and the
lack of conditionality in the flow of funds and support
are all very important elements in rendering effective
assistance.
Aid for Ebola is dedicated assistance. We must
therefore rally and be completely serious in the kind of
aid provided and the type of responses and interventions
that we bring to bear in the three countries. At this
juncture, let me perhaps make one or two suggestions.
Today, in the three countries, we have laid
the foundations for the restructuring of our public
health sectors. Treatment and holding centres have
been constructed and laboratories installed. Yet
there is no centre for disease control of a significant
nature. President Ernest Bai Koroma is approaching
the People’s Republic of China for the use of an
ultramodern hospital that has been constructed at Jui
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

to be transformed into a centre for disease control to
serve the country, the subregion and, in particular, even
the continent of Africa. All other developed countries
have centres for disease control. I would therefore like
to urge the Security Council to join President Koroma
in appealing to the People’s Republic of China.
With a centre, we will have modern research
facilities to be able to understand the origins of such
infectious diseases. It is not only Ebola that plagues
Africa. We still have problems understanding malaria.
There is tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, smallpox and
chickenpox. All those diseases exist in Africa. We need
a centralized institution where we take our knowledge
forward. So I would like to plead that the Security
Council join us in pleading with the People’s Republic
of China.
The fabric has already been set up because the
intervention of China in constructing a treatment centre
and a modern laboratory has just been done within the
vicinity of the hospital. It will use the hospital as a
holding centre, not just a treatment centre. Certainly,
the treatment centre that has been constructed by the
United Kingdom will also be brought to bear in the
use of the building. South Africa is helping us with
laboratory assistance.
I believe that, as we construct prefabricated
treatment and holding centres, that our challenge going
forward will be to have a centre for disease control. To
that end, I would like to appeal to all those institutions
that may have been affected by the derogatory remarks
and unfair comments of the sovereign people of Sierra
Leone. There is a saying that when a man is drowning,
he will not hesitate to take hold of even the sharpest
blade. I would like to particularly express our sympathy
with and our appeal to all of these institutions. I am
sure many of them have been taken aback, including the
World Health Organization (WHO), and we understand
that there have been complaints from the media and
from the citizens of Sierra Leone. That happened simply
because there was a time when we had a patient — the
most recent casualty, a woman doctor — and I think
there was an appeal to WHO for evacuation. But again,
there was a lack of understanding. The WHO does not
have global hospitals. WHO has planes. But that is the
reality when one is suffering, when one is there on the
ground.
I also want to state that I would not be surprised
if the discussions at the sixty-ninth session were
overshadowed by discussions on Ebola. I think it would

S/PV.7268

be very appropriate, by the end of the discussions at
the General Assembly’s sixty-ninth session, for us to
be very clear and come up with definitive conclusions
on how to not only contain the spread of Ebola, but
treat Ebola, or more particularly how to move forward
in the treatment of other infectious diseases. To those
countries that, through panicked reactions, have
closed their borders and cancelled flights and shipping
arrangements, I want to join my colleagues from Liberia
and Guinea to plead for a return to normalcy. Ebola was
not the making of any one of those three countries. It
just came. I hope that, in the not-too-distant future, it
will go back as fast as it came.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Moreno (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank to the Secretary-General,
Dr. Nabarro, Ms. Chan and Mr. Niamah for the
information that they have provided to us. We assure
them that it is highly useful and necessary.
The gravity of the situation created by the Ebola
epidemic that is plaguing several countries in Central
and West Africa highlights the need to deal with it
energetically and with the cooperation of all countries.
In this spirit, at the request of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the Director General of the World Health
Organization (WHO), Ms. Margaret Chan, Cuba has
already engaged in an assistance initiative under the
leadership of the WHO, as announced last Friday,
12 September 2014, by the Minister of Health of the
Republic of Cuba, Mr. Roberto Morales Ojeda. That
cooperation will enable a medical brigade to be sent
to Sierra Leone. Its members have expressed their
willingness to join the fight against this epidemic, have
over 15 years of professional experience and have worked
in other countries facing natural and epidemiological
disasters and in medical cooperation missions. We are
ready to work alongside other countries, including those
with which we do not maintain diplomatic relations.
Cuba’s response is in line with our country’s
ongoing solidarity and cooperation with Africa, Asia
and Latin America and the Caribbean. Over the past
55 years, we have cooperated with 158 countries, with
the participation of 325,710 health workers. A total
of 76,744 health workers have been working in 39
countries in Africa. Currently, 4,048 Cubans, 2,269 of
whom are doctors, are providing services in 32 African
nations.

14-5386127/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

18/09/2014

In addition, Cuba, which is a small and poor
country, has trained, to date and entirely free of charge,
38,940 doctors from 121 countries. Currently, 10,000
young foreigners are studying medicine on our island,
6,000 of whom are doing so totally free of charge.
That is being done in accordance with the principle
of providing ongoing assistance to the poorest among
us paid for by those with resources, with a view to
ensuring the sustainability of the Cuban health system
and international cooperation.

Brazil welcomes this opportunity to reiterate its
commitment to assisting our sister nations of West
Africa to combat the effects of the Ebola virus. We
recognize the disease’s potential to destabilize fragile
situations in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone and
spread far beyond the affected countries. However,
we underline the need to treat the outbreak first and
foremost as a health emergency and a social and
development challenge rather than a threat to peace and
security.

In this struggle against Ebola, which should be
everyone’s battle, the Government of Cuba has decided
to maintain its cooperation and expand it to the most
affected countries, which have already been informed.
In the rest of the region, the areas not affected by
Ebola and where we have, as I mentioned, in excess
of 4,000 health personnel, we are ready to contribute
to the prevention of this disease. The medical brigades
that will be sent to Africa for the fight against Ebola
belong to the Henry Reeve International Contingent,
which was created in 2005 and which includes doctors
specialized in facing disasters and large epidemics.
This response on the part of the Government of Cuba
confirms the values of solidarity that have guided
the Cuban revolution: not offering our leftovers, but
sharing what we have.

Brazil welcomes the contributions made thus far
by the international community. In keeping with your
suggestion, Madam President, that this meeting allow
for the announcement of specific contributions, I wish
to announce that Brazil has shipped emergency supply
kits to support local efforts in Liberia, Guinea and
Sierra Leone, in coordination with local representatives
of WHO. Each of those kits contains personal protective
equipment for infection prevention and control and
medical supplies to care for hundreds of patients.
Together, they account for a three-month supply for a
total of approximately 7,000 people. Additionally, the
Government of Brazil has announced an initial donation
to assist efforts by WHO to curb the virus. Moreover,
President Dilma Rousseff has just authorized a donation,
on an exceptional basis, of thousands of tons of rice and
beans, through the World Food Programme, targeted to
the countries affected most by the Ebola disease.

Africa is awaiting an immediate response by all
Member States, especially those with resources. It is
urgent that we join this global effort against Ebola.
Humanity owes a debt to the peoples of Africa. We
cannot disappoint them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting in an open
debate format. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO), the Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola and the representative of Médecins Sans
Frontières. Let me also acknowledge the presence
of the ministers of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone
and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
announcement of the establishment of the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, to be
headed by a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and look forward to further examining this
issue in the General Assembly.

28/50

Not only must we strive to contain the spread of the
virus, but we must make concerted efforts to contain
the potential of the outbreak to reverse or undermine
the significant strides the region has made through
peacebuilding and economic development in recent
years, after decades of war. Bearing that in mind, I
convened, in my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), an informal meeting of the PBC on
8 September to hear a briefing by Dr. David Nabarro.
I also commend the Chairs of the Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone configurations of the Commission for
having convened, in August, the first informal meeting
of the configurations to discuss the impacts of the Ebola
crisis on peacebuilding efforts in the three countries.
The statement adopted by the PBC after its
8 September meeting reiterated the Commission’s
intention to serve as a common platform for discussion,
information-sharing and awareness-raising in New
York, engaging a wider audience of actors from
Member States, international financial institutions and
United Nations agencies. Noting with deep concern

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

the potential for the Ebola virus disease to reverse
peacebuilding gains, the statement appealed to the
international community to not isolate the affected
countries, by maintaining transportation connections
with adequate prevention measures. Containment
measures must be designed in such a way that they do
not aggravate acute problems associated with fragile
social, political and economic conditions.
Let me recall that, on 21 August, when the United
Kingdom organized an open debate (see S/PV.7247)
on prevention, the early warning issued by the
representative of Brazil, as PBC Chair, was the only
reference to the Ebola crisis and its destabilizing
implications for the region, which highlights the PBC’s
role as an early-warning agent.
The outbreak underscores the importance of
building local capacity to respond to public health crises.
As Mr. Paul Farmer, co-founder of the international
non-governmental organization Partners in Health, who
is in Liberia this week, has noted, if the Ebola epidemic
had instead struck regions in the developed world,
there is no doubt that the health systems in place could
contain and then eliminate the disease. The crisis in
West Africa today is thus a reflection of long-standing
and growing inequalities in development and in access
to basic health care.
In line with the WHO Ebola response road map, the
coordinated international response being rallied here
today should place emphasis in supporting affected and
at-risk countries by strengthening national capacities.
Particular attention should be given to the security of
local health workers, who are essential for containing
the outbreak, but, unfortunately, if not adequately
equipped, face higher risks of contagion.
The unprecedented outbreak of the Ebola virus
disease is a test of our capacity to mobilize international
efforts to support affected States while preventing
further transmission. We express our conviction that
the General Assembly, the World Health Organization
and the Peacebuilding Commission are well equipped
to deal with the disease and its consequences. That
conviction is based on our confidence in the resilience
of the peoples and Governments of Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone, who will not allow the epidemic to
undermine all the hard-won progress they have made
in stabilizing their countries and putting years of
instability and conflict behind them.

S/PV.7268

Let us hope that the solidarity and commitment
shown in the face of a cause that may affect the entire
international community, inspire the Security Council
to further promote cooperation and dialogue in its daily
business.
The President: I now give the floor to the delegation
of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this urgent debate of the Security Council
on the issue of Ebola.
Today, more than ever before, West Africa is facing
an exceptionally critical and dangerous situation, in
particular in the countries most affected by Ebola:
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. The epidemic is of
unprecedented magnitude due to its geographical reach,
the number of cases and the number of victims, which
is increasing daily. The World Health Organization
figures, the reports of Médecins Sans Frontières and
various international forums and the scenes that the
media describe daily are indeed horrible. Nearly 5,000
people are infected. More than 2,400 men, women and
children have already died due to the virus. And there
are fears that the actual death toll could be higher than
that.
With a public health system that is already very
weak and on the verge of collapse, the few hospitals
that still exist in those countries and the few treatment
centres are completely overwhelmed. Patients are
turned away, and people are dying, literally, in the
streets. Others are, right now, just sitting, waiting to
die alone and abandoned.
The situation is deteriorating by the day, since
there is no vaccine or specific treatment. The virus is
spreading rapidly. It is highly contagious and deadly in
25 to 90 per cent of the cases. It is an unprecedented
epidemic, absolutely lacking any controls. The number
of people infected could rapidly double, or even triple,
if not more, with profound implications not only for the
region, but for the entire planet as well.
The Ebola crisis requires an exceptional
international response to address the health crisis and
the wider political and economic and, as President
Obama said, security threats in the affected countries.
We must urgently control the epidemic and we must act
quickly. All parts of the international community are
therefore called on today to coordinate a greater global
response; control the outbreak and prevent its spread;

14-5386129/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

continue scientific research in the hope of finding
new treatments and, hopefully, vaccines; allocate the
financial and human resources necessary to support
strategies to combat the deadly virus; build additional
treatment units, including new insolation areas on
the ground; distribute information packets to local
families so they can better protect themselves; support
national efforts in the affected areas; help affected
countries to cope with the impact on the economies of
local communities to prevent a humanitarian disaster
and economic collapse; help those countries to build a
sustainable public health system; and finally create an
air bridge to obtain humanitarian assistance, medical
supplies and to ensure the movement of medical
personnel.
Concerned by the negative effects of the isolation
of the countries affected by Ebola and the restrictions
imposed on them, Morocco has decided, on the
instructions of His Majesty the King, in a gesture of
solidarity, to break the isolation and quarantine of
the African countries affected by the Ebola virus by
maintaining the Royal Air Maroc flights. To be sure,
Royal Air Maroc has maintained its regular flights to
the countries affected by Ebola. It continues to serve
those countries on a regular basis by providing three
flights per week to Liberia, four to Sierra Leone and
seven to Guinea, Conakry. The airports in Conakry,
Monrovia and Freetown will continue to receive Royal
Air Maroc aeroplanes. In another gesture of solidarity,
Morocco is providing appropriate assistance to those
three countries.
The decision to maintain the regular Royal Air
Maroc flight schedule reflects the fraternal feeling that
ties Morocco to its African brother countries, and the
feeling of belonging to a single future community and
of solidarity and commitment through good and bad
times.
In conclusion, allow me to simply say that this
Chamber customarily resonates with speeches on
human rights in Africa, on conflicts, on collapse and
on genocide. This time Africa needs the Chamber
to resonate not only with speeches of solidarity, but
also speeches about commitments and decisions and
measures to come to the assistance of the continent
and in particular West Africa, especially those three
African countries. As the Minister of Sierra Leone
said, Ebola cannot be isolated. However, it will gravely
harm the countries who drown in their misfortune. We

30/50

18/09/2014

are therefore called upon to ensure that this does not
ever happen again.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the holding of this emergency
meeting of the Security Council. My delegation would
like to thank the speakers for their analyses of the
situation and their briefings.
The Ebola epidemic is not just a health crisis, but
a potential threat to global security. It requires a global
response that addresses both the health crisis and the
broader societal, economic, political and security
threats to the countries affected. The international
community must therefore act quickly to contain and
fight the crisis. Our efforts should focus on the needs
of the affected populations and should not isolate the
countries struggling with it. It is crucial to redouble our
efforts to find an effective and safe cure to treat those
who have already fallen ill and to prevent the spread of
the disease.
Switzerland welcomes the Ebola response road
map launched at the end of August by the World
Health Organization (WHO). While we need to act
swiftly, we also need to ensure that our efforts in the
field are calibrated and coordinated under the auspices
of the United Nations, thereby allowing international
and local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
multiply the impact of their operations. We also need to
be prepared to address the crisis over the longer term.
Switzerland acknowledges the emergency appeal
made in Geneva by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the WHO and the
Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola,
with a view to obtaining the means to cover the most
urgent needs in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. For
its part, Switzerland has so far provided humanitarian
assistance through the provision of 14 tons of protective
medical equipment to the Government of Liberia and
has scaled up the capacities of its office in Monrovia to
provide humanitarian aid.
From the onset of the crisis, Switzerland has
provided support to local NGOs in their efforts to
raise public awareness. Furthermore, Switzerland
is financially supporting Médecins Sans Frontières,
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service. In total, Switzerland has
so far allocated some $3.9 million to the fight against
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Ebola. Following the recent conclusion of an assessment
mission to Liberia, Switzerland is currently considering
options to further increase its contributions to assist the
international efforts.
Switzerland welcomes the decision of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union to authorize
the immediate deployment of an humanitarian, military
and civilian mission led by the African Union. We also
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Peacebuilding
Commission and invite it to further reflect on ways to
contribute to a solution to the crisis, including by acting
as platform to mobilize international support.
Finally, we welcome the Security Council’s
willingness to carefully consider the implications of the
Ebola crisis on the current and future configuration of
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). As a fully
integrated peacekeeping operation, UNMIL should help
coordinate and support the international community’s
effort to tackle Ebola, in close coordination with OCHA
and the crisis response mechanism.
Switzerland fully supports resolution 2177 (2014),
just adopted. My delegation would like to express its
gratitude for the leadership of the Council’s presidency
on this urgent and important subject.
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland,
Serbia and Albania; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation
to the United States for convening today’s debate. It is
important that the Ebola outbreak remain high on the
international agenda since it is not only an isolated
regional problem but a problem that affects us all.
We are deeply concerned about the crisis caused
by the Ebola virus. We deplore the loss of lives, both
among citizens of the affected countries and among
international responders. The best way to do them
justice is to act and prevent further victims. We pay
tribute to all humanitarian and health workers in the
front line who are working tirelessly to bring the crisis

S/PV.7268

to an end. We will continue to assist, in particular in the
most affected areas, and to work with the World Health
Organization (WHO), the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and other United
Nations, regional and non-governmental organization
partners to help tackle the disease as swiftly and
efficiently as possible.
We welcome the leadership shown by the WHO
in developing, in coordination with others, the Ebola
response road map. We also welcome the United
Nations coordination system created by the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that all relevant parts of the United
Nations system are activated and working coherently.
We encourage continued close cooperation with the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and humanitarian
partners.
As it stands, the European Union has pledged
€150 million, that is, nearly $200 million, for the
treatment of patients, training, measures to contain
the epidemic, medical laboratories, the maintenance
of basic health services and budget support. As part
of the package, the European Union has also provided
€5 million to the African Union to support its very
important efforts to provide assistance to the affected
countries. To that, one needs to add the very substantive
bilateral contributions made by member States of the
European Union, both in funding and in kind, as well
as through the secondment of specialists. Some of those
bilateral contributions are coordinated through the
European Union’s civil protection mechanism.
Finally, the European Emergency Response
Coordination Centre has supported the EU efforts,
including the participation of some key partners, such
as WHO, Médecins Sans Frontières, UNICEF, OCHA
and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies. The European Union and its member
States are working actively to find possible options for
reducing the growing isolation of the affected areas in
the region. The European Union will address the urgent
need to retain and re-establish links for transport and
necessary medical evacuation. For the steps ahead, the
we are preparing a comprehensive framework for our
response. That document, aligned with the WHO road
map, highlights the main challenges and in what ways
we have and will further assist with the response. The
other related impacts, notably the food crisis, the health
system crisis and the negative macroeconomic impact
are also being considered.

14-5386131/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

We all recognize the magnitude of the challenge
before us. On Monday, a high-level EU meeting on
Ebola took place in Brussels and Health Ministers are
meeting next week in Milan, where the Ebola crisis
will be addressed. The European Union and its member
States are committed to deploying all efforts to step up
support and assist in putting an end to the outbreak.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
United States presidency for holding today’s meeting.
We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2177 (2014),
which Turkey is pleased to have co-sponsored.
The Ebola outbreak has become an international
emergency with wider implications for the economic,
social and political lives of the affected States and with
serious security and stability risks for the region.
We welcome the commitment and ever-increasing
response to the emergency of national Governments,
regional organizations and the international community.
We commend the strategic leadership demonstrated
by the Secretary-General and the World Health
Organization. We also commend the efforts of the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) to develop a collective
response to the outbreak and contain the disease. The
initiatives taken by the AU and the ECOWAS once
again show that regional organizations can play a
significant role in responding to humanitarian and
health emergencies that often do not recognize borders.
We pay tribute to the humanitarian and health
workers in the front lines who put their lives at risk
and work with devotion. Turkey extends its heartfelt
condolences to the relatives of the victims of the
outbreak and to the people of the affected States.
The international emergency before us is one that
no country can deal with alone. The international
community should continue to provide and even
increase technical, logistical and financial support
to the affected countries as should the international
organizations responding the crisis. The challenge is
one that we can overcome by international cooperation
and solidarity, instead of staying on the defensive side.
We believe that isolating and restricting the travel to
and from the affected countries is causing the situation
to deteriorate and is undermining the will and ability of
the people concerned to fight the menace.

32/50

18/09/2014

Turkey immediately mobilized financial resources
and provided medical assistance to the affected
countries. Plans to scale up Turkey’s support to the
affected States through bilateral and multilateral
channels are under consideration. More importantly,
Turkish Airlines is continuing its flights to the region.
Our support in the fight against the epidemic will
continue with a long-term perspective focusing on
capacity- and resilience-building in infrastructure and
the health sector.
The Ebola outbreak requires a comprehensive,
coordinated and long-term response. We must keep the
focus and continue our support even when the outbreak
is in decline. A long-term and sustainable solution
to emergencies of this kind is needed to support the
societies and economies of the affected countries, to
help them build resilience and capacity and ensure that
the peace and stability of the region will not be set back.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to
take the floor with the presence in the Chamber of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Sierra Leone
and the Republic of Guinea, as well as Dr. Margaret
Chan and Mr. David Nabarro.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the Government of Canada and all
Canadians, I wish to begin by extending our profound
condolences to, and solidarity with, the peoples of
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as well as Nigeria
and Senegal, for the extreme challenges confronting
them at the forefront of the struggle against Ebola.
Canada remains deeply concerned by the outbreak
of this virus in West Africa. It risks undermining the
foundations for economic prosperity, security and
social stability that have been painstakingly supported
by the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in
the region.
(spoke in French)
We recognize that the crisis is occurring in a
context of chronic fragility, in places of great poverty
that are only now beginning to recover from decades of
conflict and civil strife.
The affected Governments, in partnership with the
United Nations system, the International Federation of

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Médecins Sans
Frontières and other actors have made it clear that a
collective response to this evolving crisis is urgently
required if we are to succeed in staving off the worstcase scenarios.
(spoke in English)
We are looking to the United Nations to present
a coherent approach to enable timely and effective
responses by the global community. In that regard, we
welcome the high-level event scheduled for next week.
As an active and engaged international partner, the
Government of Canada is fully committed to supporting
the international effort to combat this disease.
(spoke in French)
Canada recognized early the risks that this Ebola
outbreak represented and from the outset has been a
leader in making significant contributions in support
of humanitarian and security interventions to help
contain the spread of Ebola in West Africa. We have
provided expert deployments, vaccines and material,
and financial support. Our contributions to the World
Health Organization (WHO), Médecins Sans Frontières
and local Red Cross and Red Crescent organizations
have helped establish the base for their respective
response activities.
(spoke in English)
In addition, Canada has deployed a mobile
laboratory to Sierra Leone, with rotating teams of
Canadian laboratory technicians and supplies. This
laboratory has been deployed in Kailahun, one of the
areas of the country most severely affected by the Ebola
virus, and will continue to provide critical diagnostic
services to Sierra Leoneans requiring assistance.
We have also enabled the deployment of additional
Canadian Red Cross delegates to Guinea and Sierra
Leone, as well as experts to Sierra Leone working for
UNICEF, and we have committed over $2.5 million in
personal protective equipment to WHO for distribution.
(spoke in French)
Recognizing the extraordinary circumstances,
and for the benefit of the global community, Canada
donated to WHO 800 to 1,000 doses of the experimental
vaccine VSV-EBOV. We have also actively contributed
to WHO’s expert panels on Ebola.

S/PV.7268

(spoke in English)
Canada is now exploring the United Nations appeal
issued the day before yesterday, on 16 September, and
we will work in a coordinated manner with all partners
to enable an effective global response to bring this
outbreak under control. We shall support these ongoing
efforts and hope thus to put an end to the terrible
suffering and loss of life being caused by the Ebola
virus in West Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for the initiative of
the United States in convening today’s open debate on
one of the most important crises of today: the outbreak
of Ebola in West Africa. Given the significance of
Council resolution 2177 (2014), adopted today, Japan
was one of its co-sponsors.
In the current difficult circumstances, I would like
to express Japan’s deepest sympathy to the families of
the ever-growing number of victims of Ebola and to the
people and the Governments of the countries affected,
especially Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. These
three countries are all in a post-conflict stage and are
now at the crucial juncture of consolidating peace
and ensuring long-lasting stability. In this regard, we
are aware of the importance of preventing a publichealth crisis such as this outbreak from turning into a
peacebuilding crisis.
It is therefore important to coordinate our actions
at the international level to rapidly address this global
health crisis. To that end, Japan is very grateful to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership in
mobilizing and scaling up the support and commitments
from the international community to overcome this
crisis. I would also like to pay tribute to the efforts of
the many health-care workers who are laboring under
very difficult conditions on the ground.
I would like to share with the Council Japan’s
response to this emergency.
First, regarding our financial and in-kind
contributions, we have so far provided $5 million for
West Africa, including Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
in cooperation with the World Health Organization
(WHO), and here I thank Dr. Chan; UNICEF; the World
Food Programme; and the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. My Government

14-5386133/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

dispatched Japanese medical doctors specialized in
infectious diseases to Liberia and Sierra Leone four
times through the WHO Global Outbreak Alert and
Response Network.
Most recently, Japan decided to provide 20,000
infection protection suits for health-care workers in
Liberia and Sierra Leone. According to WHO, this
equipment is very much needed on the ground. We hope
that these contributions will help reduce the number
of infections among health-care workers. We remain
ready to provide more.
Secondly, Japan is ready to provide a new
medication to cope with Ebola. The use of the
medication known as T-705, or Favipiravir, is expected
to be effective as a post-exposure prophylaxis against
Ebola. This medicine is an experimental drug developed
by two Japanese companies: Toyama Chemical and
Fujifilm Corporation. We are working with WHO,
pharmaceutical companies and other countries so that
this medication can be put to use as soon as possible.
Thirdly, over the long term, we will continue to
support African countries’ own efforts to improve their
resilience against public-health crises. Strengthening
Africa’s social and economic resilience is one of the
priorities of Japanese policy towards Africa through
the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, otherwise known as the TICAD process.
Providing comprehensive strategic assistance aimed
at strengthening the disease-prevention and detection
capacities of Africa is one of the primary objectives of
TICAD. An excellent example is the Noguchi Memorial
Institute for Medical Research, in Ghana. It is one of
the most important medical research institutions in
West Africa, capable of conducting laboratory tests for
the Ebola virus.
In closing, I join other speakers in expressing
our hope that this Ebola outbreak will be quickly
brought under control. I would like to reiterate Japan’s
determination to take an active role in combating this
global threat.
The President: I thank all speakers for limiting
their remarks to the four minutes allotted in today’s
debate.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, for convening this important
34/50

18/09/2014

meeting. In view of the time constraints you just
mentioned, my full statement will be available through
Twitter.
I align my statement with that delivered just now by
the observer of the European Union.
My Government is deeply concerned about the
impact of the Ebola outbreak, especially in Guinea,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Our hearts and minds are
with all those who suffer. It is tragic that women are
particularly affected, owing to their role as caregivers.
We pay tribute to the courageous health workers in the
field in the very difficult circumstances under which
they do their difficult jobs. We deeply appreciate the
work of Director-General Chan and Dr. Nabarro for
the important roles they are playing. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands also welcomes the establishment of
the new United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response to fight the outbreak. Now more than ever,
a single United Nations approach is needed to counter
the epidemic. That is literally a matter of life and
death. The relevant United Nations agencies should
work together to be more effective. The Netherlands, of
course, is a key partner of all those agencies, including
the World Health Organization, UNICEF and the World
Food Programme.
Additional humanitarian aid in the form of funds,
medical supplies and health workers is needed. So
far, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has contributed
to the fight against Ebola with financial means, both
through the European Union and our contributions to
the United Nations system. Tomorrow my Government
will announce major new contributions to combating
the Ebola crisis. We are a sponsor of resolution 2177
(2014) and welcome its adoption today. We encourage
the joint effort to support the affected States and
welcome the call on the private sector to maintain trade
and transport links.
The international community must remain
committed as long as necessary to supporting the
affected countries in the region. We also need a longterm commitment on the part of the private sector to
doing its part in combating the disease and sustaining
businesses and people. To quote Director-General
Chan, Ebola is not just a public health crisis; it is also
a social, humanitarian and political crisis, and if we
do not act now, people not dying of Ebola may die of
starvation. It has the potential to destabilize entire
countries and regions, compromising national, regional
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

and international security. This is a global crisis that
requires every one of our nations to act, and to act now.
My Government is committed to taking further action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): Thank you for calling this
very important meeting, Mr. President. It is a strong
acknowledgement of the seriousness of the situation,
and Sweden welcomed the opportunity to sponsor
today’s resolution (2177 (2014)).
Sweden aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
We join the global emergency appeals for scaling
up all efforts, and we commend the leadership shown
by the Secretary-General and the United States in
that regard. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
initiative in convening a high-level meeting on
this topic during the upcoming General Assembly
ministerial week, and his important efforts to improve
the international coalition’s coordination, including
through his appointment of a Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola and his proposal for the
establishment of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response.
Sweden is one of the world’s top donors of
humanitarian assistance and development aid. We
clearly hear the call for an immediate scaling-up of
the efforts to combat Ebola. We have longstanding
relationships with all the countries concerned, and a
strong partnership with Liberia, both bilaterally and
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s Liberia
country team, along with partnering the United States
in implementing Liberia’s new deal on peacebuilding
and State-building.
Bilaterally, since April Sweden has contributed
$4.4 million to the three countries most affected,
mainly though partners such as the International
Rescue Committee, Médecins Sans Frontières, Action
contre la faim and the Swedish Red Cross. The Swedish
international development cooperation agency is now
in the final stages of preparing an additional package
of $13 million in response to the appeal from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, directed
primarily to UNICEF, the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service. We are also supporting a WHO coordinator
in Sierra Leone, and we are investigating ways of

S/PV.7268

supporting the accommodation of international medical
staff in Monrovia and possibly also in Freetown.
Due to the current parliamentary situation in
Sweden, where since Monday of this week we have had
a caretaker Government, it is not certain that additional
contributions will be able to be decided on or announced
in the next few days. Our clear ambition, however, is to
come forward with significant additional contributions
very soon.
Sweden would like to underline the importance of
ensuring that the national health systems of the countries
involved are generally strengthened in parallel with
the short-term emergency efforts. The crisis has also
highlighted other fragilities in the countries concerned
that should be closely monitored and addressed. We
must remain mindful of the potential implications of
the crisis for peace and security, considering that all
three countries most affected are under the supervision
of the Peacebuilding Commission. And, finally, we
should identify benchmarks and key measures to be
taken during their post-emergency transition. A new
void must not materialize.
In closing, Sweden will continue to stand by the
affected countries and will announce further significant
support at the earliest opportunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you for convening
this important meeting, Mr. President. The presence
here earlier today of the Secretary-General, Dr. David
Nabarro, and Ms. Margaret Chan reflects the high level
of political concern and commitment to addressing the
global outbreak of Ebola. Israel is proud to join with
other nations in sponsoring today’s resolution 2177
(2014).
The Jewish philosopher and physician Maimonides
said that the physician should treat not only the disease
but also the patient who is suffering. The suffering in
West Africa is immense. The Ebola epidemic has killed
thousands of people and new cases are being reported
daily. We must never lose sight of the fact that behind
the startling figures and statistics there are people who
are suffering, with families that are suffering too. We
are witnessing a crisis for the countries affected, the
African continent and the international community.
Diseases do not respect nations or nationalities. A
health crisis in one country can easily spread to others in

14-5386135/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

18/09/2014

the region and often well beyond. Unless we coordinate
our response and invest more resources in fighting this
disease, the Ebola outbreak will spread even further.
The epidemic already threatens to destabilize an already
fragile region. Schools and workplaces are closed, and
it is almost impossible to get any kind of medical care
because Ebola has crippled the system. As soon as a
new treatment facility opens, it immediately fills to
overflowing. Patients and families are lining up outside
begging for help. Health workers on the front lines are
becoming infected and dying. In many places fear and
misunderstanding have turned to anger, hostility and
even violence.

replace apathy with ambition. This must be the moment
when we enable nations to become the architects of their
health-care systems rather than their victims. This must
be the moment when we unite to defeat this disease and
strengthen health-care systems around the world so that
this tragedy is never repeated.

A global crisis requires a global response. We know
that this virus can be controlled. Ebola outbreaks have
occurred in Africa on more than two dozen occasions
over the past 40 years, and every time they have been
brought under control. The global community has the
tools and the know-how to save thousands of lives, but
the response from all of us so far has been inadequate.
The people of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone are
looking to us for help. They are counting on us for more
health-care workers, equipment and medical supplies.

My delegation will make a very brief statement,
given the time restrictions.

Israel is proud to be playing its part. The Jewish
faith teaches tikkun olam, the obligation of every person
to make the world a better place. Israel has taken this
message to heart and over the years has been one of the
first countries to respond when disaster strikes. From
Haiti to Ghana and, more recently, the Philippines,
Israel has lent a helping hand to dozens of countries.
Israel stands ready to join an international task
force to combat the Ebola outbreak. In the meantime,
we have sent emergency funding to Sierra Leone and
medical supplies to Ethiopia. We have also coordinated
with the World Health Organization and sent experts in
public health and infectious diseases to Cameroon. We
have trained dozens of doctors, nurses and other medical
staff from six different hospitals on how to prevent and
contain the disease. Israeli non-governmental agencies
are now preparing to send another team to Sierra Leone.
The time for global action is now. Tens of thousands
of lives and the future of West Africa hang in the
balance. Every country, no matter how small, has a
role to play in combating the Ebola epidemic. We are
standing at a crossroads. In our generation, global health
and development goals that once seemed unattainable
are now within our reach. At the same time, we are
confronting global health challenges that threaten to
set us back decades. This must be the moment when we
36/50

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay
commends the presidency of the Security Council for
convening this meeting on this very important and
urgent problem.

First, on behalf of my Government, I offer our
condolences to the families and the Governments of
the victims. We also wish to underscore the value of
resolution 2177 (2014), which was unanimously adopted
today by the Security Council with an historic level of
sponsorship.
Uruguay recognizes the importance and gravity
represented by the swift development of this terrible
disease in the western region of the African continent
and its global significance and impact, which could
grow very quickly. The magnitude of this tragedy in
the affected region not only destroys the life and health
of its people, but also threatens its social fabric and
economy and the very existence of those States that
do not have the infrastructure or adequate means to
confront the epidemic.
We are especially concerned about the devastating
impact that this disease has on women, as a consequence
of their activities within the heart of their families and
communities. That is why the fight against this disease
requires a joint effort of the international community.
In that regard, Uruguay recognizes and appreciates the
effort being made by the United Nations, particularly
the World Health Organization, and other organizations
already on the ground, and by those Member States that
have pledged resources and personnel to address the
threat.
Although we are aware of the varying scale of the
situation, Uruguay notes with particular concern the
appearance of another Ebola outbreak in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where our country has deployed
a contingent of nearly 1,200 forces. This makes my
country even more alert to the depth of the problem,

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

in virtue of having to generate an adequate system
for evacuation and the treatment of a disease without
precedent for Uruguay. In this context, Uruguay for its
part reaffirms its international commitment to maintain
its staff deployed in the area of the Mission, despite
the increased level of risk posed by the appearance of
Ebola, and pledges to seek ways to cooperate to cope
with the disease and its consequences within the actual
capacities of the country. It is in that spirit that my
country has sponsored today’s adopted resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António (African Union): Let me take this
opportunity, on behalf of the African Union (AU)
Commission, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the United States’ assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and on its initiative to
convene this meeting on the ongoing Ebola scourge that
continues to reign in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
creating a crisis of alarming proportions.
I would also like to thank all members of the Council
for unanimously voting in favour of resolution 2177
(2014) and all Member States that sponsored it.
I would like to salute the presence among us of the
Ministers who have also made very rich and insightful
statements. I would like to recognize the presence of
the Director-General of the World Health Organization
and the presence of Dr. Nabarro, Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola.
Since the outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus in
West Africa in December 2013, the citizens of the
affected countries have been in great trepidation.
Traders, farmers and health officials can no longer go
about their daily business without fear of the unknown.
It is even more difficult for post-conflict countries on
a serious course of reintegration, rehabilitation and
rebuilding of their social fabric. The retardation of
economic development is all the more worrisome.
Beyond the affected countries, all the countries of
the West African region remain on constant alert as
updates are being released. Because the Ebola virus is
so deadly, apparent tendencies of mistrust and sieges
among families, communities and countries have
been arising. I wish to quote the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana DlaminiZuma, who indicated in her statement at the emergency
meeting of the African Union Executive Council heads
on 8 September that

S/PV.7268

“the drive to protect unaffected areas is the proper
response, but it must be done in a manner that does
not fuel isolation or lead to the stigmatization of
victims, communities and countries”.
Also critical is the impact on cross-border trade
and food security as people are unable to trade and
work their fields, leading to a rise in food prices. The
need to take preventive measures to halt the spread of
the Ebola virus and avert an economic disaster cannot
be overemphasized. Measures should therefore be put
in place to enable agriculture to continue and support
traders, the majority of whom are women.
The Ebola crisis has highlighted the weakness of
the public health systems in Africa in general, thereby
vindicating the various AU frameworks that call for
universal access and people-centric and effective public
health institutions. The African health strategy 20072015 has identified weak and under-resourced health
systems as a major impediment to progress. This is
particularly true for countries emerging from conflict.
Desperate times call for desperate measures.
We can no longer procrastinate about combating this
disease. The time to act is now. It is for this reason
that the African Union Commission has mapped out
two priority approaches. The first is the emergency
approach; the second is the long-term approach. The
emergency approach focuses on the establishment of an
African public health emergency fund managed by the
World Health Organization (WHO), since the emergence
of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. In addition, a
monetary pledge has been made by the AU from the
Humanitarian Assistance Fund and the Department of
Political Affairs. The long-term approach in dealing
with the Ebola crisis has resulted in the creation of an
African Centre for Disease Control and Prevention for
early detection. We also focus on the speeding up of
the operationalization of the African Centre for Disease
Control so that information can be shared about the
development of the disease and implement an effective
coordinated response.
Subsequently, on 21 August, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union authorized the
immediate deployment of a joint AU-led military and
civilian humanitarian mission comprised of medical
doctors, nurses and other paramedical personnel to
tackle the emergency situation caused by the Ebola
outbreak. Utilizing the infrastructure of the peace
support operations, the African Union support for the
Ebola outbreak in West Africa is deploying civilian and

14-5386137/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

military volunteers from across the continent to ensure
that Ebola is contained. This operation is expected
to run for six months with the monthly rotation of
volunteers. The operation aims at bridging the existing
gap in international effort, and will work with WHO,
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United States Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, the European Union
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, and other
agencies already on the ground.
The Commission has also sought the assistance
of and is working with WHO and the United Nations
Department for Peacekeeping Operations and
Department of Field Support towards the lifting of
border closures by putting in place sanitary measures
and screening passengers at airports in Monrovia,
Freetown and Conakry. The objective is to open up
these airports to humanitarian and commercial flights.
Furthermore, the medical services have put in place a
contingency plan to strengthen the AU medical service
emergency response for AU-infected staff or staff of
AU member States in Addis Ababa.
I also wish to draw the Council’s attention to
the changes in the mandate and replacement of the
AU Special Emergency Assistance Fund for Drought
and Famine in Africa, as it relates to the Ebola
epidemic. Recently, the Permanent Representatives’
Committee’s Sub-committee on the Special Emergency
Assistance Fund for Drought and Famine in Africa
and its Sub-committee on Refugees, Returnees and
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa established a
dialogue to identify ways to harmonize the roles of the
two sub-committees and make necessary changes to
their mandates in view of recent developments on the
continent. It is notable that the Sub-committee on the
Special Emergency Assistance Fund for Drought and
Famine in Africa has made funds available to the three
most affected countries by broadly interpreting the
mandate of the fund.
Before concluding, it is worth stressing that
while assessments and analyses serve very useful
purposes, I cannot emphasize enough how important
it is for us to listen and to be guided by the realities
on the ground. Today we heard a very personal and
powerful testimony by Jackson Niamah of Médecins
Sans Frontières in Monrovia. There is another story
that I have heard personally. It is the story of a doctor
working assiduously in an Ebola unit, with some steady
and good results. The sad part of this story is that the

38/50

18/09/2014

researchers he is working with do not share his strong
determination and good will to save lives. As we move
together in our common fight against the Ebola disease,
their stories should drive and focus our efforts.
Finally, I wish to reaffirm the AU’s continuous
support and efforts to ensure the adequate coordination
and harmonization of all strategic efforts in the
implementation process to achieve our desired goal on
the continent of Africa. Cognizant of the fact that no
country can act alone while we are engaged in fighting
Ebola, we would like to thank all our partners from
Member States, inter-governmental organizations, civil
society and non-governmental organizations for their
contributions and efforts on the ground. We would like
to especially recognize the announcement today by the
Secretary-General of the deployment of an emergency
mission to the region, but we should bear in mind that
while we are committed to fighting Ebola, together we
stand and divided we fall. Worse still is that divided we
can fail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): The Ebola crisis has clearly become more
than just a serious epidemic. Given its exponential
growth and its impact on public order, the economy
and the political situation in affected countries, it has
now become a threat to the stability and security in
West Africa, with a potential global impact. That fact
underlines the timeliness of this debate and of resolution
2177 (2014), which Spain has co-sponsored.
Our response must be immediate and coordinated
under the leadership of the United Nations and regional
organizations, and geared towards supporting the
initiatives of the affected States. We welcome the
initiative of the Secretary-General to establish an
emergency response mechanism.
There are three major challenges. The first is to
provide care for those affected; the second is to provide
care for those who care for the sick; and the third is to
ensure that the medical, social, economic and security
institutions of the affected countries do not collapse. To
those I would add a fourth challenge; it may be obvious,
but I must mention it. We must avoid and prevent the
isolation of the affected countries. Marginalization and
stigmatization are counterproductive. Not only are they
totally useless, but they also delay the response to the
epidemic.

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Spain is particularly alive to this crisis because of
its geographic proximity and close links to West Africa.
We have a great deal to contribute. We are doing so, and
we are prepared to do much more. Let me offer just
a few examples of our action in the three areas that I
mentioned.
With respect to providing medical care for those
affected by Ebola, it is essential that we increase the
number of treatment units, provide medical supplies
and deploy specially trained staff. We must also break
the contagion chain and develop a communication
strategy. That is what we are doing. We have sent tons
of emergency medical and health supplies, material for
protection, disinfection and isolation, an emergency
response unit and experts in water, sanitation and
logistics to various medical centres in Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea.
Among those who are struggling to alleviate the
suffering of the victims, at this point there are some
30 Spanish nationals offering care to persons infected
with Ebola. That is a small demonstration of our efforts
in working together with many other humanitarian
workers of many other nationalities.
We are aware of the logistics and training needs
and are working to meet them. We also are particularly
sensitive to the need for protection. We have been
involved in one of the first medical evacuations, of
two humanitarian workers, and we now have a detailed
protocol that we are willing to make available to the
United Nations and interested countries.
We also have to share the sad news of the death of
the first victim, Father Miguel Pajares, whom I recall
with emotion and gratitude for the humanitarian work
that he continued through to the last days of his life.
With respect to ensuring that the affected States
can continue to provide basic protection and health
care to their citizens, it is true that the collapse of
their health-care systems is causing increases in the
numbers of victims of common diseases. Unfortunately,
maternal and infant mortality rates in those countries
are trending upward again, because the related needs
are being neglected now that all efforts are focusing on
fighting Ebola. We shall continue to provide support
towards food and nutritional security in the region and
to strengthen health capacities in water and sanitation
in the countries that I have mentioned.
It is also essential to prevent the spread of the
epidemic to neighbouring countries. We intend to

S/PV.7268

scale up our support for national response mechanisms
in neighbouring countries, namely, Senegal, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger, Côte d’Ivoire and Nigeria.
Furthermore, we will work within the European Union
to ensure that it strengthens its action in that area.
That will, of course, require additional resources,
which we are prepared to provide. Our action will be
coordinated internationally and our capacities will be
integrated within the response plan of the World Health
Organization.
In conclusion, I wish to pay a heartfelt tribute to
all of the victims and those working on the front line
against this disease. To Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, I offer our solidarity in the face of the tragedy
they are experiencing and our promise and commitment
that together, we will overcome the crisis and those
countries will find their way back to the path towards
the peace and prosperity for which they have been
fighting in recent years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and Ms. Chan and Dr. Nabarro
for their briefings. I also welcome the initiative of
the United States presidency that led to the Council’s
adoption today of resolution 2177 (2014), which Italy
was happy to co-sponsor.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union (EU) and would
like to add a few remarks in a national capacity.
Ebola is more than a health crisis. It has already
become a broader humanitarian emergency with
dramatic social, economic, security and political
implications. We are deeply concerned by the gravity of
the situation and are closely following its evolution. We
are also mobilizing both public and private institutions
to support countries struck by the virus and to prevent
further transmission of the disease.
At this juncture, it is of the utmost importance to
undertake determined, collective action to stop the
Ebola epidemic, which is indeed a global threat to
security. We will take every opportunity during our
ongoing European presidency, within the European
Union Council’s working groups on humanitarian and
development affairs, to deepen the discussion, raise
awareness among EU member States and mobilize
additional resources to tackle the Ebola virus in an
effective, concerted way. The EU ministers of health

14-5386139/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

will meet in Milan on 22 and 23 September to coordinate
the response to the Ebola outbreak.
The Italian Government has supported the World
Health Organization (WHO) since the outbreak of the
crisis, making a preliminary contribution of €200,000
in April for WHO activities in Guinea. An additional
€240,000 was recently disbursed. Moreover, we have
just approved a bilateral action, to be implemented in
partnership with Italian non-governmental organizations
in the field and the Spallanzani National Institute for
Infectious Diseases in Rome, for the prevention and
treatment of the virus, through capacity-building and
technical assistance to the national health systems of
the affected countries and public information about the
transmission of the disease. In the very near future, the
Italian Development Cooperation will carry out new
humanitarian initiatives valued at up to €4 million,
depending on the situation on the ground.
We have heard what the Secretary-General said
today and what he asked of us. We believe that Italy’s
expertise in bio-security could be an asset for tackling
the Ebola emergency. We are open to discussing
further, on a case-by-case basis, the technical and
financial details of possible joint operations for medical
evacuation of international personnel.
In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute to the
extraordinary efforts of the humanitarian and health
workers on the front line who continue to work in
the affected countries, placing their own lives at risk.
I would also like to praise the massive efforts of the
Governments of the affected countries, who are bearing
the heaviest burden of the tragedy.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that that I take the floor under
the United States presidency, allow me at the outset
to thank the presidency for convening this important
meeting on the Ebola crisis. It comes at an opportune
moment. Let me also congratulate the President on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of September. Rest assured that you will have the full
support of the Burundian delegation throughout your
mandate. Moreover, the signs of a remarkable success
have already appeared as witness to your unparalleled
leadership in the work to combat the Ebola crisis.
Likewise, my delegation welcomes the holding of
the upcoming high-level consultations on the Ebola
40/50

18/09/2014

crisis on 25 September and the recent appointment of
Dr. David Nabarro and of his assistant for the Ebola
crisis.
Clearly, I cannot but welcome today’s adoption of
resolution 2177 (2014) on the Ebola crisis. Burundi is
very proud to have co-sponsored the resolution.
Like other African countries, we are very
concerned about the rapid spread of the Ebola virus,
which was brilliantly described by Dr. Nabarro at the
informal meeting of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission on 8 September,
in which my delegation actively participated. Indeed
we believe that at the current pace, the international
community’s degree of mobilization around the crisis
that is affecting Africa has not yet achieved the level
expected, especially as the disease appears to be
spreading faster than the efforts against it.
The situation is serious — in fact, extremely
serious. The international community must not hesitate
to take action through improved coordination and
organizational efforts aimed at saving those human
lives in danger. Tomorrow will be too late because the
disease may spread even beyond the continent. That
probability is already very high.
We can never say it enough: the magnitude of
the outbreak of the Ebola virus requires from the
international community an even more robust response
that will involve not only more resources and medical
expertise in the countries but also more preparation
at the regional and subregional levels. Beyond the
regional dimension, the main development partners that
support interventions in the affected countries must be
prepared to redouble efforts to significantly increase
their assistance.
Meanwhile, we believe that a much greater
involvement of local communities is really essential for
an effective response. In fact, if grassroots communities
take matters into their own hands, take ownership of the
fight, in particular in rural and semi-rural areas, and
implement their own solutions and protection measures
in the context of public health services, transmission of
the Ebola virus could considerably slow down.
For their part, the countries already affected and
the neighbouring countries should strive to mobilize
communities and to improve communication among
people so that they know how to prevent infection and
what they should do, especially if they fear that they
have come in contact with the virus.
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

In terms of peacebuilding, the risks of a backslide
in the gains already made in countries affected under
the Peacebuilding Commission are increasing daily.
The international community must redouble its efforts
to assist countries whose capacities to deal with the
scourge are extremely limited. With regard to the
measures to be taken against the Ebola crisis, the
international community must prevent any isolation of
the affected countries because that could do more harm
than good. We must avoid treating the two situations in
the same way. The isolation of affected individuals and
the isolation of affected countries are two diametrically
opposed things that far from complement each other.
In our humble opinion, isolating those countries
would be tantamount to denying them access to basic
humanitarian assistance. Quarantine could have a very
negative impact on the already fragile economies of the
affected countries, which depend in part on the provision
of certain basic commodities from outside. In order
to support the global action against the current Ebola
outbreak in West Africa, we launch a strong appeal
to the countries neighbouring the affected countries
to kindly agree to open humanitarian corridors to
facilitate the transport and arrival of international staff
and supplies to the affected countries.
The widespread panic created by the Ebola crisis
in affected countries does not allow people to go about
their normal daily productive activities. That could
ultimately give rise to a food crisis that would compound
that of the Ebola virus currently facing them.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to join its
voice to that of other delegations in sincerely thanking
those countries that have already provided assistance to
the three worst affected countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would like to start by
thanking the Security Council and the presidency for
having convened an open debate on this urgent matter
today. I also welcome today’s adoption of resolution
2177 (2014), and I am proud that Estonia was able to
sponsor it.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
The Ebola outbreak has already claimed more than
2,400 lives and affected millions of people. The peak
has not even been reached. Half of the cases occurred

S/PV.7268

in the past three weeks. It is not only a public health
emergency but also a humanitarian crisis and a global
security issue. International action is needed now. I am
happy to note that that is taking clear form here today.
Allow me to sincerely thank the health-care workers
in the front line for their tireless and courageous efforts
to bring the crisis to an end. Their work is carried out
under extremely difficult conditions. More than 120
health-care workers have lost their lives and over 240
have now been infected. The high number of infected
health-care workers is also affecting the health systems
in the ravaged areas. The need to strengthen the health
sector is growing every day, as the number of people
affected is progressing faster than the ability to manage
them. The severe shortages of trained medical staff,
health-care facilities, medical supplies and community
education on Ebola must be our main priorities. The
World Health Organization has called for more human
resources in the affected areas.
We welcome the establishment of a system-wide
coordination initiative, established by the SecretaryGeneral to assist the affected countries in their efforts
to halt the spread of the virus. We highly appreciate
the work that has already been done and encourage the
continued focus on effective strategies and humanitarian
partnerships. We also welcome the plans to set up an
Ebola crisis centre to coordinate the response to the
deadly virus and to strive to halt the spread in West
African countries.
It has already been said here today that any country,
however small, has a role to play. Estonia has already
contributed €60,000 to the World Health Organization
and has decided to contribute an additional €40,000,
which is a total of €100,000. We are also sending
a doctor to one of the ravaged areas to assist in the
important work in the health sector. I can assure the
affected countries that we will actively work within the
European Union and its member States to find possible
options to reduce the growing isolation of the areas in
the region.
If the situation continues, the consequences could
be disastrous not only in terms of lost lives but also in
terms of severe poverty, food insecurity, displacements
and a high risk of the virus spreading to other countries.
The situation is now on the verge of becoming a
humanitarian catastrophe. We can stop the spread
of Ebola, but it will take a coordinated international
response to do that. The international community must

14-5386141/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

18/09/2014

act now if we want to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe.
We cannot afford not to act.

further. We must live up to that responsibility. The time
to act is now.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.

Ms. Stener (Norway): The Ebola epidemic is
having a catastrophic impact on the affected countries
and the wider region. What began as a health crisis now
has serious political, social, economic, humanitarian
and security dimensions. Norway therefore welcomes
the initiative by the United States to hold this very
important meeting.

Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing us to take part in this discussion. We would
like to congratulate the United States on taking the lead
in drawing the world’s attention to this epidemic. We
also applaud the Secretary-General for his commitment
to fighting the epidemic. In that vein, we are proud to
have sponsored resolution 2177 (2014), adopted this
morning.

Despite the persistent efforts, the virus continues
to spread fast. We all underestimated the severity of
the Ebola outbreak. Now we all need to step up our
response. We need to do more, and we need to do it
faster. Local communities, national health personnel
and humanitarian workers carry out the majority of the
work. They are under immense pressure, and they need
our support. That includes ensuring their safety. The
same applies to the international field personnel and
health personnel.
Médecins Sans Frontières deserves praise for
their quick and flexible response. Clear leadership
and coordinated efforts are important. We support the
priorities set out in the World Health Organization road
map. Norway welcomes the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to establish a new United Nations mission
for the Ebola response. We also welcome the active
engagement of the African Union. We reiterate the calls
from the Governments of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra
Leone on the importance of ensuring open trade and air
transportation with the affected areas.
Furthermore, we must recognize that women are
especially at risk in their role as caregivers in homes
and in hospitals. Up to two thirds of the victims are
women. As we combat Ebola, we must prioritize
protecting women and children.
The Governments of the region and the United
Nations have called for immediate action. Norway has
responded to that call by tripling our contribution. Our
total contribution is now more than $13 million. Those
funds will support the efforts of the United Nations,
the African Union and several non-governmental
organizations.
In conclusion, as we are discussing Ebola here
today, people are dying on the ground. We have the
means to stop this epidemic from spreading even

42/50

The people of Botswana have been truly concerned
by the outbreak of this pandemic. Ebola has been
visiting the West African part of our continent with
frightening regularity. Even though Ebola cases have
been reported on African soil, we are aware that it has
the potential to engulf the entire continent and beyond.
Ebola is not just an epidemic, it is a humanitarian
disaster and a catastrophe waiting to happen. The extent
of the catastrophe can be measured not only in human
terms, but also in the fear it instils in those it affects.
As our dear brothers and sisters in West Africa
continue to fight the scourge, we are acutely aware that
containing it is a monumental task. It is therefore in
that context that we need to pull together as children
of the same soil, together with the assistance of the
international community, to address this pandemic
with whatever resources we have at our disposal. We
share the pain and suffering of those who have fallen
victim to the disease. As a regional neighbour to West
Africa, we know that epidemics such as Ebola know
neither boundaries nor frontier regulations.
Over the past weeks we have seen with horror the
images of people who have fallen victim to this scourge,
including mothers and children, and we know that the
virus is swift, sudden and severe. We remain concerned
that, at any point in time, it can strike with precision
and ravage entire populations if left unchecked. As
we speak, over 3,500 people are reported to have been
infected, with over 1,900 deaths. Those include the
most vulnerable: women and children.
In that respect, the Government of Botswana took
a decision in August 2014 to render financial assistance
to Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone in order to assist
those countries in fighting the disease. We hope that
that modest humanitarian gesture of good will and
compassion will go a long way in supporting the
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

deployment of resources and expertise required to fight
and eventually eradicate the dreadful virus.
We are encouraged by the outpour of support from
the international community, including humanitarian
organizations, civil society, medical experts and people
of good will, but we know a lot more still must be
done. As the disease persists, we wish to call on other
stakeholders to play a part. We welcome the African
Union’s Support to Ebola Outbreak in West Africa
initiative, through which they sent a team of medical
experts to the affected countries.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s plan to have
established Ebola crisis centres within six to nine
months so as to harness and suppress the spread of
the virus. We believe that is both practical and timely.
We wish to further congratulate the Secretary-General
for appointing the Senior United Nations System
Coordinator for Ebola, Dr. David Nabarro, and his
deputy, Mr. Anthony Banbury.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Member States
often thank the Council presidency for convening
an important meeting, but that comment is uniquely
appropriate and uniquely meaningful for today’s open
debate. New Zealand compliments the United States
on its initiative in convening this critical discussion
about a crisis that is unprecedented in scale, impact and
potential to threaten international peace and security.
We note with approval the first resolution adopted in
respect of a health emergency (resolution 2177 (2014)),
which New Zealand was pleased to sponsor.
It is not necessary to repeat the obvious, save one
alarming key fact. The Ebola virus continues to have
a devastating impact on West Africa — most notably
in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — and it requires
a massively scaled and coordinated international
response, 20 times greater than we have at the moment,
as we were told a little earlier. That is required to
support affected and at-risk countries.
Back on 8 July, in this Chamber, we heard the thenhead of the United Nations Office for West Africa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Said
Djinnit, warn of Ebola’s alarming spread, despite some
initial successes in containment (see S/PV.7213). New
Zealand welcomes the continuation of such briefings
from regional offices, which allow for emerging threats
like this to be brought to the Council’s attention. We

S/PV.7268

also welcome the United Nations action on Ebola
over recent weeks, including the Secretary-General’s
announced emergency mission and the establishment
of an Operations Crisis Centre. We thank Ms. Chan for
her detailed outline of the World Health Organization’s
(WHO) international response plan.
The international response to stop further Ebola
transmission and to prevent a wider spread of the virus
must be swift, it must be action-orientated, and it must
enjoy the highest level of political support. That level
of political support is, I suggest, demonstrated by
the widespread attendance at today’s meeting. New
Zealand is grateful to those countries that have already
made significant contributions and to those who have
made further pledges today, including support for the
WHO, UNICEF, Médecins Sans Frontières and others.
The African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council has also, of course, authorized the AU’s firstever humanitarian mission to the affected countries,
which is a commendable act of African solidarity. That
and any other regional responses must be strongly
supported.
New Zealand has heard loud and clear the message
that what is needed is an international mobilization
of significant financial contributions, resources and
expertise. New Zealand is in the midst of a general
election, to take place tomorrow, New Zealand time.
However, one of the first tasks of our new Government
will be the urgent consideration of a range of options of
what we can do to further contribute to the international
response. I should mention that, despite the constraints
of our present constitutional position, while we have
been here, I have received advice that my minister has
approved a further significant financial contribution to
the WHO.
Last month, trained New Zealand nurses deployed
to the affected subregion to contribute to response
efforts, working with the team led by the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC). In addition to that deployment of practical
expertise, New Zealand has provided funding to the
IFRC, UNICEF and WHO, including the additional
contribution I have just mentioned.
New Zealand may be geographically far from West
Africa, but we are determined to play our part to ensure
that the Governments and people of the subregion, in
particular Guineans, Liberians and Sierra Leoneans,
have the international support they require — indeed,

14-5386143/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

the international support they deserve — to control the
outbreak and to prevent the further spread of this latterday plague. We will do our bit.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, and the United
States for the convening of this debate. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Dr. David
Nabarro, Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola; Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the
World Health Organization (WHO); and Mr. Jackson
Niamah of Médecins Sans Frontières for their briefings.
Let me begin by extending my delegation’s deepest
condolences to the families and friends of all those
who have perished in the Ebola outbreak. Malaysia
pays tribute to the many brave doctors and health-care
workers engaged in the tireless effort to counter this
deadly disease.
The scale of the Ebola outbreak is unprecedented.
The situation is worsening as the deadly disease
transcends national borders, with profound impacts
on socioeconomic activity and the security situation
of the affected countries. The challenges posed by the
outbreak would be overwhelming for any single country
to cope with alone. The health crisis constitutes a global
threat that would require a global response.
Malaysia commends the contributions and pledges
by various countries to fight the pandemic. However,
action taken so far is insufficient. More is needed to
be done by the international community to reverse the
situation. The open debate today is timely as we take
further action to address the crisis.
Malaysia is also concerned that the outbreak could
potentially reverse the peacebuilding gains achieved
in the three countries that are on the peacebuilding
agenda, namely, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea.
In their hour of need, we must not abandon or isolate
the affected countries. My delegation concurs with the
briefers that we must work together to coordinate and
mobilize resources to ensure adequate humanitarian
response on the ground and to combat the outbreak
effectively.
At this juncture, it is crucial to ensure that support
to the affected countries is coordinated and sustained at
the international level. It is also important for all United
Nations agencies to stay proactive, coordinated and

44/50

18/09/2014

flexible in responding to the unparalleled challenges
posed by this deadly epidemic.
Earlier this week, Malaysia responded to the call
for international contributions, particularly in response
to the testimonies by medical authorities that identified
the shortage of medical rubber gloves as a problem
in combating the outbreak. On 15 September, the
Malaysian Prime Minister, Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib bin
Tun Haji Abdul Razak, handed over the consignment of
20.9 million medical rubber gloves, in 11 containers to
be distributed to the affected countries. Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea will each receive three containers
of medical gloves, each container carrying 1.9 million
gloves. Meanwhile, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria will receive one container each. The
gloves will be transported from Malaysia to the main
ports of each country as soon as possible.
Malaysia sincerely hopes that this modest
contribution will help prevent the spread of Ebola and
save lives. We will continue to monitor the situation
closely to see how we can further support the affected
countries, whether in the immediate or longer term.
My delegation welcomes the outcome of this debate
in the form of resolution 2177 (2014), which Malaysia
co-sponsored. I wish to assure the Council of Malaysia’s
fullest support and cooperation in working closely with
all partners in combating the Ebola outbreak.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): The unprecedented spread
of the Ebola virus in parts of West Africa is a massive
humanitarian disaster for the region. It also threatens
the overall political and economic stability in Africa,
in particular in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia.
Germany is and remains committed to the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) as a police
contributor. Let me use this opportunity to also express
my appreciation of the work done by UNMIL in these
challenging days.
Germany fully subscribes to the Council’s
declaration that the extent of the Ebola outbreak in
Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. We are faced with a crisis that demands a
comprehensive, rapid and determined response from
the United Nations and all its Members. The Ebola
threat will therefore be a core issue for the Group of
Seven (G7) Foreign Ministers meeting in New York
next week and throughout the German G7 presidency.
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Germany welcomes the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to establish a United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response. A rapid response is crucial. The
German Air Force will airlift medical and humanitarian
goods and personnel into the region. The German armed
forces will provide material for an Ebola treatment
unit in Liberia with a capacity of up to 50 beds. We
are now looking for partner organizations that have the
expertise needed to upgrade the centre.
To date, Germany has pledged over $23 million
to combat the Ebola outbreak. Those funds have been
made available to the World Health Organization and
to humanitarian non-governmental organizations,
including Médecins Sans Frontières. In addition,
Germany is providing funds to the Bernhard Nocht
Institute for Tropical Medicine and the Robert Koch
Institute for Disease Control and Prevention, which
are operating diagnostic facilities in West Africa and
have deployed 17 epidemiologists to the region. Today,
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has decided to allocate an
additional €5 million for humanitarian assistance. With
a view to a medium-term response, Germany is funding
the development of vaccines and new therapies against
Ebola and is providing up to €6 million for further
medical and other goods.
Finally, Germany, together with partner countries,
is examining the availability of appropriate medical
evacuation capabilities. That would certainly increase
the willingness of international health-care workers to
be deployed to the region affected by the Ebola virus.
Germany stands ready to be part of the international
response coalition against the Ebola virus.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
to address the serious tragedy caused by the Ebola
outbreak, which the World Health Organization
has characterized as an international public health
emergency.
I also want to take the opportunity to offer the
most sincere condolences of the Colombian people and
Government to all the victims of this serious tragedy,
their family members and their respective Governments.
Colombia is aware that the national authorities
of the affected States have made enormous efforts.
However, while they had the best intentions, they have

S/PV.7268

been overwhelmed by the magnitude and virulence of a
disease that has not been given sufficient attention and
research. The human dimension of the crisis, the impact
on affected countries and the potential for the disease
to spread beyond West Africa mean that we must give
all our support and commit to international initiatives
aimed at addressing it.
As the Secretary-General mentioned, we will
not solve the crisis by erecting barriers to the
movement of people, cancelling flights or isolating
those countries. The solution lies in education and
cooperation, in a strategic orientation that makes
possible a comprehensive response to the disease, in
the re-establishment of health services and in taking
structural measures conducive to long-term economic
and social development.
Colombia, in consideration of its solidarity with the
States and peoples of the region, will provide support
in the amount of $100,000 to the international efforts
to respond to the crisis and will provide medical teams.
Colombia welcomes the Secretary-General’s
appointment of Dr. David Nabarro as United Nations
System Senior Coordinator for Ebola Virus Disease.
We assure him of our strong support and encourage him
to work closely with the States of the region, the World
Health Organization and other United Nations system
agencies.
If we are to succeed in containing the Ebola
outbreak, treating infected people, ensuring the
provision of health services, preserving stability and
preventing new outbreaks, we must make a coordinated
effort that respects the national ownership and
leadership of the affected States in the response to the
crisis and in defining their needs, and we must establish
a clear division of labour and avoid a duplication of
efforts. To address this situation, we must focus on
building and strengthening the capacities of national
health institutions as part of a plan aimed at long-term
economic and social development.
Let me say that while the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa has the potential to erode stability and
social cohesion in some of the countries concerned,
the situation cannot be characterized as a threat
to international peace and security in general. As
noted by the Secretary-General, in the light of the
fact that public health issues require the cooperation
and decisive political commitment of the entire
international community, Colombia believes that the

14-5386145/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

General Assembly should also move forward in the
study of the issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Dr. David Nabarro and
Ms. Margaret Chan for their exhaustive briefings and
for the commitment they have shown on a topic that is
of importance to the entire international community.
I thank the presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important meeting at a time when our
African brothers and sisters are struggling against
a fierce epidemic, the Ebola virus disease, which
threatens to decimate communities and whole villages,
and on which the international community must act
immediately with the aim of saving as many human
lives as possible and prevent the current situation from
becoming a humanitarian catastrophe, as the World
Health Organization has warned. Besides the loss of
human lives and beyond the humanitarian tragedy such
loss signifies lie the impacts and the economic and
infrastructural damage that this horrible epidemic will
bring to affected countries in the medium and long term.
Food security, health systems, water and sanitation can
collapse if we do not give an immediate and supportive
response to our affected brother countries.
Our country is a poor country but we have the most
valuable resource — the human resource — that we
are disposed to contribute help and assistance, together
with other teams, to address a humanitarian emergency
with unpredictable consequences. We acknowledge
the work of the World Health Organization, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian and the
Secretary-General’s initiative to launch the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. We
also recognize all brother countries that are providing
assistance in health workers, equipment, donations,
funds, logistics and guidance and which to date have
committed to contributing to this great effort, which
should demonstrate that the community of nations can
in fact work together, in good faith and with urgency,
to save lives in the face of a humanitarian catastrophe.

18/09/2014

Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): The United
States of America has the reputation for being at the
cutting edge. Mr. President, you have just proved that
fact once again by organizing this important meeting
on Ebola following the meeting on AIDS in Africa
that your country organized in this same Chamber
in January 2000 (See S/PV.4087). I congratulate the
United States presidency on the excellent manner in
which it is directing the work of the Security Council
in this month of September and the place it has given to
Africa in its agenda.
Taking the floor at this late hour, I will limit
myself to emphasizing the Ebola virus disease is not
new in Africa, but the epidemic currently affecting the
western part of our continent is unprecedented in terms
of propagation and the number of affected persons and
victims.
Mali, together with affected brother countries,
is making an effort at the bilateral, subregional and
regional levels to implement the measures recommended
by the African regional bodies. Today, Mali joins
the international community in contributing to the
appropriate international response fto this formidable
epidemic. Mali welcomes the initiative of the highest
American authorities and welcomes the strong
mobilization around that promising initiative. We ask
that we move forward urgently and in a coordinated
manner, taking appropriate action, for the Ebola virus
will not wait and does not observe formalities as it
moves from one country to another, from one region to
another all around the world.
Mali supports the creation of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response proposed by
the Secretary-General. That United Nations Mission
should not be just one more mission. Finally, Mali was
a sponsor of resolution 2177 (2014), which was just
adopted unanimously and which now must be urgently
implemented.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.

Those are the reasons that have led us to co-sponsor
resolution 2177 (2014) adopted by the Council today.

Mr. Sylla (Senegal) (spoke in French): Let me
express at the start of my statement my great pleasure
at seeing the United States of America assume the
presidency of the Security Council and to affirm on this
occasion all the support of my delegation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mali.

Through me, my delegation wishes to reiterate
its sincere thanks to the members of the Security

46/50

14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Council for their initiative in drafting resolution 2177
(2014), whose adoption will certainly allow for better
mobilization of the international community’s efforts
and means towards countries affected by the epidemic.
At the most recent United States-Africa Summit,
Mr. Macky Sall, President of the Republic of Senegal,
alerted the international community that the Ebola
epidemic was not just an African matter but a global
one, as the virus knows nothing of borders. Fortunately,
that call received a positive response, which we
welcome. I also warmly welcome the health protection
efforts and mechanisms already implemented by
States of the West African subregion affected by this
terrible epidemic. I would also like to include in that
appreciation the international partners, in particular
other States and civil society organizations, that have
brought their valuable assistance to countries affected
by the epidemic. In that regard, I reaffirm Senegal’s full
support for brotherly and friendly countries affected by
the Ebola epidemic and reiterate our readiness to work
to strengthen the global partnership in the area of health
emergencies and the establishment of humanitarian
corridors.
It must be said that, right from the start, on 21 March,
as this epidemic was taking hold in the West African
subregion, Senegal immediately implemented a strategy
of prevention and epidemiological monitoring, as well
as a communication and outreach plan. That strategy
has been particularly effective because, to date, there
has not been a single case of Ebola virus infection in
the country. The only case in Senegal, brought in from
outside, was quickly taken up by Senegalese doctors and
our health system, and that patient is now completely
cured of the virus, his life saved. All persons who were
in contact with the foreign patient were placed under
observation for 21 days and their tests thankfully came
back negative.
We reaffirm the need, given the strong links
uniting all the countries of our subregion, to strengthen
our unity of action, naturally with the support
international community, and work together to defeat
the epidemic. I can assure you, Mr. President, of the
full readiness of Government of Senegal to cooperate
with the international community in order to curb
this extraordinary crisis, which requires a response
commensurate with its gravity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana.

S/PV.7268

Mr. Talbot (Guyana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important debate today
and commend the leadership that your country has
demonstrated in the global response to the Ebola crisis.
We thank the Secretary-General, Dr. Nabarro, Dr. Chan
and Mr. Niamah for their presentations. We recognize
and appreciate the enormous deployment of effort
on their part by the entire United Nations system, in
particular the World Health Organization, and on the
part of the countries that have rallied to this challenge.
Guyana joins this debate to register its concern
over the deadly Ebola epidemic that has struck West
Africa, to express its solidarity with the countries
affected, particularly Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
and to convey its support for a robust response by the
international community.
In this context, we were pleased to co-sponsor
resolution 2177 (2014) and welcome its adoption.
We also look forward to the action that the General
Assembly will take tomorrow on this issue.
The present Ebola outbreak, on such a rapid and
unprecedented scale, is the largest outbreak of its
kind in history. The crisis brings with it a plethora
of challenges that require a multidimensional and
multisectoral response at the national, regional and
international levels. In addition to its obvious publichealth implications, the Secretary-General has drawn
attention to the significant political, social, economic,
humanitarian, logistical and security dimensions of
the crisis. Its potential for reversing peacebuilding and
development gains is acknowledged with concern.
The Governments of the countries affected are
making valiant efforts to respond to the crisis and
to contain the spread of the disease. At this stage,
however, given the exponential increase in the number
of cases and deaths, it has become necessary, indeed,
imperative, for the international community to mobilize
a coordinated response that is commensurate in scale
and pace with the enormity of the challenge. Guyana
supports all efforts towards that end, and we join in
the call for a massive scale-up of resources to assist
the countries affected and to prevent the spread of the
disease to others.
In that regard, our delegation also supports the
Secretary-General’s initiative to establish the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. For its
part, the Government of Guyana is giving consideration

14-5386147/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

18/09/2014

to an appropriate contribution in the context of the
global response.

sectors to cope with major outbreaks such as that of the
Ebola virus.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.

This past June, at the twenty-third ordinary
session of the African Union summit in Malabo, His
Excellency President Kikwete expressed the readiness
of the United Republic of Tanzania to render support
to the regional interventions spearheaded by the
African Union as well as international interventions,
including those undertaken by the United Nations
system. Our commitment and resolve remain: we will
continue to work with partners to strengthen the level
of preparedness to address the Ebola epidemic.

Mr. Khamis (United Republic of Tanzania):
Tanzania thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important event to discuss the Ebola
outbreak in Africa.
We also welcome the resolution adopted
today — resolution 2177 (2014) — which sends a strong
political message from the Council in the collective
effort to bring the outbreak under control. Tanzania
was a sponsor of the resolution as a show of support
and solidarity, as well as sympathy with those who have
succumbed to its deadly effects. We pledge to stand
with them in addressing this massive health crisis.
We would like to pay tribute to Member States,
regional organizations, the United Nations system, the
private sector, civil society and individuals for their
various interventions in addressing the Ebola crisis. We
believe that where there is a will, there is a way.
The adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) is a positive
contribution to the ongoing efforts. The Ebola outbreak
has demonstrated the vicious, destructive force of the
disease. The projections for its spread and consequences
are alarming and should provoke an immediate,
collective response on our part.
The pronouncements made in this Chamber today
and elsewhere are truly encouraging. All that remains is
to put those commitments into action and wipe the Ebola
virus from the face of the Earth once and for all. The
triumphs of mankind, especially those demonstrated by
the permanent members of the Council, give us much
hope that the deadly Ebola virus can be contained and
eliminated.
The victims of the Ebola outbreak deserve our
sincere sympathy and support. The isolation and
stigmatization of victims, including through transport
restrictions, is truly unfortunate. All of us should do
whatever it takes to refrain from engaging in such acts,
which would be tantamount to adding insult to injury.
The Ebola outbreak has highlighted the fragility
that persists on the African continent and which is also
present in other parts of the world. While directing our
efforts towards eradicating the Ebola outbreak in the
short and medium term, in the long term we should seek
to build the capacities of the health and humanitarian
48/50

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): When one takes the floor following so many
other speakers, one cannot but be brief and join in the
positive statements that have been made. We have a
saying in Spanish to the effect that it is never too late to
say something good, although this comes after the loss
of so many lives.
These words follow on to the show of solidarity that
we have seen here since this morning, with the massive
support announced by the United States of America, the
initiative of the Secretary-General, and the adoption of
resolution 2177 (2014), which we all sponsored, with the
unanimous support of the members of the Council.
It is now time to walk the talk. I would like to
recommend here that it should not be left only to the
World Health Organization and UNICEF. Other United
Nations agencies such as the World Food Programme
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations must also be involved, because it is
not only a question of health; there is also the issue of
nutrition and of feeding the people, given the economic
situation that these countries are now facing.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, believes
firmly, as expressed by its President, Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo, in African solidarity and, indeed, solidarity
with the entire world. It is for that reason that last
Monday, when UNESCO awards were handed out to
scientists from Peru, Burkina Faso and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, His Excellency said that we cannot
isolate those countries suffering from Ebola. We cannot
isolate human suffering. Initially, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea closed its borders and suspended its
flight in order to deal with internal preparations at our
borders and airports, but we reopened them once we
14-53861

18/09/2014

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7268

had taken the necessary measures for control. Through
our national airline, CEIBA, we will soon reopen our
flights to all the countries we serve in West and Central
Africa.

on the way forward. Let us work together to end the
Ebola outbreak and kick it out of the African continent.
Once again, I thank all here. I am really touched by the
solidarity shown with these countries.

I am honoured to take this opportunity to announce
that the President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
has decided to contribute $2 million to the World Health
Organization in order to combat Ebola. As Equatorial
Guinea is a small country with few resources, our Head
of State and the Government believe in solidarity. We
believe that we must do our utmost to join in solidarity
and support the effort to help the countries affected,
because Ebola is not just a problem for Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone, it is rather an epidemic, a pandemic
that can spread like wildfire through any number of
countries at any time. It is a concern not just for Africa
but for the entire world. All of us, therefore, large and
small, are called on to give as much support as possible
to our brother countries and to take all the preventive
measures necessary.

The President: I thank Ms. Chan for her inspiring
comments, and I think she will be pleased to learn
that four additional countries have been added to the
sponsorship of today’s resolution (2177 (2104)), which
will be reflected in the record.

The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Chan
for further remarks.
Ms. Chan: I would first like to thank the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this timely debate on Ebola. I would also
like to thank the Council members and representatives
of other countries who spoke today for their outpouring
of support, political and otherwise, including in the
areas of human resources, expertise, material and
military assets. They are all very valuable to the efforts
to support the three countries affected — Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia — in solidarity with them
and under their national leaderships. The unanimous
support for resolution (2177 (2014), with 130 sponsors,
is an unprecedented feat, and I would like to thank the
Council for its show of solidarity.
It also warmed my heart to hear the support of so many
here for the Secretary-General’s initiative in creating
a United Nations mission. The entire United Nations
family, working with various agencies in the system,
particularly the World Food Programme, UNICEF,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and others, along with partners in the private
sector, civil society and important organizations such
as the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies and Médecins Sans Frontières, will
do its utmost to conduct this massive surge with speed,
scale and efficiency, and without duplication. We look
forward to the Council’s continued guidance and advice

I now give the floor to Dr. Nabarro to make some
concluding remarks.
Dr. Nabarro: As for Ms. Chan, it is a privilege for
me to be here on this historic occasion. I will give my
quick feedback on the messages in the many remarks
I have heard today that I am taking home, as we go on
with our important tasks.
First, all those who spoke, in their different ways,
really appreciate the seriousness of this challenge as
a major public-health crisis that has multiple other
impacts with the potential for wider effects regionally
and internationally. Secondly, this was a demonstration
of powerful solidarity with the countries that are
currently affected, with an appreciation for what they are
doing through their civil society groups, Governments
and their partnerships with others. We see increased
signs of willingness to open or maintain air links and
other trading links, and strong indications of solidarity
among African nations and between Africa and the rest
of the world. Thirdly, I am personally gratified to see
how the work of the various parts of the United Nations
system is recognized, with a valuation not only of the
role of the World Health Organization (WHO) as the
world’s health leader but also of other United Nations
agencies, as Ms. Chan identified just now.
Several Governments used today’s meeting as an
opportunity to offer generous commitments. Some
of those are from within Africa, offering significant
contributions to the international response. Others are
more traditional donors. But what I saw today was an
extraordinary outpouring of support, big and small,
from all over the world — a real global coalition. I
also heard Governments saying that they were willing
to be coordinated and expressing trust in the capacity
of the United Nations to act as the coordinating body.
As the Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola, that is really refreshing for me to hear. I
noted widespread support from virtually all speakers
for the historic plan of the Secretary-General and the

14-5386149/50

S/PV.7268

Peace and security in Africa

Director-General of WHO to establish an exceptional
public-health mission, the United Nations Mission for
Emergency Ebola Response. Finally, I simply feel that
everyone here wants us all to get going and do more, so
with that I will shut up and get on.

50/50

18/09/2014

The President: There are no more speakers on
the list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

14-53861
