S/2012/534

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 July 2012
Original: English

Report of the Security Council Mission to Haiti,
13-16 February 2012
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 19 January 2012, the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had decided to send
a mission to Haiti from 13 to 16 February 2012. Susan E. Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations, led the
mission, which was composed as follows:
Azerbaijan

(Agshin Mehdiyev, Permanent Representative)

Colombia

(Néstor Osorio, Permanent Representative)

France

(Gérard Araud, Permanent Representative)

Germany

(Christophe Eick, Minister Plenipotentiary)

Guatemala

(Gert Rosenthal, Permanent Representative)

India

(Hardeep Singh Puri, Permanent
Representative)

Morocco

(Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent
Representative)

Pakistan

(Raza Bashir Tarar, Deputy Permanent
Representative)

Portugal

(José Filipe Moraes Cabral, Permanent
Representative)

Russian Federation

(Nikita Y. Zhukov, Deputy Permanent
Representative)

South Africa

(Baso Sangqu, Permanent Representative)

Togo

(Kodjo Menan, Permanent Representative)

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

(Philip Parham, Deputy Permanent
Representative)

United States

(Susan E. Rice, Permanent Representative,
Head of Mission)

The representative of China was unable to join the mission.

12-41644 (E) 180712

*1241644*

S/2012/534

2.
The primary purpose of the mission, as set out in its terms of reference, was to
reaffirm the commitment of the Security Council to assist the Government and
people of Haiti to rebuild their country, to consolidate peace, democracy and
stability and to promote recovery and sustainable development, recognizing that
Haiti has made considerable strides since the tragic earthquake of 12 January 2010
yet continues to face significant security, humanitarian and development challenges.
The mission also wished to express the full support of the Security Council for the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to assess the
progress made in the implementation of its mandate.
3.
This was the third visit of the Council to Haiti since the establishment of
MINUSTAH in 2004, the Council having previously visited in April 2005 and
March 2009. The terms of reference of the mission, which were agreed on
6 February 2012, and its programme of work are contained in annexes I and II to the
present report.
4.
The mission left New York on 13 February and returned on 16 February. The
mission met with the President of Haiti, Michel Joseph Martelly, the Prime Minister,
Garry Conille, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurent Lamothe, the Minister of
Justice and Public Security, Pierre Michel Brunache, the Minister of the Interior,
Thierry Mayard-Paul, and a number of other senior Government officials; the
President of the Chamber of Deputies and other members of Parliament;
representatives of civil society; and local officials of the Nippes and North
Departments. The mission also met with senior MINUSTAH officials including
Mariano Fernández, Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti; Major
General Luiz Ramos, Force Commander; and Marc Tardif, Police Commissioner.
5.
The mission visited Port-au-Prince, Miragoâne (Nippes Department), Léogâne
(West Department), Cap-Haïtien (North Department) and the Caracol industrial site
(North-East Department). The mission also visited various MINUSTAH military and
police facilities, including the Delmas 33 police station, as well as the Carradeux
camp for internally displaced persons and a cholera treatment centre in Port-auPrince.

II. Key issues
Overall security situation
6.
While the overall security situation in Haiti has remained stable, albeit fragile,
and political violence was largely absent, the mission noted that occasional violent
incidents continue to occur, including violent demonstrations, shootings involving
small firearms, sexual and gender-based violence and a range of crimes. Instances of
civil unrest continue to be linked primarily to political uncertainties and
socioeconomic grievances. In the light of the persistent political tensions described
below, an increase in politically motivated violence cannot be ruled out. During the
visit of the Council, a number of sporadic and limited civil demonstrations occurred
and appeared to be timed to coincide with the visit. Those demonstrations centred
on allegations of misconduct by MINUSTAH personnel, as well as on allegations
that MINUSTAH contingents had introduced cholera to Haiti. The demonstrations
took place without incident.

2

12-41644

S/2012/534

7.
The military component of MINUSTAH has continued to play its role in the
maintenance of overall security and stability, including during electoral processes. It
has taken an active part in various anti-crime operations such as “Operation Hope”
in Port-au-Prince, which was carried out jointly with the Haitian National Police and
the MINUSTAH police component in October 2011. Haitian and MINUSTAH
interlocutors informed the mission that recent joint security operations demonstrated
an improved level of integration between the Haitian National Police and
MINUSTAH police and military components. In this regard, the mission noted that
MINUSTAH police and military components have established procedures to ensure
that the Haitian police lead any joint operations. The mission met with the heads of
military contingents.
8.
The continued stability, in particular in some parts of Haiti, has enabled
MINUSTAH to initiate a partial withdrawal of the post-earthquake surge of military
and police components. MINUSTAH formed police units have taken on increased
security responsibility following those withdrawals. During its visit to Miragoâne,
the mission was briefed on the transfer of responsibility from Uruguayan military
forces to a Bangladeshi formed police unit and witnessed their effectiveness.
Overall, the local unit of the Haitian National Police expressed satisfaction with its
new partnership with the formed police unit. The mission noted the increased
potential for collaboration offered by the transfer of responsibility from an
international military force to an international police force. The mission observed,
however, that critical capabilities, most importantly in the area of crowd control,
remain underdeveloped and that the presence of the Haitian National Police in the
regions remains inadequate, thus requiring continued support. The Haitian National
Police and the Bangladeshi formed police unit provided the mission with a
demonstration of joint crowd-control operations.
9.
Although the performance of the Haitian National Police has been slowly
improving, the mission noted that it still lacks the quantity and quality of personnel
necessary to assume full responsibility for internal security. The capacity of the
Haitian police force, which currently stands at approximately 10,000 officers, was
further enhanced with the graduation in May 2011 of the twenty-second promotion
class of cadets. The pace of recruitment, vetting and training, however, has been
unsatisfactory. The mission was informed that the start of training for the next group
of cadets was delayed owing to funding shortfalls and other administrative
difficulties. The mission heard accounts that the slower-than-expected pace of
development of the Haitian police risks fuelling support among certain Haitian
sectors for the near-term creation of a national army.
10. The security situation in camps for internally displaced persons has shown
signs of improvement. MINUSTAH police, in co-location with the Haitian National
Police, maintain a 24-hour security presence and robust patrols in seven high-risk
camps and conduct daily rotational patrols in approximately 150 so-called
“non-permanent” camps. The presence of MINUSTAH police facilitates the
registration of complaints and grievances by residents. Incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence remain prevalent, however, and many women still do not feel
safe in the camps; even though reporting of such crimes has increased, significant
underreporting continues.

12-41644

3

S/2012/534

Political situation
11. The members of the Security Council found the current political situation
disturbing, as it is marked by dysfunction within the executive branch and by deep
divisions between the latter and Parliament. Despite the important achievement of
having successfully managed a transfer of power from one democratically elected
president to another from the opposition party in 2011, the situation continues to be
marred by increasing tensions between the executive and legislative branches of
Government, who have, so far, failed to develop a constructive relationship.
12. In particular, since the President took office in May 2011 and the Prime
Minister in October 2011, the new authorities have not initiated the process leading
to the holding of long-delayed local and senatorial elections. The Government has
also remained unclear regarding its intentions with respect to resolving the lingering
controversy over the promulgation of constitutional amendments. Finally, four
months into the new budget year, Parliament has yet to debate or endorse a State
budget.
13. During the meeting with members of Parliament, the fraught nature of
executive-legislative relations became apparent. Parliamentarians complained
bitterly about the President’s purported unwillingness to cooperate with Parliament
and clearly stated their fear that Haiti risked losing the democratic gains made in
recent years. Members of Parliament stressed the fact that the failure to pass muchneeded legislation was due to the unwillingness of the executive branch to propose
new laws. The mission noted that the attention of the Parliament appeared to remain
focused on the investigation into allegations that various Government officials,
including President Martelly, hold multiple citizenship. The mission urged the
legislators to open a constructive dialogue with the President and the executive
branch on a common agenda for the country. Parliamentarians shared frank and
mostly critical views on MINUSTAH. They called for the mission to compensate
cholera victims and to swiftly punish those within MINUSTAH responsible for
incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse of Haitians.
14. The mission found that President Martelly is focused is on tackling the
manifold challenges of the country, such as education, job creation and
environmental protection. In a meeting with the mission, the President outlined a
vision for his country focused on the need to change the image of Haiti in order to
attract investment, create jobs and promote sustainable economic growth. The
mission heard the President’s warning that a number of political spoilers, including
members of Parliament, were intent on creating instability in a bid to derail his
vision. The President also insisted on the reinstatement of the Haitian army as one
of the pillars of his vision and a key benchmark for the eventual withdrawal of
MINUSTAH. In that regard, the Security Council mission underscored the
importance of completing the reform and strengthening of the Haitian National
Police as a fully viable security force.
15. Meanwhile, the Prime Minister appeared increasingly marginalized during the
visit. Despite his well-articulated agenda and willingness to engage positively with
the various political actors, his position seemed that of an outsider within his own
Government. During the visit, numerous interlocutors told the mission that they
expected him to resign soon or be forced from office. The Prime Minister
subsequently resigned on 24 February 2012.

4

12-41644

S/2012/534

16. With those tensions and challenges, it was clear that the political situation
remains one of the main sources of potential instability and one of the fundamental
obstacles to reconstruction and development in Haiti.

Rule of law and institutional development
17. The weakness of Haitian institutions, particularly those responsible for the rule
of law, remains one of the major obstacles to the long-term stability and
development of the country. Of chief concern to the mission was the state of
development of the Haitian National Police. United Nations police and Haitian
National Police officials emphasized that, while progress had been halted by the
earthquake, efforts to build the capacity of the institution had started anew with the
relaunching of recruitment, training and vetting activities, as well as the
construction of new premises to replace those damaged or destroyed in the
earthquake. Those areas of cooperation were reflected in the new five-year Haitian
National Police development plan 2012-2016 that was jointly drafted by the Haitian
authorities and the MINUSTAH police component, with an emphasis on police
professionalization, particularly for mid-level management, and gender-sensitivity
training. Enhanced donor coordination was also a goal under the plan.
18. In quantitative terms, the current national police strength stands at 10,106
police officers, including 760 women. The mission noted with concern during its
visit to the Haitian National Police Academy that the current pace of recruitment
and training did not appear sufficiently sustained to allow the Haitian police to reach
the target of 16,000 officers envisaged in the current draft of the Haitian National
Police development plan. The mission heard differing estimates from different
interlocutors on the number of Haitian National Police officers ultimately required,
with estimates ranging from the 16,000 agreed in the development plan to 20,000 or
22,000. Training any fewer than 1,000 officers a year would prevent the institution
from meeting that target. Yet the twenty-third promotion group, scheduled to begin
its seven-month training in April 2012, consists of only 550 cadets. Moreover,
commencement of training was delayed owing to miscommunication over funding
between the Haitian authorities and key bilateral partners. Further causes of the
delay included divergent views over the timing and duration of the course and class
size.
19. With respect to the quality of the Haitian National Police, several interlocutors
emphasized that mid-level management was being specifically targeted with a
dedicated six-month training course, in addition to other specialized courses. The
completion of the vetting and certification process, relaunched after many files had
been lost in the earthquake, was also part of the development plan. Special mention
was made of the training being provided to the national police on sexual and genderbased violence. Through this project, six MINUSTAH police officers were training
Haitian investigators on how to investigate sexual crimes in a gender-sensitive
manner. The Haitian police still lacked a proper plan to address sexual crimes,
however, as well as adequate facilities: there were no private rooms for victims to
report such crimes.
20. The lack of capacity of Haitian institutions responsible for other aspects of the
rule of law was also of great concern. A visit to a judicial tribunal in Cap-Haïtien
illustrated many of the challenges associated with the fair application of the law in

12-41644

5

S/2012/534

Haiti. In their dialogue with the mission, the court judges and prosecutors stressed
that inequities in access to justice were extremely problematic, as the average
citizen often lacked the resources to hire a lawyer. Also raised was the issue of using
French rather than Creole as the language of the courts. The judges responded that
the translation provided was sufficient to ensure the fairness of proceedings. They
acknowledged, however, problems of competence within their professional ranks
and suggested that the school for magistrates needed to be strengthened. The judges
and prosecutors also emphasized their lack of independence as a major challenge for
the judicial system. Judges receive mandates from the executive branch and are
under the authority of the Minister of Justice rather than that of the Supreme Court,
raising concerns about the politicization of justice. Of note, during the mission,
Mr. Martelly announced the nomination of four of the remaining five judges for
open seats on the Supreme Court, leaving the court one nomination away from its
full and proper functioning.
21. The mission also gained first-hand insight into the problems plaguing the
Haitian corrections system. A visit to a prison in Cap-Haïtien was emblematic of the
deficiencies plaguing the prisons in Haiti, such as extreme overcrowding, excessive
pretrial detention, food and water shortages, non-separation of minors and adults
and poor hygiene. Overcrowding was also apparent in the tiny pretrial detention cell
on the premises of the tribunal. In their dialogue with the mission, the court judges
stressed that issues of pretrial detention were outside their area of responsibility, as
the matter fell under the purview of the Haitian National Police and the National
Prison Administration. They did acknowledge, however, that the unwillingness of
citizens to serve on juries had a negative impact on the timely holding of hearings,
compounding delays. The Council mission noted with deep concern the inadequate
facilities for the court and its shortage of qualified and trained personnel.

Humanitarian situation and recovery from the earthquake
22. The mission was able to see the remaining impact of the destruction and
displacement caused by the earthquake and the progress made in removing rubble
and rebuilding and resettling some of the displaced persons. A tour of downtown
Port-au-Prince showed that a number of buildings had been utterly destroyed,
including the Presidential Palace. At the same time, there had been a reduction of
119,000 (or 19 per cent of the total) in the number of displaced persons, as well as a
reduction in the number of sites since June 2011.
23. Part of the progress was a result of greater efforts by the Government of
Mr. Martelly to “resettle” the individuals living in camps. For instance, the mission
was briefed on the “16/6” programme. The Government pilot programme, supported
by MINUSTAH, sought to rehabilitate 16 neighbourhoods through the
reconstruction of improved housing, the provision of access to basic services to the
community and the creation of income-generating opportunities. In parallel, the
project aimed to facilitate the return and relocation of the displaced people currently
living in six camps, hosting about 5,000 households, to the 16 districts, spread over
the municipalities of Port-au-Prince, Pétionville and Delmas. Mr. Martelly also
made reference to another project, funded by Canada, to move 20,000 people out of
the Champ de mars camp in central Port-au-Prince.

6

12-41644

S/2012/534

24. The mission learned that there were still approximately 515,000 camp
residents, including internally displaced persons, living in 707 sites, the majority of
which were located in or around Port-au-Prince. The mission visited the Carradeux
camp, where camp residents were still dependent on assistance for their basic
survival. Council members discussed security in the camp with representatives of
international and national police assigned there. Sexual and gender-based violence
remain key concerns. A MINUSTAH gender unit was training the local police to
interview victims, and it was reported that, as a result, camp residents were
increasingly contacting both the national and international police to report cases.
That was viewed as a sign of growing public confidence in the response of the
authorities and a sign of productive cooperation between MINUSTAH and the
Haitian National Police.
25. Invited into their tents by camp residents, Council members noted the
meagreness of their belongings but also the profound dignity with which they kept
their homes orderly. Speaking with women leaders in the camp, Council members
took note of a long list of needs, including security, schools, access to health
services and job opportunities. With respect to security, the women observed that
while MINUSTAH provided backup and security for the Haitian National Police, no
one was providing security for them. Greater police presence was needed, including
around the tents that served as schools. The women wanted real school structures for
their children and ambulances to transport the sick to hospital.
26. Council members also visited a cholera treatment centre that was part of the
Haitian Group for the Study of Kaposi’s Sarcoma and Opportunistic Infections and
was operating in part with funding from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria. The centre was initially established to treat HIV/AIDS
and tuberculosis but had expanded operations to respond to the cholera epidemic
when it broke out in October 2010. As at 8 January 2012, the number of cumulative
cases of infected persons stood at 524,861, while the epidemic had killed
7,018 people since the beginning of the outbreak. The reported decrease in the
infection and fatality rates could be observed at the centre, as many of its cholera
treatment beds were currently empty, but infection rates were expected to increase
again in the rainy season, and there was a fear that the camps for internally
displaced persons would be particularly vulnerable.
27. During the course of the visit, the mission was also given the opportunity to
visit the base of one of the MINUSTAH military engineering units and was briefed
on their continued support to a wide range of recovery activities. The briefing noted
that work carried out by the military engineering company of the Republic of Korea
in Léogâne provided examples of how MINUSTAH conducted projects involving
the removal of earthquake-damaged Government buildings, the preparation of land
for the construction of new buildings, road repair, well drilling and river and canal
drainage in preparation for the rainy season.

Social and economic development
28. Socioeconomic conditions remain a major concern. Haiti is ranked 158th out
of 187 in the Human Development Index. Three quarters of the population live on
less than $2 a day, while roughly half of the population must survive on less than
$1 a day. That level of poverty is clearly a factor in the long-term stability of Haiti.

12-41644

7

S/2012/534

Many Haitian interlocutors, particularly at the local level, emphasized the important
role that assistance from the international community was playing in the
reconstruction and development of Haiti. In particular, during the visit to
Parliament, members of the legislature insisted that more international assistance
and more funding from donors were required, although Parliamentarians told the
mission that current international assistance was not taking sufficient account of
Haitian national wishes.
29. By contrast, the President and his team were eager to promote a new image of
Haiti to attract foreign investors. Earlier this year, Mr. Martelly attended the World
Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, and upon his return launched a project that
aims to reduce the time needed to register a business in Haiti from 105 days to
10 days. The Caracol industrial park near Cap-Haïtien is slated to create up to
60,000 jobs. Despite these positive steps, the mission noted that the Government has
been slow to propose business-friendly reforms to the legislature or to articulate a
clear strategy for removing structural constraints to private investment and job
creation such as the absence of a system to regulate land registration and property
rights. The overall weakness of the rule of law institutions in Haiti also hinders
foreign investment.
30. While stressing the business side of his agenda, Mr. Martelly also
acknowledged that the Haitian State needed to find ways to address the problem of
the socioeconomic marginalization of such a vast segment of the population. He told
Council members that he intended to put in place some social measures, such as
offering free schooling to 1.1 million children, as well as a system of vouchers for
mothers to receive food products and vaccinations for their children. He also wanted
to provide loans to the poor, as well as cash transfers using cell phones. In addition,
the Government was looking at how Haiti could develop a social security system.
Those measures, however, were still in the proposal phase.

Role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
31. As the focus of the efforts of the United Nations in Haiti has begun to shift
away from addressing the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, MINUSTAH has
increasingly directed its energies towards fostering cooperation between the two
branches of Government and strengthening the capacity of Haitian public and civil
society institutions at both the central and local levels. The mission welcomed the
ongoing efforts of the Government and international partners to reach agreement on
mutual responsibilities, which would form the basis of systematic collaboration on
institution-building to enable the Haitian State to fully and effectively lead the
country’s economic and social recovery and develop functioning rule of law
institutions.
32. Of significant concern to the Council mission was the widespread criticism
levelled by a wide variety of interlocutors against MINUSTAH with respect to its
alleged role in the cholera epidemic, and allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse of Haitian citizens by MINUSTAH personnel. Members of Parliament, local
authorities and members of civil society expressed anger and frustration over these
issues. The criticism, however, was countered by the much more positive feedback
that Council members received from representatives of the Haitian National Police,
civil society and individuals living in camps regarding their interactions at the

8

12-41644

S/2012/534

working level with MINUSTAH personnel, whether through mentoring and training
or through services provided.
33. Finally, noting the ongoing efforts of the Haitian authorities to attract foreign
investment, the mission has taken note of the stated concerns of Mr. Martelly
regarding the current wording of the Council resolutions on MINUSTAH, which
state that “the situation in Haiti continues to constitute a threat to international
peace and security in the region” (see, for example, resolutions 2012 (2011), 1944
(2010) and 1892 (2009)).

III. Observations
34. The elections and the peaceful transfer of power in Haiti from one elected
Government to another was a critical milestone in the history of the country. The
Council commends the Government and people of Haiti for this historic
achievement. We remain concerned, however, at the often difficult relationship
between and within the executive and legislative branches of Government. We
encourage all Haitian political leaders to put aside their differences and work
together in a spirit of compromise to tackle critical challenges, including making
progress on recovery and development to deliver real benefits to the Haitian people,
undertaking needed elections, completing needed constitutional reforms,
strengthening the rule of law and protecting human rights.
35. Beginning preparations for required partial legislative and local elections,
including through the establishment of a credible electoral council, will be a critical
next step in the consolidation of democracy in Haiti. The Council commends the
support that MINUSTAH has provided to the electoral processes so far and
reiterates that the international community stands ready to assist with the electoral
process as it has done in the past.
36. The Council reiterates the importance of completing the reform and
strengthening of the Haitian National Police so that it can assume full responsibility
for security in the country, including reaching agreement among all stakeholders on
what size force would be required for that purpose.
37. Council members are concerned by increasing reports that armed former
military personnel have occupied former training camps in some regions. Any
decision to re-establish the Haitian armed forces should be the result of a
transparent process that includes the fundamental principles of democratic
accountability and civilian oversight.
38. The Council has seen first-hand the challenges that Haiti faces in building
critical rule of law institutions, including the police, judiciary and the corrections
system. We encourage Haitian leaders to redouble their efforts to strengthen the rule
of law, establish more credible State institutions and reform the legal system. Those
steps are critical for the foreign investment that Haiti requires to build a more
prosperous future for all its people.
39. Haiti has made significant progress in its recovery from the devastating
January 2010 earthquake. The Council commends the heroic efforts of so many
Haitians and their international partners in this effort, the results of which we saw in
many places we visited. Much more work is needed, however.

12-41644

9

S/2012/534

40. Council members noted that while many Haitians recognize that MINUSTAH
plays an important role, they continue to have deep concerns about aspects of the
Mission, including allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse and claims that
United Nations personnel introduced cholera into Haiti. The Council mission
underscores the importance of rigorous enforcement of the United Nations zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and underscores the importance of
thoroughly investigating and bringing to justice any personnel responsible for such
misconduct.
41. The Council commends the efforts of the leadership of MINUSTAH for the
ongoing orderly drawdown requested in Security Council resolution 2012 (2011). It
is a critical step that will ensure that MINUSTAH is properly configured to address
the challenges that Haiti faces. Yet it remains critically important that as
MINUSTAH undertakes further steps, strengthened Haitian institutions are capable
of assuming greater responsibility for the security and the rule of law. The Council
notes the importance of MINUSTAH planning for future drawdown and
reconfiguration as progress is made in building the capacity of the Haitian National
Police.

10

12-41644

S/2012/534

Annex I
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Haiti
The terms of reference are to:
(a) Reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the
Government and people of Haiti to rebuild their country, consolidate peace,
democracy and stability and promote recovery and sustainable development while
recognizing that Haiti has made considerable strides since the tragic earthquake of
12 January 2010 yet continues to face significant security, humanitarian and
development challenges;
(b) Assess the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2012 (2011), and review the progress the Government of Haiti
has made, with the assistance of the international community, particularly the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in addressing the interconnected
challenges in the areas of stability and security, including strengthening the rule of
law and protecting civilians; economic and social development; institutional reform
and governance, including elections; border management; and human rights;
(c) Express strong support for MINUSTAH and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and their efforts to improve stability and governance in Haiti,
and create conditions conducive to the security, reconstruction and development of
Haiti;
(d) Assess the ongoing strengthening of the Haitian National Police and the
increasing exercise by national authorities of the responsibility of the Haitian State
for the maintenance of stability and security in the country, examine efforts by
MINUSTAH to increase coordination with the Haitian National Police and to
strengthen their capacity in order for them to take full responsibility for security
needs, underscore the importance of adequate funding for the Haitian National
Police, encourage the Government of Haiti to take advantage of the support being
provided by the international community to guarantee the provision of adequate
security for the Haitian people, and assess the full range of the rule of law, security
and security-related structures of the country;
(e) Reiterate the importance of immediate, medium- and long-term sustained
efforts to support the reconstruction of Haiti; consolidate democracy, peace and
stability; ensure the protection of human rights; and promote sustainable development;
while bearing in mind the ownership and primary responsibility of the Government
and people of Haiti;
(f) Evaluate and discuss with the Government of Haiti the progress in
earthquake recovery, including the overall humanitarian situation, rubble removal,
housing reconstruction and the rebuilding of critical infrastructure; evaluate the
impact of those efforts on security, stability and development; and assess the capacity
of the Government of Haiti and the private sector to carry out civil engineering and
reconstruction tasks, including consulting the Government of Haiti on how capacity
can be increased so that Haitians take a wider role in reconstruction;
(g) Review and assess the efforts of the Government of Haiti, with the
support of MINUSTAH and the cooperation of Member States, to address challenges
to security, including threats to internally displaced persons and other vulnerable

12-41644

11

S/2012/534

groups; sexual and gender-based violence; cross-border trafficking of persons, drugs
and arms; and other criminal activities;
(h) Urge all relevant political actors in Haiti, in particular the executive and
legislative branches, to engage in an effective dialogue towards a political agreement
that would consolidate a concrete forward agenda for progress in key areas, such as
the security, budget, recovery and development priorities of Haiti; elections and
electoral reform, including the participation of women in the electoral process; and
the completion of constitutional reform;
(i) Review the progress achieved so far, and assess the state of planning and
implementation of the upcoming legislative and local Government elections;
(j) Underscore the importance of mutual commitments made by the
international community and Haiti and convey the importance of the fulfilment of
all pledges of support to reconstruction;
(k) Assess the impact of the health challenges facing Haiti on the security
and stability of the country and examine the efforts of the United Nations system,
particularly MINUSTAH, to assist the Government of Haiti in addressing emerging
health issues;
(l) Underscore the importance of full compliance of all MINUSTAH
personnel with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse and assess steps taken to implement the policy;
(m) Review the progress of implementation by MINUSTAH of the force
reduction authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2012 (2011), assess
planning to encourage greater Haitian ownership of security and reconstruction
activities and examine the potential for adjustments to MINUSTAH force
configuration based on the overall improved security situation on the ground, taking
into account the impact of social and political realities on stability and security, the
increasing development of Haitian State capabilities, including the ongoing
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, and the increasing exercise by the
national authorities of their responsibility for the maintenance of stability and security.

12

12-41644

S/2012/534

Annex II
Schedule of meetings of the Security Council mission to Haiti
Monday, 13 February 2012
3.30 p.m.

Arrival in Port-au-Prince from New York

3.45 p.m.

Press conference

4.15 p.m.

Meeting with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General

7 p.m.

Meeting and dinner hosted by Prime Minister Garry Conille

Tuesday, 14 February 2012
8 a.m.

Travel through Port-au-Prince

9 a.m.

Meeting with Parliamentarians

10.30 a.m.

Military briefing in Fort National military camp

12.20 p.m.

Departure to Miragoâne

12.50 p.m.

Visit in Miragoâne and United Nations police/Haitian National Police
activities

1.50 p.m.

Departure from Miragoâne

2.15 p.m.

Arrival in Léogâne and activities with engineers from the Republic of
Korea

4.45 p.m.

Departure from Léogâne

5 p.m.

Arrival in Port-au-Prince

5.30 p.m.

Meeting with President Michel Martelly

8 p.m.

Reception hosted by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral

Wednesday, 15 February 2012

12-41644

8.20 a.m.

Departure from Port-au-Prince to Cap-Haïtien

9.50 a.m.

Arrival in Cap-Haïtien and visits in town

noon

Departure to Caracol industrial site

12.20 p.m.

Arrival in Caracol and site visit

12.45 p.m.

Departure from Caracol

1.30 p.m.

Arrival in Port-au-Prince and lunch with military units

3.15 p.m.

Police briefing at Delmas 33 police station

4.10 p.m.

Departure from Port-au-Prince to New York for part of the delegation

13

S/2012/534

Thursday, 16 February 2012

14

8.40 a.m.

Visit to police academy in Port-au-Prince

9.30 a.m.

Visit to camp for internally displaced persons in Port-au-Prince

11.30 a.m.

Visit to cholera treatment centre in Port-au-Prince

1 p.m.

Lunch with civil society groups

2.30 p.m.

Press conference

4.10 p.m.

Departure from Port-au-Prince to New York for the remainder of the
delegation

12-41644
