General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

150

programmes will be considered only after specific
approval of the General Assembly;
9. Reaffirms its resolution 3534 (XXX) and
stresses the responsibility of the Secretary-General to
draw to the attention of the competent intergovernmental bodies activities that are obsolete, of marginal
usefulness or ineffective, indicating the resources which
could be released so that the bodies concerned may
take the necessary action;
10. Decides that the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination shall function as the main subsidiary
organ of the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly for planning, programming and coordination and approves the consolidated terms of reference as set out in Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX);
11. Instructs the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination in particular:
(a) To review in depth, on a selective basis, the
major programmes of the plan and to recommend any
necessary amendments to the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly;
( b) To determine which programmes, subprogrammes or programme elements are obsolete, of marginal usefulness or ineffective and to recommend, as
appropriate, their curtailment or termination;
( c) To assess the degree of substantive co-ordination of selected programmes within the United
Nations system and to recommend the appropriate action thereon;
12. Further decides that, in order to encourage
Member States to be represented at a high level of expertise and to ensure the continuity of their representation in the body whose central role and over-all responsibilities are recognized, the Organization shall bear
from 1978 onwards, for an experimental period and
subject to review by the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session, as a special exception to the basic principles set out in paragraph 2 of Assembly resolution 1798 (XVII) of 11 December 1962 concerning
the payment out of United Nations funds of travel and
subsistence expenses to members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations, the travel (on the
basis of economy class) and subsistence expenses ( at
standard rates applicable to officials of the Secretariat
plus 15 per cent) of one representative of each Member State on the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976

31/94.

Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered with appreciation the reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions relating to administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specializ.ed agencies and the International Atomic Energy

Agency 50 and to co-ordination questions in the activities of the United Nations Environment Programme/ 1
Concerned with the growing need for effective administrative and budgetary co-ordination within the
framework of the United Nations system,
1. Concurs with the observations and comments of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in the above-mentioned reports;
2. Refers to the organizations concerned the observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in its reports
and brings the report on co-ordination questions in the
activities of the United Nations Environment Programme51 specifically to the attention of the Governing
Council of the Programme;
3. Refers the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on coordination questions 51 to the Committee on Programme
and Co-ordination in connexion with the decision of
that Committee to consider in depth environment programmes at its seventeenth session in 1977;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to refer to the
executive heads of the organizations of the United
Nations system, through the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, matters arising out of the abovementioned reports and the related discussion in the
Fifth Committee which call for their attention and
necessary action, in particular the question of rotation
of staff;
5. Transmits those reports to the Board of Auditors,
to the members of the Panel of External Auditors and
to the Joint Inspection Unit for their information;
6. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to continue to supplement, as appropriate, the annual reports on administrative and budgetary co-ordination with reports on
specific problems, taking into account the suggestions
made in this respect during the discussions in the Fifth
Committee.

98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976
B

The General Assembly,
Considering the rapidly expanding applications of
electronic data processing techniques to information
systems and data banks throughout the United Nations
system, their potential value in accelerating the implementation and co-ordination of important programmes, particularly in the field of economic and
social development, and the importance of ensuring
efficient use of available resources,
1. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to provide policy advice and recommendations on the administrative coordination of electronic data processing and information
systems in the United Nations organizations; in carrying out this task, the Advisory Committee should identify and focus on major issues that will help to increase
the benefit from the expanding applications of elec50 A/31/233

5 1 A/31/227.

and Add. I.

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Conunittee

tronic data processing and informa!io~ systems, and
should also examine methods and cntena for:
(a) Assessing the utility of existing and proposed
information systems;
( b) Co-ordinating and harmonizing existing and
planned information systems;
(c) Estimating costs for establishing and operating
the systems;
(d) Considering any other administrative C?-ordination issues, including policies concermng acquisition and utilization of co.r~puter hard~are,
that in the opinion of the Advisory Committee
or the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, require the consideration of Member
States;
2. Requests the Administrative Com~it~ee on Coordination to assist in that task by providmg, as r~
quired, the services and assi~tance of the Inter-Orgamzation Board for Information Systems and Related
Activities.
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976
C

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral52 on the review of action taken on the recommendations of the Administrative Management Service and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 53
Convinced that an effective and continuing management improvemen~ program;111e_ is essential for ~e e!ficient and economical funct10mng of the Orgamzatt_on
and that this in turn, requires a competent central mternal machniery endowed with the necessary mandate
and the maximum support of the Secretary-General,
Noting the view of the Secretary-General that, while
"an acceptable degree of success" 54 ha~ been achieved
in implementing the past reco~mendations of the Administrative Management Service, further measures are
needed throughout the Secretariat for securing better
results from management improvement efforts,
Noting also the statement made by the UnderSecretary-General for Administra_tion and :rytanag~ment
before the Fifth Committee on this matter, m particular
paragraph 17 of the summary record containing that
statement, 55
Agreeing with the observations of the Advisorr Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as
contained in paragraphs 12 to 19 of its report, particularly those in paragraph 14,
1. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To put into effect promptly the measures
mentioned in paragraph 67 of his report; 52
( b) To strengthen the existing role and functions
of the Administrative Management Service by:
52 A/C.5/31/6.
58 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/31/8 and Add.1-26), document
A/31/8/ Add.5.
114 A/C.5/31/6, para. 64.
55 Official Records of the Gene~al Assen;kly, T_hirty-first
Session, Fifth Committee, 24th. meetmg; and zb1d., Fifth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.

151

( i)

Authorizing the Service to identify management problems or areas requi~ing management
improvement and to examme a~d report
thereon with specific recommendations as to
action required;
(ii) Reviewing the reports and recommendations
when received and by taking the necessary
steps to ensure the prompt and effective implementation by the offices or departments concerned of those recommendations which he
has approved;
(iii) Empowering the Service to monitor and,
whenever necessary, assist in the implementation of recommendations which he has approved;
( iv) Calling upon the offices or departments responsible to report at six-m_on~hly interv_als
on the progress being made m 1mplement1_ng
the approved recommendations, together w1~h
any problems and difficulties encountered m
the process;
( c) To inform all staff of the Se_cr_etari~t of the
revised role and functions of the Adm1mstrative Management Service and of his strongest suppo~t for the
Service, and to call upon them to extend to 1t full cooperation and assistance;
( d) To give special attention to the ma~ter of staffing of the Administrative Management S_erv1ce s~ as_ t_o
ensure that the Service is staffed at all times by mdividuals possessing the highest degree of technical competence;
( e) To submit annually to the Advi~ory Committ:e
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions a report 1!1
summary form on the management improvement proJects and other advisory services rendered by the
Administrative Management Service during the preceding twelve months; such reports should also include:
( i) A complete list of all reports and recommendations made by the Administrative Management
Service during the year, with an indication of
the recommendations, or parts thereof, not
approved by the Secretary-General;
(ii) A summary of the progress reports submitted
during the past year in accordance wit~ subparagraph ( b) (iv) above, together with an
evaluation by the Secretary-General of the
benefits derived to date or expected to be
derived in the future from the implementation
of the approved recommendations dealt with
in these reports;
(f) To ensure that the programme budget proposals, beginning with those for the biennium 1978-1979,
reflect all the benefits derived from the management
improvement efforts referred to in subparagraph ( e)
(ii) above;
( g)
To report to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session on the results obtained through the application of the measures mentioned in paragraph 67
of his report 52 and the procedure set out in the present
resolution;

2. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions:
(a) To draw the attention of the General Assembly
to any situation or problem requiring its attention which

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

152

may arise from the annual reports mentioned in paragraph 1 (e) above;
(b) To submit its views and recommendations on
the report of the Secretary-General requested in paragraph 1 (g) above;
3. Decides to review, at its thirty-third session, the
question of administrative and management control of
the United Nations, on the basis of the report of the
Secretary-General requested in paragraph 1 (g) above
and the views and recommendations submitted thereon
by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.

98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976
31/95.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 582 (VI) of 21 December
1951, 665 (VII) of 5 December 1952, 1927 (XVIII)
of 11 December 1963, 2118 (XX) of 21 December
1965, 2961 C (XXVII) of 13 December 1972 and
3062 (XXVHI) of 9 November 1973 relating to the
additional recognition to be given to the low per capita
income countries in calculating their rates of assessment
in view of their economic and financial problems,
Recalling that the capacity to pay of the countries
recognized by the United Nations as the least developed
among the developing countries and those most seriously
affected is being adversely affected, inter alia, by inflation and currency instability,
Recognizing the need for reconsideration of the scale
of assessments of the least developed countries and
those most seriously affected in order to help them
meet their priorities at home and to allow the adjustment necessary for these countries,
Believing that the existing arrangement of assessment
at the floor level is incompatible with the principle of
capacity to pay,
Believing also that the collective financial responsibility implies that all Member States pay at least a
minimum percentage of the expenses of the Organization,
I. Reaffirms that the capacity of Member States to
contribute towards the payment of the budgetary expenses of the United Nations is the fundamental criterion on which scales of assessment are based;
2. Decides to lower the floor for purposes of formulating and establishing the rates of assessment;
3. Requests the Committee on Contributions to
reflect this decision in formulating the coming scale
of assessments in so far as purely practical and technical limitations in calculating permit, which should be
understood to mean a minimum payment of no less
than 0.01 per cent of the total expenses of the Organization;
4. Also requests the Committee on Contributions
to study urgently and in depth ways and means of
increasing the fairness and equity of the scale of assess-

ments in the light of views expressed by Member States
at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly, in
particular by:
(a)
Seeking imnrovements in the statistical measurement of the ~relative capacity to pay, including new
or additional statistical indicators and criteria;
( b) Considering the possibility of mitigating extreme variations in assessments between two successive
scales, without departing essentially from the principle
of the capacity to pay, either by increasing the statistical
base period from three years to some longer period or
by any other appropriate method;
( c) Bearing in mind the fact that the capacity to
pay of Member States may be subject to severe fluctuations in economic activity for a variety of reasons;
5. Further requests the Committee on Contributions
to embody as appropriate in subsequent reports of the
Committee the particular justification for any significant
increases in the assessment of any Member State between two successive scales;
6. Requests the Committee on Contributions to
report in depth on its findings to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session with a view to enabling the
Assembly to consider early action on a new scale;
7. Decides to enlarge the membership of the Committee on Contributions hy five members, effective 1
January 1977.~6

98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976

B
The General Assemhly
Resolves that:
(a) The scale of assessments for the contributions
of Member States to the United Nations budget for the
financial year 1977 sha11 be as follows:
Member State

Afghanistan ..................... .
Albania ........................ .
Algeria ......................... .
Argentina ...................... .
Australia ....................... .
Austria ......................... .
Bahamas ....................... .
Bahrain ........................ .
Bangladesh ...................... .
Barbados ....................... .
Belgium ........................ .
Benin .......................... .
Bhutan ......................... .
Bolivia ......................... .
Botswana ....................... .
Brazil .......................... .
Bulgaria ........................ .
Burma ......................... .
Burundi ........................ .
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic ..
Canada ......................... .
Cape Verde ..................... .
Central African Empire ............ .
Chad .......................... .
Chile .......................... .
r.a See also resolution 31 /96.

Per cent

0.02
0.02
0.10
0.83
1.52
0.63
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.02
1.07
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
1.04
0.13
0.02
0.02
0.40
2.96
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.09
