United Nations

A/RES/60/134

General Assembly

Distr.: General
31 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 62

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/501)]

60/134. Follow-up to the implementation of the International Year
of Volunteers
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/106 of 26 November 2002 on the follow-up to the
International Year of Volunteers,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of volunteering, including traditional
forms of mutual aid and self-help, formal service delivery and other forms of civic
participation, to economic and social development, benefiting society at large,
communities and the individual volunteer,
Recognizing also that volunteerism is an important component of any strategy
aimed at, inter alia, such areas as poverty reduction, sustainable development,
health, disaster prevention and management and social integration and, in particular,
overcoming social exclusion and discrimination,
Noting with appreciation the efforts to increase understanding and awareness
of volunteerism through research, global information-sharing and education,
including efforts to develop an effective network for volunteers through, inter alia,
the World Volunteer Web 1 and linked national sites,
Acknowledging the existing contribution of the organizations of the United
Nations system to supporting volunteering, including the work of United Nations
Volunteers around the world,
Bearing in mind the need for an integrated and coordinated follow-up to the
International Year of Volunteers to be pursued in the relevant parts of the United
Nations system,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General; 2

2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General in response to the report
of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations; 3
_______________
1

www.worldvolunteerweb.org.
A/60/128.
3
A/59/354.
2

05-49564

A/RES/60/134

3.
Welcomes the hosting of the first International Conference on
Volunteerism and the Millennium Development Goals, organized jointly by the
Government of Pakistan and the United Nations system and held in Islamabad from
5 to 7 December 2004, and takes note of its final report;1
4.
Reiterates its call upon Governments, with the active support of the
media, civil society and the private sector, to observe the International Volunteer
Day for Economic and Social Development on 5 December and to include activities,
in particular on efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals;
Reaffirms the need to recognize and promote all forms of volunteerism as
5.
an issue that involves and benefits all segments of society, including children, young
persons, older persons, persons with disabilities, minorities and immigrants and
those who remain excluded for social or economic reasons;
Recognizes that volunteering, in particular at the community level, will
6.
help to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including those
contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration; 4
7.
Also recognizes the importance of supportive legislative and fiscal
frameworks for the growth and development of volunteerism, and encourages
Governments to enact such measures;
Welcomes the work of the United Nations Volunteers, and requests them
8.
to continue their efforts, together with other stakeholders, to raise awareness of
volunteerism, increase reference and networking resources available, provide
technical cooperation to developing countries, upon their request, in the field of
volunteerism and enhance coordination among those operating on the ground;
Invites all stakeholders, especially from the private sector community
9.
and from private foundations, to support volunteerism as a strategic tool to enhance
economic and social development, including by expanding corporate volunteering;
10. Calls for the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to integrate volunteerism in its various forms into their policies, programmes
and reports, and encourages the recognition and inclusion of volunteer contributions
in future United Nations and other relevant international conferences;
11. Acknowledges the importance of civil society organizations for the
promotion of volunteerism, and in this respect recognizes that strengthening the
dialogue and interaction between civil society and the United Nations contributes to
the expansion of volunteerism;
12. Encourages Governments to establish partnerships with civil society in
order to build up volunteer potential at the national level, given the important
contribution that volunteerism makes to the fulfilment of the internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration;
13. Recognizes the increasing attention being given to the economic
dimension of volunteerism, and encourages Governments, with the support of civil
society, to build up a knowledge base on the subject, to disseminate data and to
expand research on other volunteer-related issues, including in developing
countries;

_______________
4

2

See resolution 55/2.

A/RES/60/134

14. Welcomes the work of the United Nations Volunteers in building up the
capacity of the World Volunteer Web1 with a view to enhancing network capabilities
and to expanding information, knowledge and resource management, and
encourages Governments and all stakeholders, in particular the private sector, to
contribute on a voluntary basis to this initiative;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution under the item
entitled “Social development, including questions relating to the world social
situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family” and to include in
the report proposals regarding possible ways to mark the tenth anniversary of the
International Year of Volunteers in 2011.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

3
