A/64/PV.68

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

68

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 23 December 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Agenda item 127
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/64/513)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/64/590)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In connection
with agenda item 127, the Assembly has before it
document A/64/513, in which the Secretary-General
transmits letters dated 15 October and 6 November
2009 from Judge Dennis Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
Assembly also has before it document A/64/590.
In document A/64/513, the Secretary-General
informs the Assembly of a number of requests made by
the President of the Tribunal. In document A/64/590,
the President of the Security Council transmits to the
President of the General Assembly the text of Council
resolution 1901 (2009) of 16 December 2009.

In view of these two documents, may I take it that
the Assembly decides, first, to underline its intention to
extend, by 30 June 2010, the terms of office of all trial
judges at the International Tribunal based on the
Tribunal’s projected trial schedule and the terms of
office of all appeals judges until 31 December 2012 or
until the completion of the cases to which they are
assigned, if sooner; secondly, that, in order for the
International Tribunal to complete existing trials or
conduct additional trials, the total number of ad litem
judges serving at the International Tribunal may from
time to time temporarily exceed the maximum of nine
provided for in article 11, paragraph 1, of the statute of
the International Tribunal, to a maximum of 12 at any
one time, returning to a maximum of nine by
31 December 2010; and thirdly, that, notwithstanding
the expiry of his term of office on 31 December 2009,
Judge Erik Møse complete the Setako case, which he
began before the expiry of his term of office; and to
take note of the intention of the International Tribunal
to complete the case before the end of February 2010?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 127.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-66461 (E)

*0966461*

A/64/PV.68

Agenda item 128
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/64/510)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/64/591)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In document
A/64/510, the Secretary-General transmits a letter
dated 29 September 2009 from Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, in which he makes a number of
requests.
In document A/64/591, the President of the
Security Council transmits to the President of the
General Assembly the text of Council resolution 1900
(2009) of 16 December 2009.
In view of the contents of these two documents,
may I take it that the Assembly decides, first, to
underline its intention to extend, by 30 June 2010, the
terms of office of all trial judges at the International
Tribunal based on the Tribunal’s projected trial
schedule and the terms of office of all appeals judges
until 31 December 2012, or until the completion of the
cases to which they are assigned, if sooner; secondly,
that, notwithstanding the expiry of their terms of office
on 31 December 2009, Judges Kimberley Prost of
Canada and Ole Bjørn Støle of Norway complete the
Popović case, which they began before the expiry of
their terms of office; and to take note of the intention
of the International Tribunal to complete the case
before the end of March 2010; thirdly, that, in this
regard, the total number of ad litem judges serving at
the International Tribunal may temporarily exceed the
maximum of 12 provided for in article 12, paragraph 1,
of the statute of the International Tribunal, to a
maximum of 13 at any one time, returning to a
maximum of 12 by 31 March 2010; and fourthly, to
allow ad litem Judges Prost and Støle to serve at the
International Tribunal beyond the cumulative period of
service provided for under article 13 ter, paragraph 2,
of the Statute of the International Tribunal?
It was so decided.

2

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 128.
I would now like to inform members that the
Assembly will suspend the meeting and resume after
the completion of the work of the Fifth Committee.
The meeting was suspended at 3.35 p.m. and
resumed at 3.10 a.m., Thursday, 24 December
2009.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Draft resolution (A/64/L.27)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/598)
The President: The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
draft resolution A/64/L.27 is contained in document
A/64/598.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/64/L.27, entitled “Institutionalization of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force”.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the introduction of draft resolution
A/64/L.27, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Egypt,
Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kenya,
Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mauritius, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway,
Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovenia, Somalia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda
and the United Republic of Tanzania.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.27?
Draft resolution A/64/L.27
(resolution 64/235).

was

adopted

09-66461

A/64/PV.68

The President: I now call on those
representatives wishing to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Giménez-Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is firmly committed to the fight
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
whatever its origin or motivation, pursuant to its
obligations under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, and the relevant
international conventions and protocols, in particular
the norms of human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
In particular, my country has fulfilled the
provisions applicable with regard to the provision of
mutual legal assistance and the extradition of any
person who has participated in the planning,
preparation, financing or carrying out of terrorist acts.
However, this has not been the case for some States
Members of this Organization, which, while they claim
to be leaders in the fight against terrorism, aid and abet
the impunity of dangerous terrorists working for their
Governments in undercover operations abroad.
Today, having adopted resolution 64/235, in
which we reiterate our commitment to the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, we call on one State Member of
this Organization to set aside its double standards and
to fulfil without selectivity its international
commitments in the fight against terrorism. The
country to which I refer has openly protected known,
convicted and self-confessed terrorists and allowed
them to go free, including Cuban-Venezuelan Luis
Posada Carriles. Luis Posada Carriles was responsible
for many terrorist attacks, including the blowing up of
a Cubana de Aviación aircraft in mid-flight over the
coast of Barbados, causing the deaths of over
73 people.
Contrary to that country’s commitments in the
fight against terrorism, it has repeatedly refused to
extradite terrorist Luis Posada Carriles to Venezuela,
or, failing this, to submit the case to the competent
authorities in order to guarantee that this criminal be
brought to trial, without condition and irrespective of
whether the crime was committed or not on that State’s
territory. It has also failed effectively to apply
paragraphs 2 and 3 of section II of the United Nations

09-66461

Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288,
annex), which we are renewing today.
Despite being one of the five permanent members
of the Security Council, that country has not even been
able to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), in which the Council urges States, among other
things, not to provide refuge to terrorists and or to be
swayed by political motivations in denying requests for
the extradition of terrorists.
My country takes this opportunity to call upon on
the President of that country, who was recently
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, to, in the spirit of that
Prize, immediately free the five innocent Cuban heroes
and to extradite and prosecute the terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles.
Mr. Delgado Sánchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation joined in the consensus adoption of
resolution 64/235, entitled “Institutionalization of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force”,
because of the importance that Cuba attaches to agenda
item 115 on the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, and in particular because of the
need to provide the resources necessary to
institutionalizing the Task Force.
As members of the General Assembly know,
Cuba has always taken a firm, clear and unchanging
position with regard to fighting and condemning all
acts, methods and practices of terrorists in all their
manifestations by whomever, against whomever and
wherever they are committed and regardless of
motivation, including those in which States are directly
or indirectly involved. We wish once again to denounce
the fact that, even as we adopt this resolution, major
perpetrators of terrorist acts against Cuba continue to
walk free on the streets of the United States of
America. Their acts have claimed more than
5,000 victims, killed or injured, among the Cuban
people.
In contrast, on 12 September 2009, five Cuban
heroes marked 11 years of unjust incarceration in
United States prisons simply for having sought to
prevent the planning of terrorist acts against the Cuban
people from North American soil, with the tolerance
and complicity of United States authorities. Cuba
resolutely supports the efforts of the international
community against terrorism, and hopes that other
countries will act likewise, over and above their
political rhetoric.

3

A/64/PV.68

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 115.
Reports of the Second, Third and
Fifth Committees
The President: The General Assembly will now
take up the remaining reports of the Second Committee
on sub-item (a) of agenda item 53 and sub-item (b) of
agenda item 55, as well as of the Third Committee on
sub-item (c) of agenda item 69. Thereafter, the General
Assembly will take up the reports of the Fifth
Committee on agenda items 143, 144, 131, 132, 136,
145 and 130.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Second, Third
and Fifth Committees that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of these Committees
have been made clear in the Committees and are
reflected in the relevant official records. May I remind
members that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401,
the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote is
different from its vote in the Committee”.
May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Second, Third and Fifth Committees, I should like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take decisions in the same manner as was done in the
Committees, unless notified otherwise in advance. That
means that where separate or recorded votes were
taken, we will do the same. I also hope that we may
proceed
to
adopt
without
a
vote
those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the respective Committees.

4

Agenda item 53 (continued)
Sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21
and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.1)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/600)
The President: We shall now take a decision on
draft resolution III recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 20 of its report. The Second
Committee adopted draft resolution III. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
64/236).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 55 (continued)
Globalization and interdependence
(b) Preventing and combating corrupt practices
and transfer of assets of illicit origin and
returning such assets, in particular to
the countries of origin, consistent with the
United Nations Convention against Corruption
Report of the Second Committee
(A/64/422/Add.2)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/599)
The President: We will now take a decision on
the draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/237).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 55 and of agenda item 55
as a whole?

09-66461

A/64/PV.68

It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Second Committee.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/64/439/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/597)
The President: We shall now take a decision on
draft resolution II entitled “Situation of human rights
in Myanmar”, recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 18 of its report. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay.
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, India, Lao People’s

09-66461

Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Russian
Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Bahamas, Bahrain, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mauritania, Nepal, Niger, Norway, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen.
Draft resolution II was adopted by 86 votes to 23,
with 39 abstentions (resolution 64/238).
[Subsequently, the delegations of the Dominican
Republic and Norway advised the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour; the
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
against.]
The President: I now call on those delegations
wishing to speak in explanation of vote on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Swe (Myanmar): The delegation of Myanmar
is greatly disappointed by the continuation of the
selective adoption of a country-specific resolution on
Myanmar. It is a sad commentary on the work we do in
the General Assembly that selectivity and double
standards still prevail here.
It is clear to see that only through international
cooperation, which is based on the principles of
impartiality and non-selectivity, can human rights be
effectively promoted and protected.
It is noteworthy that Myanmar has been on track
for a smooth transition to democracy, and we are
determined to proceed with our seven-step political
road map. We are now actively making preparations for
the multi-party election to be held in 2010. The
exploitation of human rights for political purposes is
not acceptable to Myanmar. Moreover, Myanmar
cannot allow or accept blatant interference in our
home-grown political process. We therefore reject and

5

A/64/PV.68

voted against this highly politicized, country-specific
resolution, and we dissociate ourselves from the
resolution and will not be bound by it.
Here, my delegation wishes to express our deep
appreciation to Member States that took a principled
position and stand shoulder to shoulder with Myanmar.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm that, in
conformity with our foreign policy, Myanmar will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and the
good offices role of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Members will
recall that the Solomon Islands delivered an
explanation of vote before the vote in the Third
Committee.
We uphold the human rights principles of our
Human Rights Council. I regret that, due to intense
external pressure from a handful of countries, we have
been forced to change our vote. We find this lack of
respect for our sovereign position disturbing. Such
politicization and this heavy-handed approach make
voting on country-specific human rights resolutions
even more controversial. My Government will review
its position and calls on those who infringe on our
foreign policy to respect us as equals.
I would like this statement to be placed on record.
We will leave it to history to determine how serious our
Assembly is in addressing human rights globally.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 69 and of agenda item 69
as a whole?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Third Committee.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 143, 144, 131, 132, 136, 145 and 130.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Ms. Yuliana Zhivkova Georgieva of Bulgaria, to
introduce in one intervention the reports of the Fifth
Committee before the Assembly.

6

Ms. Georgieva (Bulgaria) (Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee): I have the honour today to present to
the General Assembly the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues that
required action during the main part of the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly.
Before I begin, I would like to draw the attention
of the Assembly to the fact that the following Fifth
Committee reports have already been considered by the
General Assembly at its 16th, 62nd and 67th plenary
meetings, held on 8 October and 10 and 22 December.
These reports are contained in documents A/64/482,
A/64/587, A/64/548, A/64/549, A/64/550, A/64/553,
A/64/580, A/64/581 and A/64/582, and their
consideration is recorded in A/64/PV.16, A/64/PV.62
and A/64/PV.67, respectively.
The following agenda items were considered at
those meetings: item 129, “Financial reports and
audited financial statements, and reports of the Board
of Auditors”; item 132, “Proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2010-2011”, specifically the Capital
Master Plan; agenda item 133, “Programme planning”;
item 135, “Pattern of conferences”; item 136, “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations”, specifically on article 19; item
137, “Human resources management”; item 139,
“United Nations common system”; item 142,
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”; item
154, “Financing of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia”; and item 163, “Financing of the
activities arising from Security Council resolution
1863 (2009)”.
Allow me to now present the additional reports of
the Fifth Committee containing recommendations on
issues that required action during the main part of the
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
Regarding agenda item 143, “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”, and
agenda item 144, “Financing of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia

09-66461

A/64/PV.68

since 1991”, the Committee, in paragraph 6 of each of
its reports, contained in documents A/64/592 and
A/64/593, recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of two draft resolutions, which were adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 131, “Programme budget
for the biennium 2008-2009”, the Committee, in
paragraph 8 of its report contained in document
A/64/594, recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of two draft resolutions, which were adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 132, “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011”, in
paragraph 9 of document A/64/548/Add.1, the
Committee considered five draft resolutions.
The Committee decided to adopt draft resolution
I without a vote. With regard to draft resolution III, a
recorded vote was requested by the delegation of Israel
on section V. The Committee voted to retain section V
of draft resolution III, and the draft as a whole was
adopted without a vote. The Committee recommends
the adoption of all other draft resolutions without a
vote. The Committee therefore recommends the
adoption of the draft report on the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011.
Also with regard to agenda item 132, the
Committee considered and recommended the adoption
of four statements of programme budget implications.
The reports of the Fifth Committee on these statements
are issued in documents A/64/597 to A/64/600.
On agenda item 136, “Scale of assessments for
the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations”, the Committee, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/64/482/Add.1, recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of one draft
resolution. An amendment to the draft resolution was
proposed by the delegation of the Russian Federation.
A recorded vote was requested on that amendment. The
Committee voted against inclusion of the amendment.
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted without a
vote.
On agenda item 145, “Scale of assessments for
the apportionment of the expenses of United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, the Committee, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/64/595,
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of

09-66461

one draft resolution, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Finally, under agenda item 130, “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 6 of
its report A/64/596, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of one draft decision
relating to questions deferred for future consideration.
The proposal was adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation
and to assure them that the changes made in the course
of the Fifth Committee’s 22nd formal meeting have
been duly taken into account and will be reflected in
the draft resolutions and reports, which will be issued
shortly.
Before I conclude, allow me on a brief personal
note to thank the Chairman of the Fifth Committee,
Ambassador Peter Maurer of Switzerland, for the wise
and noble manner in which he guided us through our
difficult work. I would also like to thank my fellow
Bureau members, with whom working is always a truly
gratifying experience. And on behalf of all of us, I
would like to express our profound thanks to the
representatives of the Secretariat, most especially the
staff of the Secretariat of the Fifth Committee, for their
patience and support.
Last but not least, we extend our appreciation to
Ms. Susan McLurg, Chairman of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions. To all of those next to whom I have had the
privilege and honour of being seated on the podium of
Conference Room 3, I would like to express my thanks
for their camaraderie. I wish wonderful holidays to one
and all.
The Acting President: Before proceeding
further, I would like to emphasize to representatives
that, as the Fifth Committee has just finished its work,
the reports are in English only. It is my understanding
that they will be issued in all official languages as soon
as possible. I thank representatives for their
understanding.

7

A/64/PV.68

Agenda item 143

Agenda item 131

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994

Programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/592)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the
draft resolution is, for the time being, contained in
document A/C.5/64/L.13. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/239).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 143.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/593)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the
draft resolution is, for the time being, contained in
document A/C.5/64/L.14. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/594)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Afterservice health insurance”, the text of which, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/64/L.15.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution
64/241).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Second performance report on the programme
budget for the biennium 2008-2009”, the text of which,
for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/64/L.16. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
64/242).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
131.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/548/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report, the text of
which, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/64/L.23.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/240).

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic in explanation of vote before the voting.

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 144.

Mr. Diab (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to make a statement
before the adoption of draft resolution III in order to
express certain concerns we have about the budget of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the

8

09-66461

A/64/PV.68

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004).

Draft resolution
64/243).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

We would like to point out that the Special
Envoy, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, has exceeded and
continues to exceed his mandate under resolution 1559
(2004) by involving himself in the bilateral affairs of
two sovereign States, Syria and Lebanon, concerning
the establishment of diplomatic relations and the
demarcation of the borders between them. He is also
blatantly biased in favour of Israel, which has met none
of its obligations under resolution 1559 (2004),
particularly withdrawal from occupied Lebanese
territories. Mr. Roed-Larsen intentionally seeks to
divert attention from the real problem his mandate
covers: the practices of the Israeli occupation and the
continued occupation of Arab territories.

The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Special subjects relating to the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011”, the
text of which for the time being is contained in
document A/C.5/64/L.20.

Worse, the Special Envoy seeks to promote
conflict and perpetuate the occupation in the name of
international legitimacy instead of trying to achieve
peace and the implementation of United Nations
resolutions within the framework of his mandate. Here,
we highlight paragraph 12 of General Assembly
resolution 63/261, which underlines

A separate vote has been requested on section V
of draft resolution III. Member States are reminded
that, in accordance with rule 83 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, budgetary
questions require a majority of two thirds of those
present and voting. A recorded vote has been
requested.

“the continued importance of the role of the
Secretary-General in ensuring, when appointing
his special representatives and envoys, the
highest standards of integrity, competency,
impartiality and professionalism”.
Clearly,
the
Special
Envoy
for
the
Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1559
(2004) does not exemplify these standards.
Accordingly, our delegation wishes to express its
reservations concerning the allocation of resources for
the budget of the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Implementation of Security
Council Resolution 1559 (2004).
The Acting President: We will now take action
on draft resolutions I to V, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Questions relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2010-2011”, the text of which is
contained for the time being in document
A/C.5/64/L.18. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

09-66461

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011”, the text of which is contained for the time
being in document A/C.5/64/L.19. The Fifth
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
64/244).

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,

9

A/64/PV.68

Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen.
Against:
Israel.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Section V of draft resolution III was retained by
134 votes to 1, with 3 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Algeria and
Ukraine advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution III as a whole. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
64/245).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Unforeseen extraordinary expenses for the
biennium 2010-2011”, the text of which for the time
being is contained in document A/C.5/64/L.21. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
64/246).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Working Capital Fund for the biennium
2010-2011”, the text of which for the time being is
contained in document A/C.5/64/L.22. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
64/247).

10

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico for an explanation of
position.
Mr. Hermosillo Sosa (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 64/243 on the proposed programme budget
of the Organization for the biennium 2010-2011. The
strengthening and achievement of the goals of the
United Nations are a high priority for my country. For
that reason, allocating sufficient resources for the
achievement of its mandates is particularly important.
Budgetary discipline and efficiency have been key to
our position in the negotiations concluded today, and
will allow more resources to be devoted to the
Organization’s substantive activities.
A culture of austerity and discipline in
expenditure is not only congruent with the positions
adopted by a majority of Member States as a result of
the international economic crisis, but will also
strengthen the credibility of the United Nations.
Members should seek to ensure not only that mandates
are fulfilled, but also that resources are allocated
according to the principles of austerity and budgetary
discipline. Mexico will continue to work constructively
to achieve the changes necessary to strengthen the
Organization in this regard.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
132.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/482/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the
draft resolution is, for the time being, contained in
document A/C.5/64/L.24.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/248).

09-66461

A/64/PV.68

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
136.
Agenda item 145
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/595)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the
draft resolution is, for the time being, contained in
document A/C.5/64/L.25.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. It is the understanding of the
Assembly that, by the adoption of this draft resolution,
the Bahamas and Bahrain, as an exception, shall be
treated as Level C for the scale of assessments for the
period 2010-2012. The Fifth Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/249).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 145.
Agenda item 130
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/596)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the
draft decision is, for the time being, contained in
document A/C.5/64/L.26.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 130.

On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank Mr. Peter Maurer, Permanent Representative
of Switzerland to the United Nations and Chairperson
of the Fifth Committee, members of the Bureau and
representatives for a job well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
Programme of work
The Acting President: With regard to the
programme of work of the General Assembly, apart
from organizational matters and items that may have to
be considered by operation of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, and bearing in mind that consideration
and action have already been taken by the Assembly on
a majority of items thus far, I should like to inform
members that the following items of the agenda remain
open for consideration during the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly: agenda items 9, 10, 13 to 16, 18,
20 to 26, 29, 33, 42, 44 to 46, 48, 49, 52, 53 (d), 62,
63 (a) and (b), 64, 70 (a), 77, 96, 106 to 108, 111 (a) to
(d), (f) and (h), 112 (f), (g) (i) and (j), 113 to 115, 118 to
123, 125 to 163 and 172.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of those items on the agenda that remain
open for consideration during the sixty-fourth session
of the Assembly?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Our colleagues have been
very disciplined. We have now completed all of today’s
agenda. Before closing this meeting at such a late hour —
although it is 4 a.m., it is too early to relax — on behalf
of all those who participated in today’s meetings, not
only of the plenary but also of the Fifth Committee,
which is the most important, I would like to congratulate
members on the coming Christmas holidays and to wish
them a happy new year. Be well, be happy, be lucky! We
are going to see each other as soon as possible at the
beginning of 2010. I wish them all good luck and offer
them my warm, private, personal hug.
Also, on behalf of the General Assembly, I would
like to express our deep appreciation for the entire staff
of the Secretariat, the interpreters, and all those who
gave us the opportunity to work all day and all night
long, and who will do so again in the future.
The meeting rose at 4.05 a.m.

09-66461

11
