The General Assembly
Expresses its confidence that the Security Council will exercise its responsibilities under the Charter as soon as it considers that the situation in regard to Spain so requires.
Hundred and eighteenth plenary meeting,
17 November 1947.

L'Assemblee generale
Exprime sa confiance que le Conseil de sccurite
exercera ses responsabilites conformement a la
Charte, aussitot qu'il jugerait que la situation eu
egard a l'Espagne l'exige.
Cent-dix-huitieme seance pleniere,
le 17 novembre 1947.

115 (II). Report of the Security Council

115 (II). Rapport du Conseil de securite

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security
Council.1
Hundred and twenty-second plenary meeting,
21 November 1947.

L'Assemblee generale
Prend acte du rapport du Conseil de securite'.

116 UI). Rules governing the admission of
new· Members

116 (II>. Regles applicables a !'admission
de nouveaux Membres

The General Assembly
Decides to adopt the following new rules, for
insertion in the provisional rules of procedure of
the General A'ISCmhly as adopted on 17 November 1947:

L'Assemblee generate
Decide d'adopter les nouveaux articles suivants
destines a etre inseres clans le reglement interieur
provisoire de l'Assemblee generate, tel qu'il a cte
adopte le 17 novembre 194 7 :

XVII. ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS TO THE

XVII. ADMISSION DE NOUVEAUX MEMBRES

Cent-vingt-deuxieme seance pleniere,
le 21 novembre 1947.

UNITED NATIONS

New rule 113
Any State which desires to become a Member
of the United Nations shall submit an application
to the Secretary-General. This application shall
contain a declaration, made in a formal instrument, that it accept<; the obligations contained in
the Charter.

N ouvel article 113
Tout Etat qui desire devenir Membre des
Nations Unies adresse une demande au Secretaire
general. Cette demande doit contenir une declaration, faitc clans un instrument formel, par laquelle
cct Etat accepte lcs obligations de la Charte.

New rule 114
The Secretary-General shall send for information a copy of the application to the General Assembly, or to the Members of the United Nations
if the General Assembly is not in session.

N ouvel article 114
Le Secretaire general adresse, a titre d'information, une copie de la demande a l'Assemblee
gencrale ou, si celle-ci n'est pas en session, aux
:t-.fcmbrcs des Nations Unics.

New rule 116
If the Security Council does not recommend
the applicant State for membership or postpones
the consideration of the application, the General
Assembly may, after full consideration of the special report of the Security Council, send back the
application to the Security Council, together with
a full record of the discussion in the Assembly, for
further consideration and recommendation or
report.

N ouvel article 116
Si le Conseil de securite ne recommande pas
!'admission de l'Etat qui fait la demande, ou remet a plus tard l'examen de la demande, l'Assemblce generalc peut, apres examen approfondi du
rapport special du Conseil de securite, renvoyer
la demande au Conseil de securite, accompagnee
du compte rcndu complet des debats de l'Assemblee, afin q ue le Conseil procede a un nouvel
examen et formule une recommandation ou etablisse un rapport.

New rule 117
The Secretary-General shall inform the applicant State of the decision of the General Assembly. If the application is approved, membership
will become effective on the date on which the
General Assembly takes its decision on the application.
Hundred and twenty-second plenary meeting,
21 November 1947.

Nouvel article 117
Le Secretaire general communique la decision
de l'Assemblee generate a l'Etat interesse. S'il est
fait droit a la demande, l'Etat interesse est
c:onsidcre comme Membre de !'Organisation a la
date a laquelle l'Assemblee generate prend sa
decision sur la demande d'admission.
Cent-•vingt-deuxieme seance pleniere,
le 21 novembre 1947.

1
Document A/3G6 to be published as Supplement No. 2
to the Official Record, of the second session of the General Assembly.

1
Document A/366 qui constituera le Suppl~ment No 2
aux Documents officiels de la deuxieme seuion de l'Assemblie glnlrale.

22
