TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 19 MARCH 1973

PANAMA

CITY

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1700) . , . , . , . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . I . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . , , . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter . . , . . . . . . , . , , , . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 1700

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN
Held in the Legislative

HUNDREDTH

MEETING

Palace, Panama City, on Monday,

19 March 1973, at 3 p.m.

El-Shibib, under its provisional rules of procedure. At the
appropriate time I shall invite him to make his statement.

President: Mr. Aquilino E. BOYD (Panama).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

It was so decided.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
first name on the list of speakers is that of Mr. Armando
Oscar Pacheco, representative of the Dominican Republic, I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 700)

4. Mr. PACHECO (Dominican Republic) (interpretation
from Spanish): The delegation of the Dominican Republic

1, Adoption of the agenda.

to this important meeting of the Security Council wishes to
state, on behalf of its Government, some views on the
questions of which the Council is seized.

2. Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in
Latin American in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter.

5. Since the very dawn of American independence, Panama, because of its willingness generously to offer its soil,
has had particular significance when the mbst important
hemispheric matters have been discussed. The Congress held
here in 1826 gave birth to the idea of harmonious unity
among the brother peoples of our continent to which
Panama has paid tribute at all times.

The meeting was called to order at 3.3.5 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,

6. These meetings of the Council, in this noble land of
Panama, beyond any doubt focus world attention on Latin
America. It is here that we seek to settle divergencies which
might affect the effectiveness of international co-operation,
as it is understood in count,ries like ours which believe in
the need to make more effective the instruments and
methods with which we are involved as members of
international organizations.

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles
of the Charter
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decisions previously taken by the
Council [3696th-1699th meetings/, and with its consent, I
invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Bolivia,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Jamaica, Mauritania, Mexico, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber.

7. In this conviction, our Government wished to attend
the meetings of the Council in Panama with the intention
of making a moral contribution, within the measure of our
possibilities, to the attainment of the legitimate aspirations
of Panama. We are convinced that only by means of a
frank, open and sincere dialogue can viable, permanent and
acceptable solutions be found to disagreements between
States,

2. I should like to draw the attention of the Council to
document S/10933 containing a letter dated 19 March
1973 to the President of the Security Council from the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan. In that letter the
representative of the Sudan requests that the Council,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, extend an invitation to Mr. Talib El-Shibib, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to deliver a message to the Council on behalf of
the League. As I hear no objection, I take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Talib

8. In the course of the meetings which have been held we
have heard the views of the countries which have wished to
make a contribution with their statements in order that a
just and practicable solution shall be reached, which we
all-absolutely all-trust will occur,
9. The Dominican Republic joins in these wishes and these
hopes of the brother countries which have faith that, both
in the regional system as well as in the United Nations,
1

there do exist the instruments which, when used with goodwill and legally, can reconcile the most delicate and
profound divergencies, We also believe that no country of
America can be indifferent to the purposes based on the
principles which we have all defended since the far-away
days of American independence.

concentrate on peaceful pursuits of national development
for the realization of their people’s potential, both in
material and spiritual spheres. It is only by strict adherence
to the basic principles and purposes enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations that we can hope to continue
playing an active role in the community of nations.

10. The task which unites us in this hospitable city hashad
a beginning of a solution since the time when both
sovereign States have frankly discussed their own problems
and their reciprocal problems. In the Joint Declaration’
which was signed in April 1964 at the Council of the
Organization of American States, the idea emerged that a
just and equitable treaty could be the key to the solution of
the matter brought before the Security Council.

15. It is this basic philosophy which the Kenya Govern.
ment, under the wise leadership of our President, Mzee
Jomo Kenyatta, has followed since independence, That is
why Kenya has taken its membership in the United Nations
seriously, and has observed to the letter all the basic
provisions of the Charter. In this same spirit, we have
become members of the Organization of African Unity and
the non-aligned movement, which seek to implement the
same basic principles within the regional context of Africa,
and the world.

11. This can surely be so because we are bound to hope
that the parties in their negotiations, carried out on the
same level of friendship, respect and co-operation of which
they have always given proof, will in the end, as we hope,
give their own example of what can be expected among
States which have fought for common ideals in honour of
the necessaryhuman solidarity.

16. Kenya emerged from colonial rule through a unique
revolution in which many of my countrymen lost their lives
and during which untold human suffering and destruction
occurred. Through sacrifice, and under the leadership of
one of Africa’s greatest patriots, a man who indeed is
cherished and recognized not only in Africa but also in the
world as a whole, the forces of justice triumphed over
injustice, over oppression and over colonialism and racialism in our part of Africa. It is this philosophy of universal
justice, which has guided Mzee Jomo Kenyatta through his
life-long struggle, that now forms the cornerstone of
Kenya’s foreign policy. It is in pursuance of this philosophy
and the objectives of our revolution that my country is
unflinchingly opposed to colonialism, racialism, aparrheid
and exploitation of one people by another.

12. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, allow me
first to express my delegation’s gratitude and thanks for the
hospitality and friendship which has been extended to us in
your beautiful city. It is through your wise leadership,
Mr. President, that the current series of meetings awayfrom
Headquarters has fulfilled the expectations of many delegations, including my own, when we accepted your invitation
to meet here.
13. The peoples of Latin America, who are descended
from various continents, cultures and ethnic origins, have
managed to settle in this continent and have built a new
society based on equality and devoid of racialism, and they
have thus laid the foundation of a new civilization basedon
human dignity, high moral values, and respect for law. This
is so characteristic of the Republic of Panama, which by its
very geographical nature forms the vital bridge between the
two great continents of the western hemisphere as well as
the link between the East and the West. We wish, therefore,
to extend our congratulations to your eminent President,
the Government, and the people of Panama for making it
possible for the Security Council to hold this historic
session in Latin America. On behalf of our President,
Mr. Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, and on behalf of the Government
and people of Kenya, my delegation extends its congratulations to the Government and people of Panama and
expresses the hope that these meetings of the Council will
meet with unqualified success,

17. While these meetings of the Security Council away
from Headquarters are devoted to the probIems of Latin
America, we cannot afford to ignore the problems facing
the peoples of our great continent of Africa: the untold
sufferings, misery and indignity imposed upon millions of
Africans under Portuguese colonial domination in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), the racist minority
regime of South Africa and the illegal minority regime of
Ian Smith in Southern Rhodesia. International peace and
security is basically indivisible. Therefore, so long as these
regimes which have totally rejected the trend of liberation
and independence and the noble concept of human equality
and justice continue to subsist, international peace and
security shall always remain illusory.
18. It is in that light that we wish to draw the attention of
the peoples and nations of Latin America, in the context of
our deliberations here, to the evils and inequities Of
Portuguese colonial domination in Africa; to the scourge of
racialism and apartheid in South Africa: and to the
existence of the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia so that the conscience of the valiant peoPIeS of’
Latin America that have always been in the forefront of the
struggle for human dignity can be aroused, and their
unflinching solidarity be solicited.

14. As a small and young developing country, the Republic of Kenya has a vital stake in world peace, international
order and security, because it is only in the atmosphere of
peace and international co-operation that the yearnings and
aspirations of our people for freedom, prosperity and
human dignity can be realized. It is only within the context
of peace that small countries like my own can hope to
preserve and protect their hard-earned independence and

19. The peoples and Governments of Latin America have a
particular responsibility to use their influence to persuade
the diehard colonialist r&ime of Portugal to mend its wVs
and comply with the General Assembly resolutions on the

1 See The Department of State Bulletin, vol. L, No. 1296 (Wash-

ington, LX, U.S.Government Printing Office, 1964), p. 656.

2

through positive efforts to bring the nations and peoples of
Latin America together even where they have adopted
different social systems, He said:

granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples,
since the Portuguese have some common ties and historic
connexions with some Latin American countries. It is only
in freedom that mutual respect and healthy relationships
such as exist between the Portuguese Government and some
Latin American countries can thrive. We must therefore in
this context appeal to our brothers in Latin America to do
all in their power to persuade the Portuguese regime to
abandon its present posture of a colonialist overlord over its
African Territories.

“What is needed if international peace and security in
Latin America is to be maintained and strengthened in
conformity with the provisions and principles of the
Charter is for aI States within the region, and for all
States in the hemisphere and beyond in their relations
with Latin America, to elevate the principles of respect
for the sovereignty of other States, for their territorial
integrity, for the security of their boundaries settled on
the basis of treaties solemnly concluded, for their right to
determine and pursue the patterns of their social, political
and economic systems; for freedom from interference
through intervention, pressure or intrigue-to
elevate
these principles to the level of a national ethos-to move
them from the level of public asseverations to that of
guiding rules of national conduct.” (1696th meeti)zg,

20. As a member of the Non-aligned Group, Kenya
believes in the principles which the non-aligned movement
in its outlook on major issues affecting international affairs
have adopted. These principles, as recently formulated in
the Lusaka Declaration of 1970 at the time of the Third
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, are: the right of the peoples who are not
yet free to self-determination and independence; respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States; the
right ‘of all States to equality and active participation in
international affairs; the right of all sovereign nations to
determine, in full freedom, the paths of their internal
political, economic, social and cultural development; the
right of all peoples to the benefit of economic development
and the fruits of the scientific and technological revolution;
refraining from the threat or use of force, and the principle
of peaceful settlement of disputes. During the same
Conference, the leaders of the non-aligned countries reaffirmed the central meaning of non-alignment in the Lusaka
Declaration on Peace, Independence, Development, Cooperation and Democratization of International Relations
as follows:

para. 63.1

22. We cannot hope to unite if we allow ourselves to be
divided by the whims and designs of outside forces. In
order to establish co-operation and peaceful coexistence in
this hemisphere, the peoples of Latin America and the
Caribbean, as neighbours, must come together and work
together to determine their own future in terms of political
relations, economic development and co-operation, relations with other regions and so on. Furthermore, as the
logic of peace and security dictates that the peoples of
Latin America reach new and more fruitful accommodations with their northern neighbours, it is imperative that
efforts be made now to forge these new pan-American links
and solidarity. It is not possible to build peace in a spirit of
negative confrontation; but, on the other hand, real
accommodation can be possible only where sovereign
equality of States and respect for the territorial integrity of
all States are respected by all the States in the area. That is
the philosophy behind the non-aligned movement. Of
course, peace knows no boundaries, and those who desire
peace must not deny peaceful coexistence to others,
irrespective of ideological or philosophical differences.

“The policy of non-alignment has emerged from the
determination of independent countries to safeguard their
national independence and the legitimate rights of their
peoples, The growth of non-alignment into a broad
international movement cutting across racial, regional and
other barriers, is an integral part of significant changesin
the structure of the entire international community. It is
the result of the world anti-colonial revolution and of the
emergence of a large number pf newly liberated countries
which, opting for an independent political orientation
and development, have refused to a’ccept the replacement
of centuries-old forms of subordination by new ones. At
the root of these changes lies the ever more clearly
expressed aspiration of member nations for freedom,
independence and equality, and their determination to
resist all forms of oppression and exploitation. This has
been the substance and meaning of our strivings and
actions . . .“,

23. Therefore, in order to build peace in this part of the
world, as indeed in other regions of the world, we must be
partisans of peace and progress rather than enemies or allies
of this or that country, ideology or philosophy. It is not
sufficient to desire peace. To vindicate peace, we must
work for it; we must pledge that those who are our
adversariestoday will, ultimately, be our friends and good
neighbours in the years to come.
24. The peoples of Latin America have demonstrated their
concrete desire for international peace and security,
through the conclusion of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, by which they have
wilfully imposed an obligation upon themselves to exclude
nuclear weapons entirely from the Latin American region.
This is indeed the first step, a first step in the right
direction towards the goal of complete and total disarmament to which my delegation, among many, is committed.
The Council should commend the Latin Americans for this
practical step at regional level towards the maintenance of
international peace and security. We express the hope that

21, We believe that the positive policy of the non-aligned
movement which has a wide following not only in Asia and
Africa but also in Europe and Latin America, has direct
relevance to the solution of many of the problems of the
Latin American region, as is evident from the pronouncements of a number of Latin American delegations which
have spoken at this series of meetings of the Council, The
Foreign Minister of Guyana, for example, outlined very
clearly and logically some of the problems the countries of
this hemisphere face. In his brilliant statement he brought
out the cardinal fact that these issues can be resolved only
3

the other regions will gradually emulate the Latin American
example. It is our hope also that the anomalies in the
Treaty which were pointed out by the Foreign Minister of
Guyana will be removed and that the Treaty will thus
become universal within this region.

28. We believe that within these principles a just and
equitable solution is possible. It is true that the relation.
ships between the United States and Panama over the
Panama Canal and the Zone are governed by existing
treaties between the two countries, and particularly by the
Convention of 1903.2 It is, however, accepted by both the
United States and Panama that the conditions applicable
when that Convention was signed have drastically changed
over the years, and that a far-reaching revision of it is now
overdue. What we should like to see the parties do is
renegotiate their treaty relations in a spirit of mutual
accommodation and good faith so as to effect just and
long-lasting arrangements.

25. Mr, President, let me turn now to one other major
problem in the area which deeply concerns your country:
the problem of the Panama Canal and the Zone. I have
already pointed out that, as a non-aligned country, Kenya is
a partisan of peace. We believe in building bridges of Eeace
and regional understanding and we have no desire to create
or stimulate hatred between nations. As a developing
country, we want our aspirations to be understood. We also
are keen to understand and learn the perspectives and
concerns of other countries and regions. During the short
time we have stayed in your beautiful country we have seen
and witnessed deep feelings and preoccupations over the
issue of the Panama Canal and the Zone. We have been
impressed and positively struck by the determination of the
people of Panama to have the Convention provisions, under
which the Zone was created and the Canal constructed,
changed so as to create more equitable and just arrangements.

29. Finally, I want to underscore the intrinsic unity
between the peoples of Latin America and the peoples ol
Asia and Africa as members of the third world. While the
Latin American peoples naturally must consolidate co.
operation and understanding among themselves first, it is
vital that this co-operation be extended to other countries,
particularly to their brothers in Asia and Africa, who face
similar problems. While this co-operation is not founded on
antagonism to any other group of countries in the world, it
has proved in the past to be of great value. One has only to
mention the common problems faced by the third world
countries in trade negotiations in the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development or the current
negotiations in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the
Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of
National Jurisdiction to realize how vital this unity is. My
delegation is convinced that these Security Council meetings will serve to consolidate that unity between the
peoples and Governments of the third world, which in turn
will enhance international peace and security.

26. My deIegation is of the view that the question of the
Panama Canal is basically a bilateral issue to be resolved
between the Republic of Panama and the 1Jnited States of
America. We should like to see the two countries resolve
their differences equitably on the basis of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We are
encouraged that the two parties have indeed initiated
negotiations for that purpose. We in the Council wish to
give full support and extend every assistance to ensure that
peaceful and just solutions will be arrived at which will
frilly respect the national sovereignty of the States in
question and ensure full and effective realization of the
legitimate desire of the Government and people of Panama
to exercise full sovereignty over their natural resources in
conformity with the spirit and principles of the Charter and
in accordance with the various General Assembly resolutions on the subject, such as resolutions 523 (VI) of 12
January 1952, 626 (VII)
of 21 December 1952,
1314(XIII)
of 12 December 1958, 1515 (XV) of 15
December 1960, 1803 (XVII) of 14. December 1962,
2158(xX1) of 25 November 1966, 2626 {XXV) of 24
October 1970, and 2692 (XXV) of 11 December 1970.

30. Mr. JANKOWITSCH

(Austria) linterpretafiulr

fi0m

Spanish): Mr. President, may I, at the outset, express my

delegation’s appreciation and gratitude to you and, through
you, to your Government and to the people of Panama for
the kindness and most generous hospitality with which we
have been received in your country. From the moment we
arrived, your Government and people have succeeded in
creating an atmosphere of personal warmth and friendship
which should prove to be conducive to the SUCCCSS~U~
completion of the work the Security Council is called upon
to do at its meetings here in Panama City.
31, General Omar Torrijos, in his most impressive opening
statement /1695th meeting] set forth Panama’s case in
clear and unequivocal terms. Subsequently, Latin American
statesmen have put before us the political, economic ad
social panorama of this continent. Those declarations, in
themselves, provide ample justification for the decision to
hold these meetings of the Council ln the beautiful capital
of your country, Sir.

27. As was pointed out by the Kenya delegation in its
paper on the subject of permanent sovereignty over natural
resources presented to the Conference of Foreign Ministers
of Non.Aligned Countries in Georgetown in August 1972:
“Sovereignty over natural resources is inherent in the
quality of statehood and is part and parcel of territorial
sovereignty-that is, the power of a State to exercise
supreme authority over all personsand things within its
territory. Sovereignty over natural resources, which is
essential to economic independence, is functionally
linked to political independence, and consolidation of the
former inevitably strengthens the latter. Since it excludes
allegiance or subordination to any authority, sovereignty
over natural resources implies complete freedom of action
for a State in determining the use of those resources.”

32. As you are well aware, Mr, President, Austria, from
the very moment it became a member of the Security
Council, gave full support to Panama’s initiative to CO~~~~~
2 Isthmian Canal Convention, For the text, see Treaties and Other
Aareements of the United States of Americ%j i%
1949, vol. 10, department bf State publication 8642 (WaShk$W
DE., U.S. Government Printing Office, 1972), p, 663.

International

4

meetings of the Council on Latin American soil. At the
meeting of this body on 16 January last [1484th meeting]
I explained the reasons which had led Austria to take this
position. We are convinced that holding meetings of the
Council away from Headquarters at the appropriate time
can play a positive role in focusing attention on specific
regions of the world, as was demonstrated by the Council’s
meetings in Addis Ababa last year, which brought about
important results for the future work of the United Nations
on problems related to the situation in southern Africa.

States to Austrian refugees who had to flee the country
after 1938. After the liberation of Austria in 1945, strong
support for the speedy restoration of our independence and
sovereignty wasexpressed on numerous occasions by Latin
American countries, In this context, special mention should
be made of the initiative of the Government of Brazil of 29
August 1952s concerning the speedy conclusion of the
Austrian State Treaty, which led to the inclusion of a
corresponding item on the agenda of the seventh session of
the General Assembly. On the basis of a draft resolution
submitted by Brazil, Lebanon, Mexico and the Netherlands,
the General Assembly subsequently adopted resolution
613 (VII) of 20 December 1952. Today, two decades after
the conclusion of the Austrian State Treaty and the
adoption by Austria of a status of permanent neutrality,
new possibilities for the creation of an active partnership
with the countries of Latin America have evolved.

33. The present series of meetings, which has been
honoured by the presence of so many illustrious representatives of Latin American countries, is a further reason to
express to you, Mr. President, our gratitude and satisfaction. Speakers before me have pointed out the most
fortunate combination of elements which provide a propitious atmosphere for Council meetings in a country so
fittingly described as “the bridge of the world”. We are
fully conscious of these qualities of your country which
make it not only a privileged meeting ground between the
north and the south of a great hemisphere, but also one of
the centres of world communications.

37. The desire for sovereignty and independence, in the
full meaning of these terms, as voiced by the nations of
Latin America, is well understood by Austria. But the
classical exercise of sovereignty and independence in the
political field must find its contemporary complement in
the economic field. Only thus can a measure of international justice and a balance between the interests of large
and small nations alike be attained.

34. It was not difficult for the Austrian delegation to
accept the invitation to visit a country and a continent to
which my country is linked by many centuries of friendly
and cordial relations. Latin America has occupied a firm
place in Austrian history ever since the historic event
described as the “discovery of America”. Undoubtedly,
that term does not do full justice to the true significance
and historic dimensions of that event, for it marked, both
for the western hemisphere and for Europe, the beginning
of a new era of common historical experience and
exchanges whose impact became increasingly felt on both
sides of the Atlantic.

38. Another link in the relations between Austria and
Latin America is our admiration for the cultural values of
this continent, marked by a mixture of the great American
civilizations with the cultural heritage of the European
peoples, a continent which has thus developed its own
unmistakeable style of life. The high degree of cultural
identity which characterizes the peoples of Latin America is
a sound and strong basis for developing cultural partnerships with other continents.

35. I do not think that this is either the time or the place
to describe in all its manifold aspects the process of
cross-fertilization between Europe and the Americas in the
centuries since the heroic deed of Christopher Columbus.
Yet I should like to say a few words about the relations of
my country-which lies in the centre of Europe-with the
nations of South America and emphasize the immensely
rich political, economic, cultural and human links we have
come to value so highly.

39. Today Austria maintains friendly and cordial relations
with all the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
area, without any discrimination or exception, The increase
in trade and technical co-operation will evidently constitute
a further important element in expanding and intensifying
the old and new relations between Austria and Latin
America.
40. In this way we are trying to express our belief in the
common ideal of international co-operation and the
friendly meeting between nations, to which Latin American
nations and statesmen have contributed in such brilliant
and constructive ways. It was the Latin American States
which played an outstanding role in the creation, and
subsequently in the work, of the League of Nations. And it
would be virtually impossible in the short time available ta
give even a limited account of the invaluable role of Latin
America and its distinguished statesmen in the history of
the United Nations. As only one example, let me recall that
as many as six of the past sessionsof the General Assembly
chose Presidents from Latin America, Presidents whose
experience and skill helped to steer the Organization
through many a difficult moment. May I at this point also
recall with gratitude that it was a Latin American President

36. It is difficult to resist the temptation to describe here
the nature and mutual benefits of the relations which the
Austria of previous centuries enjoyed with Latin America,
especially since the time when independent States arose
from colonial domination under the leadership of such
great and enlightened statesmen as Simon Bolivar, TousSaint Louverture, San Martin and Jose Martf. Friendship
and mutual esteem between the nations of Latin America
and Austria have stood the test of time and the upheavals
of history. When Austria was subjected to a most difficult
period of trial in 1938, resulting in a temporary loss of
independence, the Latin American countries admirably
demonstrated their strong feelings of solidarity. The AUStrian people will never forget, in particular, that it was
Mexico which formally protested, in 1938, against the
occupation of our country. Neither will we forget the
humanitarian assistance extended by many Latin American

3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Session,
Annexes,agendaitem 63, document A/2166.

5

communications. The fascinating possibilities offered by
this geographical position have long challenged the imaanation of statesmen and engineers, and it is thus that a great
international effort, initiated by the technical genius of
Ferdinand de Lesseps, led to the construction of one of tile
finest works of human engineering, the Panama Canal,
These singular possibilities which have so greatly favoured
Panama, are, however, also a source of serious preoccupa.
tion and concern. We have been alerted to the wide range of
problems facing Panama in this respect and we are aware
also of the immense complexity of the queqtions involved.
Any solution should, in our view, be based on a number of
principles. The principle of territorial integrity and sovep
eignty is certainly one of them, as is the consideration that
developing countries should be able to benefit from the
advantages which nature and geographical position haye
offered them. But in an independent world there is also
interdependence between national and international inter.
ests, between the legitimate rights and aspirations of one
people and the legitimate rights and aspirations of the
international community as a whole. This interdependence
is obvious in an area so intimately linked to world trade and
communication. We are confident that the two countries
actively involved in the Canal, Panama and the United
States, are the first to be fully aware of these special
responsibilities, We hope that future negotiations between
Panama and the United States will create the basis for new
friendship and confidence between these two countries.

who presided over the session of the General Assembly
which admitted Austria as a Member State in December
1955,
41. Let me mention only two areas of international
co-operation which have greatly benefited from Latin
American initiatives.
42. The idea of economic co-operation between developing and industrialized countries through the United
Nations has been greatly enhanced by the dynamic leadership of Latin American statesmen. The creation of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is a
case in point, as it owes so much to the creative intellect of
its first Secretary-General, Mr. Ra61 Prebisch, who has made
it a singular instrument in fighting for greater economic
justice.
43. In another field, namely, disarmament, the work of
the United Nations has been inseparably linked with the
stimulating ideas and untiring efforts of Latin American
statesmen. The conclusion of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, to
which many of the preceding speakers have referred, is one
of those initiatives opening wide and most promising
perspectives. The fact that the Treaty provides for the
creation of a nuclear-free zone in Latin America, a zone
which, as the Secretary of External Relations of Mexico
pointed out [169&h meeting], covers an area of 8 million
square kilometers populated by well over 140 million
people, demonstrates in itself the validity of such efforts,

48. As far as the existence of colonial situations is
concerned, the position of Austria has been expressed on
numerous occasions in the various organs of the United
Nations. In the world of today there is certainly no place
for the continued existence of colonial and dependent
Territories. That is all the more true for the continent of
America, which has led the anti-colonial struggle since the
end of the eighteenth century. Nevertheless, as several
speakers have pointed out, the situation of some of the
remaining dependent Territories is not exclusively of a
colonial nature.

44. It is in this positive context and in this atmosphere
dedicated to peace, justice and international co-operation,
that we should view the importance of the meeting of one
of the principal organs of the United Nations on Latin
American soil. Yet, beyond the rightful acknowledgement
of Latin America’s contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security in the world, I am
convinced that this series of meetings of the Security
Council will give new momentum to the promotion of
international co-operation, peace and security not only in
the western hemisphere but also in the world at large. We
believe that the time is most auspicious and promising for
such initiatives. Now that the conflict in South-East Asia is
on the way to a peaceful settlement, we hope that the
forces and energies liberated by this process will lead to an
improvement of the situation in other parts of the world,

49. May I, then, in conclusion sum up my delegation’s
position as follows: Faced with the necessity to accommodate a variety of conflicting interests, no set formulas can
exist. Rather, imaginative efforts and continuous and
patient search will surely provide a safer basis for the
attainment of satisfactory solutions. It is our firm belief
that such solutions will have to take into account the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples concerned as laid down
in the Charter of the United Nations. Those principles
include the right of nations to sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and they also include the achievement of the
goals of economic and social justice, freedom and human
dignity.

45. The speakers from Latin America who have addressed
this Council have, without exception, highlighted the
specific problems awaiting solution, and all have pointed to
the wave of change which is gaining momentum throughout
the entire Latin American continent. We have been made
aware of the persistence of political and economic problems
with which the continent as a whole and individual
countries are confronted. We are conscious of the urgency
to find adequate solutions,

50. As we participate in these meetings of the Security
Council we are confident of the successof our deliberations, and we stand ready to take part in any initiative and
to discuss any proposal which corresponds to the goals we
have set ourselves.

46. In this context, I should like to address myself to two
particular questions which have been dealt with by almost
all the speakers who preceded me.

51. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSI? (Guinea) (interpref~@rl
The exceptional nature of the Security
Council meetings in Panama bears out in many respects the

47. Because of its unique geographical situation, Panama
has become one of the most important centres of world

from French):
6

similarity of the problems confronting Latin America and
Africa, two continents marked by the tireless struggle of
their peoples against foreign occupation and under-develop.
merit, just as in Addis Ababa a little over a year ago our
meetings away from Headquarters were testimony to the
growing influence of the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin
America on the international political scene,

destiny and has been so bound since the very beginnings of
colonization by the European empires. For the same
reason, it has been subjected to an economic blockade
inadmissible in a period when detente is developing among
the great Powers and when intense co-operation of every
kind is being developed between them. It is that lack of
solidarity that is deepening the division among our States
and rejecting some from a community to which they would
like to belong. It is also that want of unity and solidarity
that lies behind the tragedy of the Palestinian people
deprived of their homeland and has allowed the continued
arbitrary occupation of Arab territories by Israel. Since
1967, indeed, a “no war, no peace” situation has characterized the crisis between the Arab countries and Israel.
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) remains without
effect because of the inertia of the international community and more particularly that of certain great Powers.
My delegation has every reason to think that the efforts of
our various Governments will be conducive to bringing
about the restoration of peace in the Middle East which has
become an imperative for the strengthening of international
security and the d6tente that our States so badly need for
the development of their economic and human resources.

52. The Invitation by the Government of Panama is clearly
consonant with the interest our Organization should take in
the legitimate aspirations of our peoples and their Governments to free themselves of all foreign domination. My
delegation is grateful to the Government of President
Torrijos for taking the initiative of inviting the Security
Council to come to this hospitable city of Panama. The
warmth of the welcome, the spontaneity of the Panamanian
people and the facilities that have been made available to us
are a reflection of the generosity and gaiety characteristic
of South America. Those feelings remind me of Africa,
from which I come, for Africa too extends to any stranger
setting foot on its soil the same hospitality, which for the
settler who came from elsewhere was the basis of the policy
of domination and subjugation of our peoples.
53, Once again we should like to thank the Government of
Panama and take this solemn opportunity to convey to it a
message of fraternal solidarity from the people and Government of Guinea. Under the leadership of President Ahmed
Sekou Toure since 2 October 1958 when our independence
was proclaimed, they have been carrying on an unremitting
struggle against colonialism and imperialism. The struggle
has been waged on the political, economic, social and
cultural levels, continuously thwarting the subversive plots
which seek to call into question the fundamental options of
our people, Their determination to remain masters of their
destiny has succeeded in foiling all the plots hatched by
imperialism down to the Portuguese colonialist aggression
of 22 November 1970. Expetience has taught us that a
people determined to defend its freedom and the integrity
of its territory can be vanquished by no force, even one
equipped with the greatest military means of destruction.
The peace that has just returned to Viet-Nam after more
than 25 years of murderous and devastating war with the
United States is the most recent proof of that.
54, A common

past marked by colonialism

56. Latin America, for its own development and in order
to develop its relations of co.operation and friendship with
Africa, should also come to know the tribulations of that
continent. Only a few days ago I communicated to the
Council, at its meeting of 9 March [1693rd meeting/,
information concerning a suspicious vesse1,the Albatross,
which was carrying white and black mercenaries in order to
mount a further act of aggression against my people. There
is a general tendency to regard such information as
unfounded, because it comes from a State of the third
world. But on the very next day [1694th meetingJ the
Council was to learn, through a statement by the representative of Spain-and I should like here once again to thank
him for the objectivity of the information supplied-that
the communication I had made was accurate. There was
indeed a criminal enterprise afoot to launch an Invasion
against an African State, Equatorial Guinea, and to overthrow its head of State, President Macias and his principal
aides, However, there is still a mystery surrounding the
Albatross, which sails under the British flag, and until such
time as that piratical vessel has been halted in its criminal
enterprise our peoples will continue to stress the danger of
aggression that hovers bver them, the responsibility for
which must be pinpointed,

and the

similarity of the heroic struggle waged by our peoples to

throw off that foreign domination binds our continentsAfrica, Asia and Latin America, The same wind of peace
that has just spread over the valiant people of Viet-Nam,
which is the appendage of no country or group of
countries, must necessarily in the same way sweep across
Africa and Latin America. The time has come for our
peoples of the so-called third world to unite their efforts
and to multiply the contacts among our States, strengthem
ing and diversifying our co-operation in order to overcome
our respective problems.

57. The special series of meetings held by the Security
Council in Addis Ababa during January and February 1972
also demonstrated the determination of the independent
States of Africa, in the Organization of African Unity, to
mobilize all their material and financial resources to liberate
their brothers in Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau),
Cape Verde, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe.
58. Portuguese fascism, in steady retreat in its colonial war
and also on the diplomatic level, is pursuing a policy of
genocide against the African peoples which it is in most
casesnow incapable of administering. In Guinea (Bissau),
where two-thirds of the territory has been proclaimed
liberated zones, Portugal’s tactic of genocide has been
turned into a policy of individual assassinations of leaders

55. In this struggle which our countries of the third world
must undertake the problem of unity and solidarity is of
capital importance. It is because we of the third world are
not united and do not stand shoulder to shoulder that Cuba
continues to be isolated from the other States of Latin
America, to which it is bound by a common history and
7

of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea Bissau
and Cape Verde, the PAIGC. The treacherous assassination
of Amilcar Cabral, the Secretary-General of that Party, was
the most obvious token of the inability of the Lisbon
authorities to overcome that valiant people. But in committing the crime Portugal, at the same time, galvanized the
revolutionary forces of Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde in
their march towards ineluctable victory whose impact in
Angola and Mozambique will certainly speed the accession
to independence and freedom of the peoples of southern
Africa. My delegation feels in duty bound to draw the
attention of the representatives of the States of Latin
America present at the meetings to a fact of great
importance to Africa, While we were preparing to come to
Panama we learned that Portugal, a small country which is
itself under-developed but, thanks to its powerful allies
continues to dominate our peoples, is seeking observer
status with the Organization of American States. We are
sure that Africa can count on the solidarity of Latin
America-the solidarity we were speaking of earlier-to
reject this request, which is an affront to Africa.

foreign military bases on national territory, It must
unfortunately be recognized that certain Powers, despite
the fact that they bear the main responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security in the world, are all too
far from strictly applying to our peoples these same
principles on which the Government of the Republic of
Guinea bases all its anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist
activity.
62. There is no doubt that the Government of Panama, of
whose most legitimate aspirations we are well aware, is
doing its best to ensure respect for these same principles,
which constitute the true guarantee of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The representative of Panama in the
Security Council, Ambassador Aquiline Boyd, in conveying
to us the invitation to hold these special meetings of the
Council on Panamanian soil [1684th meeting/, did not
conceal his Government’s determination to exercise its fuli
sovereignty and its national jurisdiction over the Canal
Zone. This determination of the people and the Government of Panama was brilliantly described by General Omar
Torrijos in his opening address here:

59. A few weeks ago, our Council welcomed back the
Special Mission that had just visited Zambia, Zambia having
once again been a victim of the machinations and criminal
acts of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia-two countries
which have made racism and apartheid their doctrine of
government. The unanimous adoption by thk Council of
resolution 329 (1973) calling on the international community to help Zambia so that it may overcome its difficulties
gives us reason to hope that the administering Power of
Southern Rhodesia, the United Kingdom, will take adequate measures against its rebel colony which presents a
constant threat to international peace and security in that
part of southern Africa.

“I come to speak to you now on behalf of a people that
does not feed on hatred and whose simple hearts have led
us to forgive and forget offences and to guide our future
toward the achievement of our own identity. For he who
is right need not resort to insults.
“ a* .
“From this high rostrum, Panama states that we cannot
accept the economic subjection of one country by
another or political, economic or cultural penetration,
since that is nothing more than neo.colonialism. That is
only a veiled and disguised colonialism which appears in
our people in the form of economic assistance with
conditions, assistance that is aimed not at the develop
ment of our country but at control over our people.”

60. The role of the Security Council in preserving international pt?dCC and security should allow us to set forth
principles without which the detente initiated in Europe
would be no more than an illusion for Asia, Africa or Latin
America. The Council must endeavour to secure respect for
the principles to which States have subscribed. Thus, in
1965, the General Assembly adopted resolution 2065 (XX)
which invited the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom to begin negotiations without delay in
order to find a peaceful solution to the problem of the
Falkland Islands (Malvinas). We regret that the interruption
of those talks in 1971 allowed other threats to international
peace and security to subsist in this part of Latin America.
At a time when negotiations are coming to the fore as a
means of resolving international conflicts, my delegation
would welcome with relief a resumption of the bilateral
negotiations between the United Kingdom and Argentina
for a peaceful solution to their problems.

[I 695th meeting,paras.5 and 9.1

63. We need to remember that Panama is enduring a
situation that since the construction of the Canal, an
international waterway, has been a standing potential threat
to world peace and security, The claims of the Panamanian
Government, which, in any case,are justified in the light of
the above-mentioned principles, aim at putting an end to
the colonial status of the Canal Zone which constitutes for
its people a permanent source of trouble and insecurity. It
is indeed hard to credit the situation-anomalous in our
day-of this colonial enclave which is the result of a now
anachronistic agreement between the Governments of the
United States and Panama. No one doubts that the
meetings of the Security Council in this country Will
underline the need to settle this question in order to
remove all the causesof a conflict which it is our duty to
expunge, By so doing we shall have contributed, through
so-called preventive diplomacy, to promoting a real Cfimate
of peace in Panama and, consequently, in all Latin America,
a continent whose democratic traditions and determination
to contribute to the peace efforts of our Organization will
be strengthened.

61. We continue to reaffirm that the United Nations, in
order to exercise the moral force that it represents for
present and future generations, must succeed in applying
the moral precepts it has proclaimed, precepts to which
Member States subscribed when they signed the Charter:
the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
and national independence; the permanent sovereignty of
States over their natural resources; respect for the integrity,
unity and sovereignty of States; and the elimination of all

64. My delegatiojn remains optimistic as to the outcome of
these special mketings of the Security Council held in the
8

City of Panama, which has hosted so many historic
conferences, the first of which bore the illustrious name of
Bolivar, the Liberator of this continent.
65. General Torrijos said:
“I say to the representatives of the United States that it
is more noble to redress an injustice than to perpetuate an
error, From the world which is represented here today,
we ask for moral support in this struggle engaged in by
the weak. This struggle can triumph only when it is
assisted by the conscience of the world and our people is
already reaching the limit of its patience.” [Ibid.,
para. 2U.j

We hope that more intensive bilateral negotiations will be
instituted between the Governments of the United States
and Panama and that the political situation will be
stabihzed with the restoration of Panamanian sovereignty
over its territory without restriction. We have no doubt
that, given the efforts of the Governments of the United
States and Panama to arrive at a revision of the Central
Convention, Washington will succeed in resuming negotiations with the Government of Panama in order to restore to
it its jurisdiction over the totality of its territory. It goes
without saying that the peaceful settlement of this question
will be in accordance with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and will serve the best interests of the
Government and the people of Panama. Our meetings here
will thus have helped to create better conditions of
co.operation for the peoples of this hemisphere and, all in
alI, will have helped to establish a climate of peace and
security without which the developing countries cannot
proceed to construct their young nations in happiness,
freedom and economic progress.
66. Everyone will agree with my delegation that the
climate of co-operation which has ‘marked our special
meetings, thanks to efficient organization and unfailing
hospitality-a reflection of the warm tropical sun-is, above
all, the work of the Government of Panama. The successof
our proceedings will unquestionably be due to the host
people and Government, but also to the Latin American
continent, which at these meetings will have laid sure
foundations for lasting co-operation with Africa and the
rest of the world.
67. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Algeria, Mr. Abdellatif Rahal. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
68. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, by allowing me to participate today in the
debate of the Council, you give me an opportunity to have
the voice of Algeria heard in this beautiful capital in Latin
America, which has welcomed us following the well-known
traditions of its warm and generous hospitality. It was
fitting that the presidency of the Council for this particular
session be entrusted to you, Sir, as a tribute to your
country, a tribute with which we wish to be associated in
congratulating you and in wishing you complete successin
your tasks.

69. We are among those who believe that the Security
Council did well in accepting the invitation of the Republic
of Panama to meet in its capital. The Council, having
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace, should naturally open itself up to the outside world,
go to the very heart of the problems which arise, and thus
bear witness to its concern for independence and realism by
periodically departing from its permanent Headquarters
with its routine atmosphere, which is also often restrictive.
70. Last year the Council attempted the same experiment
by holding a series of meetings at Addis Ababa, The
presence of the Council on African soil brought to the
forefront of the news the problems of that continent,
which can be best explained and understood in their natural
context. The Africans have not failed to express their
wholehearted gratitude to the Council for the solicitude it
thus showed for their concerns and for the renewed interest
which international opinion was thus led to accord them.
71. Latin America has its concerns too, which we share;
and its difficulties, which we know. In many of their
aspects the problems of Latin America are identical to
those of Africa. Furthermore, they are characteristic of
what one calls the third world. The conditions under which
they arise in different places may conceal the similarity of
their nature, but they cannot conceal the need for all those
countries to unite their efforts and to close ranks, so that in
unison they can do away with the threats directed against
their independence, the dangers which affect their security,
and the barriers to their development.
72, Accordingly, we consider that the present series of
meetings of the Security Council in Panama must be
interpreted as a new manifestation of the interest of the
international community in the problems of the third
world. While this gives us satisfaction, without however
causing us to harbour unreasonable illusions, the meetings
here also give the Council and the international institutions
an opportunity to regain among our peoples the prestige
and confidence which a quarter of a century of disap.
pointed hopes and unfulfilled expectations have, it must be
said, considerably weakened.
73. Speaking today in the Council’s debate, the delegation
of the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria wishes, first
of all, to convey its feeling of sympathy and friendship .to
the Republic of Panama, with which we have just established diplomatic relations reflecting a long tradition of
cordiality and understanding. Through the Security Council, the people of Algeria wish to transmit to the people and
leaders of Panama the greetings of our people and Government, to assure them of the solidarity of Algeria in their
admirable task of reaffirming and consolidating their
national independence, and to express to them our brotherly wishes for the success of their struggle, for the
well-being of their people and for the greatness of their
country.
74. The participation of the delegation of Algeria is also
an indication of the interest of Algeria in Latin America
and its problems, in the context of the ties of friendship
which we have with the countries of this continent and a
struggle in which, on several occasions already, we have

been on their side in the pursuit of common objectives,
which underline how alike are our concerns.
75. Finally, the role of our delegation in this debate must
be considered as a contribution to the defence of the cause
of the countries of the tl~rd world, an appeal to internationaI opinion, so that it becomes aware of our problems
and the dangers which the persistence of our problems
represent for world peace. The future of mankind is
doubtless less threatened by the dangers of a nuclear
conflagration than by those which would result from the
development of an explosive situation in the countries of
the third world.
76, The contemporary world has its chronic ills. It has
become accustomed to live with them, and indeed sometimes forgets them, but regularly, insidiously, they undermine and erode it, preparing the inevitable crisis which
might be fatal to it. Only the parties to this great body,
directly exposed to the evils, feel the painful effects and
measure their progress with anguish. The chronic ills result
from the growing inequality of peoples, from the unjust
order which governs international relations, from the will to
power and domination which the stronger show in regard to
the weaker. These are, no doubt, the original sins of human
society. But the consciousness which all peoples are
acquiring of their place in the international community
breaks their resignation to their fate and prompts them to
fight against a situation of inferiority to which they can no
longer be reconciled. The aspirations to freedom and to
well-being is today shared by all nations and inevitably
determines the evolution of the world in which we live,
77. While regions of Africa continue to suffer from
colonial domination, foreign intervention appears in the
most diverse forms in Africa as well as in Asia and Latin
America. In the pursuit of political as well as economic
objectives, this intervention has the support of the most
powerful means and does not hesitate to make use of the
most brutal methods. The example of Viet-Nam is still fresh
in our minds and will so remain for ,a long time, no doubt,
despite the cessation of fighting which has been welcomed
throughout the world with readily understood relief.
78. The blockade of Cuba imposed by the United States
falls within this same trend to deny a small people the
freedom to make its economic and political choices, choices
which the great Powers claim for themselves. Pillage and
exploitation of the natural resources of the countries of the
third world constitute another, and not the least dangerous
form of foreign intervention since the great period of
colonial expansion, and while this is now carried out by less
ostensible methods, nevertheless this is a grave attack
against our interests which our peoples will not tolerate for
very much longer.
79. The struggle against these attempts at political subjection and economic exploitation is not an easy one and we
know it well; it imposes on our countries the heaviest
sacrifices, permanent vigilance and a sometimes inhuman
perseverance in our efforts. Our will to devote all our
energies to this vital struggle should leave no room for
doubt and should convince the international conscience of
the primary importance which we attach to the final
outcome.

80. The countries of the third world, like the others, and
perhaps more than the others, are anxious to have
international peace and security strengthened, They know
from experience the dangers which would weigh on them
were there to be an international conflagration evenif tIley
were not directly involved in it. They know that they
would be threatened with the same catastrophe wllich
would precipitate all of mankind into a generalized holocaust in which they would not be spared. They know that
whenever peace is threatened, their efforts to consolidate
their independence and ensure their development are
jeopardized. Thus they are the first to be interested in
establishing an international order based on relations of
confidence between peoples and free of suspicion, misgivings and apprehensions which create tensions and engender conflicts.
81. But the international community would do well to
realize that world stability and balance may also be
endangered by the situation which prevails in the countries
of the third world because of the dissatisfaction of their
peoples, because of the feelings of frustration and the
injustices they suffer. We applaud the peaceful coexistence
which seems to be extending between.the greatest Powers;
we rejoice that confrontation has yielded to co-operation,
which frees us from the fear that their opposition wouid, in
spite of ourselves, sweep us into a confrontation where our
very existence would be at’ stake, But this peaceful
coexistence cannot dispel our apprehensions if it is not
applied, equally to the relations which these great Powers
maintain with our countries, if understanding between the
mighty is not achieved to the detriment of our freedom and
our interests, and if it does not lead to a division of the
world into zones of influence where each of them would
reservefor itself the possibility of exercising its domination.
We do not believe in an international balance which would
be based on a division of the world between the great
Powers and which would entrust exclusively to them
responsibility for watching over the maintenance of world
peace.
82. The contemporary world is certainly made up of great
Powers and small countries which cannot play the same role
in the maintenance of a satisfactory international balance,
but which all contribute to it within the measure of their
means and by virtue of a solidarity which may seem to be
negligible to some but which is none the less imperative and
which it would be dangerous to ignore. International
security is in the final analysis a matter for all peoples and
cannot exist otherwise.
83. Of course we recognize the special role, the preponderant role of the great Powers which their means enable
them to exercise in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Power obviously does not entail PriviIeges
alone; it also generates duties and obligations respect for
which is essential for the harmonious development of
international life.
84. The unique role of the great Powers in being responsible for the maintenance of peace is expressly and ri&tlY
recognized as theirs in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the organs entrusted with its application, in
particular in the Security Council. The permanent seats

10

88. This attitude on the part of the countries of the third
world would doubtless be misunderstood if it were to be
interpreted as systematic hostility towards the great
Powers, uniting their conduct on the international scene in
the same disapproval. The distribution of forces throughout
the world is beyond control, and we accept it with realism,
just as we objectively measure the contribution each
country can make to our common pursuit in building a
world based on a justice which is equal for all. However, in
relations among nations, as in relations among men, there is
no justification for force unless it is placed at the service of
the law. The future of mankind concerns us all equally, and
all the peoples of the world have their share in the
responsibility for its preservation and its direction towards
a better understanding among men and a better life for
future generations.

given them in the Council establish the importance and
continuity of their responsibilities for maintaining world
order and confirm their role as vigilant guardians of
international peace. The right of the veto is an undeniable
privilege which compensates in some manner for the
particular burden placed on them.
85, However, in the same manner as power can be used to
pursue selfish objectives and to defend unfair privileges, the

right of veto can also serve to cover abuses, to mount a
facade of legality to conceal situations which are contrary
to the law of peoples and, ultimately, supply yet another
weapon to serve the will for domination, When thus used,
the right of veto is tainted with immorality, which makes it
reprehensible and which deflects it from its initial purpose
flowing from the very principles of the Charter. We believe
that it should be inadmissible for a great Power to exercise
its right of veto in a matter in which it is involved and when
by that abusive use of a privilege which has been
recognized to it because of the very fact of its power it
would thus remove itself from the normal application of
the rules of the laws which should be imposed uniformly on
all nations, without regard to their size, their means or their
place in the international community. This use of the right
of veto is even more reprehensible when a great Power has
recourse to it in a conflict it has with a small country and
where it already has the advantage given it by its material
superiority and particularly the advantage of its military
means. In that case the right of veto makes international
law the right of the mightiest, which deprives it of its moral
foundation, the very bed rock of international justice.

89. This is an act of faith which we base,on the wisdom of
men and the goodwill of Governments, despite present
difficulties and tensions which here and there characterize
international relations. In proclaiming it here, in Panama,
and amid these people of Panama whose aspirations and
hopes we share, we wish at the same time to pay a tribute
to all those who throughout the world have placed their
lives at the service of justice and freedom and who give us
reason for hope even in the difficult times in which we are
now living.
90. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The delegation of the Union of

Soviet Socialist Republics would like first of all to express
its gratitude to the Government and people of Panama for
the hospitable reception and the attention shown to the
Security Council and its members who have come here, in
response to the kind invitation of the Panamanian Government, to attend this session of the Council at Panama City,
and for creating favourable conditions for the work of the
Council in this beautiful city. We have already had the
pleasure of greeting you in New York, at United Nations
Headquarters. Now we take great pleasure in greeting you,
Mr, President, here in your homeland, on your native soil,
in the capital of your country, whose generous hospitality
we are ail enjoying and which has provided the Security
Council with the splendid opportunity to meet in Latin
America for the first time in the history of the United
Nations, in order to consider the strengthening of international peace and security in this important region of the
world and examine an urgent problem which is of concern
to your country and your people.

86. International justice is what even today we are
claiming in the Council. And this claim acquires a particular
resonance when the Council is meeting in Panama, in one
of those regions of the world where precisely there is a
conflict between the interests of a great Power and the
aspirations of a small country to its independence and to
the preservation of its sovereignty over its territory and
over its resources, There is nothing that could justify the
prevalence of the interests of the great Power over those of
the country where they are situated, just as security
considerations can in no caseignore the legitimate concerns
of that country regarding its protection against any foreign
attack.
87, In the final analysis, this is one of the main causesfor
the lack of understanding which increasingly separates the
countries of the third world from certain great Powers and
which are the reasons for our concern in regard to the
maintenance of peace in the world, The great Powers
consider that peace consists above all in the preservation of
their own security; in this they are right, but this security
can be real only when it is extended also to the countries of
the third world. The tendency of certain great Powers to
place the frontiers of their security in the regions of the
world where they exercise their influence is extremely
dangerous, and we shall never accept it or submit to it. It
constitutes at any rate a manifestation of the spirit of
domination which we have already condemned, and the
peoples of the third world will always find in themselves
sufficient force and determination to have their will for
independence respected and to resist an interference which
now more than ever they are determined to tolerate no
longer.

91. We were profoundly saddened by your announcement
of the death of Mr. Chacko, and we wish to express our
deepest sympathy on the occasion of his untimely demise.
He was a distinguished, active, experienced and responsible
member of the United Nations Secretariat, a citizen of
India, a country to which we are bound by ties of
friendship. We knew him as a man who was deeply
committed to the high ideals of the United Nations and
devoted all his strength, knowledge and experience to
serving the noble cause of strengthening international peace
and security and of developing and strengthening co-operation between Sates and peoples. We request the SecretaryGeneral and the Under-Secretary-General under whose
immediate direction Mr, Chacko worked to convey to the
11

family of the deceasedour sincere condolences and deepest
sympathy.

96. In world-wide relations the trend towards normaliza.
tion of the international situation, relaxation of tension and
the peaceful settlement of urgent problems is beginning to
prevail; there is a growing realization of the need to develop
relations between States on the basis of the principle of
peaceful co-operation between States with different social
systems and the non-use of force in relations between
States.

92. The strengthening of peace and security is, as we all
realize, the most important problem of our time for every
region of the earth and for the world as a whole. It is the
duty of the United Nations to keep this question under
continuous review, since it is the centre for uniting the
efforts of all States and their peoples to maintain and
strengthen international peace and security, and its main
purpose is to save the present and succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. The members of the Security
Council are in duty bound to devote their attention to the
question of peace and security in their statements on the
item on the Council’s agenda concerning measures for the
maintenance and strengthening of international peace and
security in Latin America.

97. The most outstanding international event of the recent
past was the end of the war in Viet-Nam. The international
conference on Viet-Nam, held recently in Paris, confirmed
the agreements reached between the parties; now the task is
to ensure that the agreements are implemented and that the
freedom-loving Viet-Namese people, which has heroically
defended its national dignity, freedom and independence in
the struggle against oppression, should be able to achieve its
national aspirations in conditions of peace and without
external intervention and to decide its own destiny.

93. The Security Council is holding its meetings in Panama
in accordance with a decision which it took at the initiative
of the Government of Panama and which was supported by
all the Latin American countries and by many other States
Members of the United Nations. The very fact that the
Council has been convened here is of historical import not
only for the development of international
relations
throughout the American continent but also for the
enhancement of the role played by the States of Latin
America in international relations and the intensification of
their participation in the activities of the international
community and in the work of the United Nations. This is
proof of the desire of the Latin American countries to play
an increasing part in resolving the problems connected with
the maintenance and strengthening of peace and security,
to consolidate their own national sovereignty and independence, to oppose resolutely any imperialist interference in
the internal affairs of Latin America, to bring about a
renunciation of the use or threat of force in all its forms
and manifestations in relations between States, and to
participate actively in solving the problem of disarmament,

98. There has been noticeable relaxation of tension and a
significant improvement in the political &mate in Europe.
At the initiative of the Soviet Union and all the countries of
the socialist community, a start has been made towards
helping the world turn sharply away from the tension,
hostility and confrontation of the “cold war” years towards
business-like co-operation between States with different
social systems in conditions of peace and mutual understanding.
99. It was in Europe, during the first half of this century,
that two bloody wars, which became world wars, began. It
is enough to recall-and we of the Soviet Union never forget
this-that 50 million people perished in the Second World
War. The heaviest loss was suffered by the Soviet people.
Our country lost over 20 million sons and daughters. NO
other country in the whole history of mankind has suffered
such enormous loss from aggression and war. We know
what war is, and we do not want it for ourselves or for
other peoples, That is why Soviet citizens are such steadfast
and passionate supporters of peace throughout the world.

94. The significance of the Security Council meetings in
Panama to consider the question of peace and security in
Latin America is not confined to Latin America alone,
Following the initiative of the African States Members of
the United Nations, which resulted in the successful
anti-imperialist and anti-colonialist Council meetings in
Africa early last year, this initiative of the Latin American
countries once again confirms that the developing countries-or the “third world” countries, as they are called at
the United Nations-are concerned with enhancing the
effectiveness of the United Nations as an international
organization whose mission it is to promote, in accordance
with its Charter, the strengthening of peace and security
and the development of friendly relations between peoples
on the basis of complete equality, non-interference and
friendly co-operation.

100. The developments in Europe and Indo-China show it
is possible to find a peaceful and just solution to Other
situations of conflict as well, to reach a settlement in the
Middle East and eliminate that dangerous hotbed of war
and the threat of war, Achieving this will require great
efforts by the Security Council, especially by its permanent
members.
101. The positive changes that have taken place in the
international situation are the embodiment of the objectives for which the Soviet Union and all the countries of’ the
socialist community are tirelessly and consistentiy stru&
gling. These objectives, proclaimed over half a century ago
by the great Lenin, founder of the Soviet State, still define
the basic directions of the Soviet Union’s foreign policy
even today. The greatest of these objectives is to strengthen
peace and international security. The USSR has always
opposed, and it will continue to oppose, the policy of
aggression and arbitrary action in international affairs. The
goal of USSR foreign policy is to help all peoples to enjoy
their inalienable rights, and above all, their right t0
independence and independent development without any
external interference or pressure,

95. The Security Council’s consideration of measures for
the maintenance and strengthening of peace and international security in Latin America comes at a time when in
other regions and throughout the world the beneficial
influence of the important changes for the better in the
international situation that have been achieved in recent
years is becoming more tangible and more evident.
12

108. The position taken by those who in words call for a
complete ban on nuclear weapons but indeed oppose and
vote against a General Assembly resolution on the non-use
of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of nuclear weapons is therefore particularly invidious.

102. This Leninist policy pursued by the Soviet Union in
foreign affairs was once again confirmed and given tangible
expression in the programme for peace and international
co-operation adopted at the Twenty-fourth Congress of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Its main objective is
to improve the climate of international relations, to ensure
the non-use of force, to liberate the colonial peoples and to
institute business-like co-operation between States irrespective of their social systems.

109. Problems connected with the strengthening of international security occupy an important place in the Soviet
Union’s policy. Guided by the principles of peace, goodneighbourliness and friendship between peoples, the Soviet
Union, in addition to submitting a proposal for convening
an all-European conference on questions of security, also
advanced the idea of establishing a system of collective
security in Asia, with equal participation by all countries of
that region and subject to the condition that such a system
should not be directed against any individual State.

103, The Soviet peace programme is aimed at eliminating
any hotbeds of war that still exist in the various regions of
the world and helping to foster the political settlement of
conflicts in those regions, on the basis of respect for the
le@imate rights of States and peoples that have been
subjected to or are threatened with aggression. It is based
on the thesis that any act of aggression and any arbitrary
action in international affairs should always be firmly
repulsed. In order to achieve this, it is essential to make full
use of the potential of the United Nations.

110. The Soviet Union proceeds from the premise that
any system of regional security that is in keeping with the
requirements of the Charter of the United Nations should
not serve the one-sided interests of any particular Powers or
narrow group of countries but should be based on respect
for the rights and interests of all States of the region,
irrespective of differences in their social and political
systems, and on co-operation between them without any
discrimination whatsoever.

104. The Soviet peace programme provides that the
renunciation of the use or threat of force, including of
course the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear
weapons, should become a norm of international life and
inter-State relations. We were very pleased to note that on
this important question of today’s world, the USSR
position is identical with the position held by the “third
World”
countries.

111, The Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, adopted at the twenty-fifth session of the
General Assembly [resolution
2734 (XXV)J at the initiative of the USSR, confirms and strengthens the principles
concerning relations among States; unless those principles
are strictly adhered to, it will be impossible to maintain
world peace and ensure international security. Now, when
the Security Council is considering the question of the
maintenance and strengthening of international peace and
security in Latin America, it is particularly satisfying to
observe that the countries of Latin America themselves
made a significant contribution to the preparation of that
Declaration and its adoption by the Assembly. We are also
deeply appreciative of the fact that it was at the initiative
of the Latin American countries that the Assembly adopted
the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force or by war, a principle which has now
become a norm of international law.

105. At its twenty-seventh session, the General Assembly,
in accordance with this position of the “third world”
countries on the question of the non-use of force and at the
initiative of the Soviet Union, adopted by a significant
majority a resolution in which the Assembly solemnly
declares on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations, their renunciation of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of
nuclear weapons [2936 (XXVII)J.
As L. I. Brezhnev,
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, said in his report on the
fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the Soviet Union,
that resolution was a major event in international life.
Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stressed that the Soviet Union was
willing, in implementation
of that resolution, to make
agreements and formulate appropriate mutual commitments with any nuclear Power on the non-use of force,
including the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons
against one another.

112. From the very first days of its existence the Soviet
State has been consistently and tirelessly struggling for
disarmament. In this matter we are guided by the precepts
of Lenin, V. I. Lenin, the founder and leader of the Soviet
State, said that disarmament is the ideal of socialism. Since
then the USSR has always been in the vanguard of the
struggle for disarmament, Over the last decade a number of
important treaties have been concluded on such matters as
the ban on nuclear weapon tests in three environments, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the prohibition of
bacteriological weapons, But this is only a modest beginning.

106. We are deeply convinced that renunciation of the use
of force in international relations and the permanent
prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons are in the interest
of both large and small States and their peoples, irrespective
of their social system, the size of their territory or
population, or their military strength.
107. During the discussion of this item in the General
Assembly, a significant majority of States Members also
supported the proposal that the Security Council should
take appropriate measures as soon as possible for the full
implementation of this solemn declaration by the Assembly. It is therefore essential for the Council to take a
decision requiring all States to be guided in their international relations by this declaration.

113. In an attempt to stimulate more vigorous action in
the struggle to halt the arms race covering weapons of every
kind, the Soviet Government proposed at the twenty-sixth
session of the General Assembly that a World Disarmament
Conference should be convened. That proposal, which is
13

completely in agreement with the decisions taken at a
number of conferences of the non-aligned countries, from
the Cairo conference to the Georgetown conference, was
supported by the overwhelming majority of States Members
of the United Nations. At the twenty-seventh sessionof the
General Assembly a resolution [2930 (XXVV)] establishing
a Special Committee to make preparations for convening
the Conference was adopted. That resolution must be
implemented. The Committee should begin its work. It is
essential to overcome the opposition and resistance of those
who voted in favour of the resolution or abstained, but are
now interfering with the preparations for the convening of
this most important international conference, which was
called for by 105 States at the twenty-seventh session of
the General Assembly.
114. Today’s improvements in the international situation
offer particularly favourable opportunities for the start of
preparations for the World Disarmament Conference. The
holding of such a conference will, in turn, promote the
further normalization of international relations and will
reduce and halt the arms race, which is devouring over
$220,000 million every year.
115. The position taken by the Soviet Union in calling for
the elimination of foreign military bases is well known.
After the creation of the United Nations, the Soviet Union
was the first to propose the removal of all military bases
established in foreign territory.
116. The Soviet Union’s relations with the Latin American
countries, like its relations with the other countries of the
world, are based on the principles formulated by Lenin, the
founder and leader of the Soviet State. These principles are
equality, respect for territorial integrity, non-interference in
internal affairs and the development of mutually advantageous co-operation,

resources. It would seem that this should long ago have
turned the continent into one of the most highly developed
and flourishing regions of the world. Many wonder how it
can be that the economic development of the Latin
American countries, which have such vast natural resources,
still is not so high as it should be. They correctly conclude
that the main reason for the situation is that the countries
of Latin America have been fettered by the international
imperialist monopolies which exploit their natural resources,
derive vast profits and leave almost nothing for the
economic and social development of the countries at whose
expense they are prospering.
120. In this connexion it is appropriate to recall the
brilliant statement made at the twenty-seventh session of
the United Nations General Assembly last year-r by
Mr. Allende, President of the Republic of Chile. I-Ie said
that the profits of the international monopolies operating
in Chile amounted in some years to over 200 per cent and
that they derived thousands of millions of dollars in profits
from the exploitation of the copper deposits alone, to the
detriment of the country’s economic and social deveiop
ment.
121. It is therefore perfectly natural that the Latin
American peoples should aspire to become masters of their
own countries and their own wealth, The growing liberationist trends against domination by the international
imperialist monopolies have been the mainspring of events
in this part of the world in recent years.
122. We of the Soviet Union can well understand these
legitimate aspirations. In October 1917 our country won
liberation from the Tzarist regime and also from domination by foreign capital. The Soviet Union supports the just
claims of the countries of Latin America in matters relating
to the defence of their national sovereignty over their
natural resources. In accordance with this position df
principle, the USSR delegation supports and will vote in
favor of draft resolution S/10932 on this question, submitted today by the Panamanian, Peruvian and Yugolav
delegations,

117. Next year will mark 50 years-a half-century-since
the first occasion when the Soviet Union, acting on the
basis of these very principles, established international
relations of equality and mutual advantage with a Latin
American country. That country was Mexico, whose
President, Mr. Echeverria, will, as you know, visit the
Soviet Union in the very near future, Fraternal friendship
and co-operation between the Soviet Union and the
Republic of Cuba is being successfully developed and
consolidated. We are also developing relations and co-operation with Chile, Peru and other Latin American countries
which have demonstrated a desire for co-operation with the
Soviet Union. The President of Chile recently made an
official visit to our country.

123, The United Nations has taken many decisions recognizing the sovereign right of every country to dispose of its
natural resources and its wealth for the benefit of its
people. However, as soon as a start is made towards
implementing this sovereign right in a developing country,
that country immediately becomes the target and victim of
threats and pressuresfrom international monopoliess Nowadays this policy of coercion, whose purpose is to prevent
the developing countries from implementing their legitimate sovereign rights, is being pursued in a more sophisticated and, one might say, more insidious way. Such
countries are subjected to economic and financial blockade,
credit is denied them, and the terms of their already
disadvantageous trade are made even harsher.

118. True to the Leninist principles of peace, freedom and
the independence of peoples, the Soviet Union always
supports
the just claims made by the countries of Latin
America to defend and strengthen their national sovereignty, including those relating to the question of their
sovereign rights over natural resources. During the present
debate in the Council almost all the representatives of the
countries of Latin America have touched upon this problem
in their statements,

124. The economic and social measures that any country
takes to recover control of its national wealth in order to
ensure its economic and political independence are, of

119. The Latin American continent is one of the richest
regions of the world from the point of view of natural

ing.

4 Ibid,, Twenty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings, 2096th meet.

14

course, completely legitimate and just and consistent with
the Charter and many decisions of the United Nations. It is
therefore the duty of the United Nations to promote by
every means at its disposal the strengthening of the national
sovereignty and independence of States.
125. We strongly condemn the imperialistic practice of
reprisals designed to prolong the exploitation and oppression of the peoples of developing countries.
126. The Soviet Union firmly opposes any attempt to
exert pressure, direct or indirect, on States whose peoples
have won by a hard struggle their right to independent
development and are building their national economy,
making progressive social and economic changes and defending their sovereign right to control of their own natural
resources. In that connexion, it is clear to everyone that the
policy of pressuring, blockading and isolating the Republic
of Cuba is a flagrant violation of the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

131. Our approach to this important international problem is honest, open and principled, We do not wish to be
hypocritical and give the Latin American countries and
their peoples false impressions, unlike some others whose
words support an agreement for a nuclear-free zone but
who in deed have invented pretexts for not becoming a
party to it. Unlike some others, we do not want to close
our eyes to the truth and overlook the fact that one major
nuclear Power-and I mean one, not two, and I emphasize
this for the benefit of those who like to speculate on the
contrived expression “one or two major Powers”-1 repeat,
one major Power still retains the option to transport
nuclear weapons in Latin America and has many military
basesat its disposal there.
132. Turning the territory of the Latin American countries into a zone which is completely free from nuclear
weapons would undoubtedly be an important factor in
strengthening peace and international security on the Latin
American continent and throughout the world. The efforts
of the Latin American States to keep their territory forever
free from nuclear weapons therefore deserve all possible
support. This is completely in keeping with the spirit and
the letter of the resolution taken at the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, at the initiative of the
Soviet Union, concerning the non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of
nuclear weapons.

127. Imperialism and colonialism have long been condemned by the world community and by history. They are
considered intolerable in the modern world. Nevertheless,
instances of colonialism and neo-colonialism still exist in
Latin America. In the interest of world peace and in the
interest of the peoples of Latin America, this imperialist
policy should be condemned by the Security Council. A
number of representatives from Latin American countries
have, in their statements in the Council, raised specific
questions about colonial territories in Latin America, in
respect of which the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples should be
implemented, In this connexion, the United Nations must
take steps to ensure that the method of negotiation
concerning the problems of colonial territories in Latin
America is not used to maintain and prolong what is in
essence colonial and neo-colonial domination or to delay
the resolution of the colonial problem.

133. As everyone knows, the Soviet Government has
declared its willingness to undertake to respect the status of
Mexico as a zone completely free from nuclear weapons, in
the expectation that other nuclear Powers will make similar
commitments.
134. If other Latin American countries do in fact make
their territory into zones completely free from nuclear
weapons, the Soviet Union will be ready to accept the
status of those countries as nuclear-free zones. And, of
course, the transit or transport of nuclear weapons through
the territory of States which are members of the zone must
be prohibited, as must nuclear explosions for peaceful
purposes as well, if they are contrary to the provisions of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
However, an agreement on a nuclear-free zone should not
be extended to the limitless expanses of the open sea in the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

128. A number of statements in the Security Council have
touched upon the question of a nuclear-free zone in Latin
America, and the USSR delegation wishes to make the
following comments in that connexion.
129. For many years now the Soviet Union has been
supporting the establishment of nuclear-free zones in
various parts of the world. We proceed from the premise
that the establishment of nuclear-free zones should effectively and genuinely restrict the scope of, and the opportunities for, the installation of nuclear weapons and should
fully meet the need for prohibiting their direct or indirect
proliferation. Commitments to establish nuclear-free zones
may be undertaken not only by groups of States covering
whole continents or large geographical areas but also by
smaller groups of States and even by individual countries.

135. The Soviet Union reserves the right to review its
commitment to observe the status of nuclear-free zones if
any State with regard to which the Soviet Union has
accepted such a commitment should commit aggression or
become party to aggression.
136. The USSR delegation has listened with great care to
the convincing statement made by Mr. Torrijos, the distinguished head of Government of Panama, in which he
raised the question of Panama’s sovereignty over the
Panama Canal [1695th meeting]. Surely no one can deny
the extraordinary importance of this problem to Panama,
whose Government has frequently called it to the attention
of the United Nations.

130. As everyone knows, the Soviet Union favours the
noble idea of establishing a nuclear-free zone in Latin
America, provided, of course, that it is a zone which is
really free from nuclear weapons and does not entail any
reservations in writing or any tacit loop-holes for violation
of its nuclear-free status.

137. The Council has heard the statements and comments
of many representatives of Latin American countries
15

concerning the Panama Canal. The Council cannot disregard
the fact that the just proposals made by Panama on this
question have, as the debate in the Council has shown, won
the broad support of Latin American States and aroused
sympathy and understanding throughout the world. First of
all, it was noteworthy that not one of the ministers for
foreign affairs or other representatives of Latin American
countries who have spoken here has questioned the fact
that the Panama Canal and the Canaf Zone are Panamanian
territory. They have unanimously held that sovereignty
over the Canal and the Canal Zone belongs to the Republic
of Panama.

142. The basic purpose of the United Nations, as has been
said before, is the one stated in Article 1, paragraph 1)of
the Charter of the United Nations, namely: “To maintain
international peace and security”. In order to do this, the
United Nations must be firm in repulsing aggression and
effective in establishing co-operation between all countries
irrespective of their size or their level of econonlic
development.
143. The United Nations can achieve significant successes
if its Member States will regard it as a centre for
harmonizing their actions in the attainment of c~n~m~n
ends, as is their obligation under the Charter.

138. The geographical position of Panama made it possible
to construct in its territory a navigable canal linking the
two oceans by the shortest possible route, and that position
is a most important, if not the most important, natural
resource of Panama. We therefore support the aspiration of
the people and Government of Panama to re-establish their
sovereignty over this natural resource and to use it for the
benefit of the people and the development of the country.
We also support the aspiration of the Government of
Panama to restore the country’s territorial integrity. No
people could acquiesce in an unnatural situation in which
the territory of its country is cut in two by a strip of
territory held by another State. The Canal Zone, which
from a geographical, political, and economic and social
point of view belongs to the Republic of Panama, is an
inalienable part of its national territory. The restoration of
Panama’s sovereignty over this zone is one of the inescapable and fundamental factors in the development of the
Panamanian nation and in the elimination of this focus of
constant tension in the Americas.

144. The positive trends in the relaxation of international
tension, which have been growing stronger recently, have a
beneficial influence on relations between States in various
parts of the world and prompt us to fresh efforts in [be
search for a settlement of current international problems.
14.5. The continent of Latin America must not be left out
of these beneficial trends. The actions of the Security
Council should be directed towards ensuring that lllr
favourable effects of the relaxation of international tension
should extend to this part of the world as well. Confrontation and the use or threat of force should give way here, as
elsewhere, to a policy of peaceful coexistence, respect for
the legitimate rights of people and renunciation of the use
of force in international relations.
146. The holding in Panama, on the Latin American
continent, of a session of the Security Council, the organ of
the United Nations on which the Charter confers primary
responsibility for the maintenance of internationai peace
and security, should make a positive contribution to lhe
establishment of new, peaceful and constructive relations
between States, in keeping with the needs of our time.

139. At the same time, the Panama Canal is an important
inter-oceanic route of worldwide importance, the use of
which-without detriment to the legitimate sovereign rights
and interests of Panama, of course-must be effectively
based on the principle of the freedom of international
shipping and must serve the interests of the peoples of the
entire world.

147. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanishj: In
accordance with the decision already taken by the Council,
I invite Mr. Talib El-Shibib, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations, who has
expressed the wish to address the Council on behalf of the
League, to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

140. Only a realistic and responsible approach, based on
respect for the sovereign rights of Panama and the interests
of international shipping, can lead to a solution of the
problem of the Panama Canal in keeping with the interests
of world peace and the establishment of healthy and
normal relations between States.

148, Mr. EL-SHIBIB: Mr. President, allow me first to
thank you and the members of the Security Council for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council in the
name of the League of Arab States, whose eighteen
members are represented in the United Nations.

141. In view of this, and in view of the fact that the
Government of Panama has brought this problem before
the Security Council, the USSR delegation feels that it
must speak in support of a settlement of the Panama Canal
problem that would ensure respect for the effective
sovereignty and complete jurisdiction of Panama over all of
its territory and also guarantee freedom of international
shipping. The Soviet delegation supports the draft resolution concerning the Panama Canal submitted by the
Panamanian and Peruvian delegations (S/l 09311, which
calls for abrogation of ,the Isthmian Canal Covention of
1903 and also proposes a number of principles for an
equitable and just solution of the problem, The Soviet
delegation will vote in favour of this draft resolution,

149. I should also like to express our gratitude to the
Government and the people of Panama-and
to you
personally, Sir-for their initiative and their generous
hospitality which made it possible for the Council to hold
these meetings here.
1.50. The representatives of the Arab States to the Uniled
Nations had previously considered the holding of the
present meetings in Panama City and decided unanimously
to have a wide Arab participation in them as an expression
of Arab support for the peoples of Latin America and their
just causes.The presence-in addition to the presence of the
6

156. This meeting has strengthened our belief in the
community of interests between the many small countries
of the so-called third world. Their bitter experience of
injustice and ruthless exploitation by imperial Powers
makes it imperative that they should unite in a common
cause. These small nations may be separate from one
another by name and distance, but the Ills they have
suffered come from the very same evil source.

representative of Sudan-of the representatives of Algeria,
Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya and myself here in Panama is a
token of Arab solidarity with the people of Panama and
those of the Latin American continent.
151. The relations which bind the Arabs and the Latin
American peoples are part of the long history which began

with the Arab presence in Spain, Over the years since the
discovery of the New World thousands of people from all
parts of the Arab world have come to this continent to live
as loyal citizens of the respective Latin American States
within which they were assimilated, thus further strengthening the bonds of understanding and co-operation between
the old and new countries.

157. When our experiences in the past have been identical
and when we still bear the terrible marks of colonialism and
foreign exploitation and domination, it is only natural and
logical that we should unite in the struggle for the
eradication of the ills which have so cruelly plagued our
peoples for so long.

152. When we listened to the opening statement made by
General Oman Torrijos [I695th meeting], our one reaction
as Arabs was that, with few changes of geographic names,
he could well have been speaking for us, pleading and
arguing brilliantly on our behalf, General Torrijos would
not have needed a change of name for that purpose. Omar
is the illustrious name of a great leader in Arab history and
is revered throughout the world of Islam. Indeed, the world
at large remembers him to this day for what may have been
one of his greatest acts, namely, the magnanimity, justice
and tolerance he displayed towards Jerusalem and the
freedom of worship in that Holy City. To this day
Jerusalem, with its Dome of the Rock and the Mosque of
Omar, bears witness to the wisdom, the humanity and,
above all, the humility of an Arab named Omar.

1.58. The Arab Group expresses once again its full solidarity with the people of Latin America and hopes that this
present series of meetings of the Security Council will make
a decisive contribution to the cause of peace, justice and
true self-determination for the people of Latin America.
159. Let us all hope, Mr. President, that, as we have been
enriched by the experience of being among the valiant,
generous and warm people of your country and listening to
so many distinguished leaders of your great continent, our
deliberations will contribute towards the security, progress
and prosperity of this great Latin American continent I
160, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Canada, Mr. Saul Rae. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

153. These meetings of the Security Council are devoted
to the problems of Latin America, and this is rightly SO. It
is also highly appropriate that the place chosen for the first
meetings of the Council in Latin America should be
Panama. The special geographic position of Panama as a
link between the two Americas reminds us of a similarity
with the position of the Arab world which spans the
crossroads between the continents of Asia, Africa and
Europe.

161. Mr, RAE (Canada): I appreciate the privilege of
making a brief statement before the Council today.
162, As the Permanent Representative of Canada to the
United Nations, I would like first of all to thank, in the
warmest possible terms, our hosts, the Government of
Panama, both for the warmth and cordiality of the
reception given to us and for the splendid arrangements
made at these meetings. We also note the important
substantive declarations which the Government of Panama
has made during these special meetings of the Council.

154. All have previously noted with approval the fact that
these meetings are devoted to Latin American issues. We
therefore have neither the wish nor the inclination to infuse
them with other issues, urgent and important though they
are. Indeed, we wish to take this opportunity so that the
Arab voice will rise from this Latin American capital firm
and sincere in reciprocity for the support the Arab causeis
increasingly receiving from the progressive States of Latin
America. However, I have to note with gratitude that two
representatives-those of Guinea and the USSR-have
drawn the attention of the members of the Council to the
situation in the Middle East and to the fact of the
colonization of Arab territory by Israeli military occupation and the disposition of 2 million of our people from
their birthrights,

163. The agenda before the Council is of deep interest to
the Canadian Government: “Consideration of measures for
the maintenance and strengthening of international peace
and security in Latin America in conformity with the
provisions and principles of the Charter”. We are deeply
interested in the Council’s discussions for two main
reasons: as a Member of the United Nations, with a long
and demonstrated interest in international peace and
security; and as a North American nation which has steadily
been developing closer links with the countries of Latin
America, bilaterally and through the inter-American regional system.

1.55. Listening to the distinguished Latin American speakers, one after another, brilliantly and passionately voicing
the aspirations of the people of this great continent and
defending their iust causes. we were reminded once again
that the cause df progress,-freedom and world peace is an
indivisible entity.

164, Let me expand very briefly on this second point
because, although they go back a good many years, our
relations with the countries of Latin America have been
intensified in substantial ways over the past few years. I
have had the privilege of seeing something of these
1’7

important developments at first hand as Ambassador to
Mexico and Guatemala, and at meetings of the InterAmerican Development Bank in Guatemala and in Punta
de1 Este, and of the Inter-American Economic and Social
Council in Port of Spain, and here in Panama in 1971.

economic base of the participating countries, and the
regions concerned, but contribute to the general expansion
of world trade.

165. Canada maintains diplomatic links with every country ih the area, and through these bilateral ties our
knowledge of the aspirations of the Governments and
peoples concerned has grown steadily and reciprocally as
these countries have come to know us better.
166. At the regional level, the process of more active
participation by Canada began, in recent years, with the
visit of Canadian Ministers in 1968 to nine countries of the
region, as part of a general study of ways to make more
effective and meaningful our relations with the countries
and peoples of Latin America.

171. I might note here that we have enjoyed over many
years close relationships, in many fields, with the countries
of the Commonwealth Caribbean Governments whose
representatives have spoken with such distinction here.
These countries, each of them determined to grasp the
opportunities of international development for the economic and social progress of its prople, have,launched the
Caribbean Free Trade Association. It is worth observing
that the Association is only one, albeit perhaps the most
important, of several forward-looking initiatives in regional
co-operation now under way in the Caribbean area,
172. We have heard a number of significant references to
the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the prohibition of mrclear
weapons in Latin America. My Government, with its long
and sustained interest in disarmament in all its phases,
warmly welcomes this Treaty and has given it full support,
both in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
and in the General Assembly of the United Nations, We
have also urged-and continue to urge-the full implementation of its provisions and Additional Protocols by all
the States concerned.

167. Among the many major decisions which ensued I
shall mention only two. The first decision is related to the
field of development assistance and co-operation. Many
speakers who preceded me stressed, as one of the themes of
these meetings, the basic relationship which exists between
development and international peace and security, Canadians fully recognize this basic relationship.
I68. In the area of development assistance and co-operation over a number of years, in addition to our participation in the programmes of the United Nations and the
World Bank, a portion of the Canadian overseas develop
ment effort has been channelled to countries in Latin
America through the Inter-American Development Bank. In
1974 an agreement was entered into with the Bank
whereby it would administer on behalf of Canada a
programme of long-term concessional loans for capital,
technical and educational projects. This was supplemented
by closer measures of co-operation on long-term financing
between the Export Development Corporation of Canada
and the Inter-American Development Bank for use in
economic development projects in Latin America, Finally,
in May 1972 Canada became a full member of the
Inter.American Development Bank, Our own national
experience in the northern part of our common hemisphere
in solving problems of infrastructure, communications, and
technology may prove helpful in the solution of similar
problems in the southern part of the hemisphere.
169. The second step which my Government has taken is
to establish a Permanent Observer Mission, at ambassadorial
level, at the headquarters of the Organization of American
States. This has already given us a better insight into the
workings of this important regional system, and the needs
and hopes of all those who participate in it, In addition, we
are now full members of eight inter-American organizations
which operate in areas where we share common interests
with our Latin American partners or where we felt that
Canada was in a position to make a distinctive contribution.
170. I shotrId add that Canada follows with interest and
approval the progress being made in the field of economic
integration and development in Latin America. These
developments, carried out in accordance with recognized
trade negotiation principles, can not only strengthen the

173. The question of the Panama Canal has been to the
fore of the issues subsumed in the agenda before the
Council. We have followed with the closest attention and
interest the statements made by the representatives of
Panama, and the various statements made by Foreign
Ministers and other Government representatives in the
course of this session. Reviewing developments since the
first Convention 70 years ago, in 1903, it is clear that, as
the poet said, the old order changeth, yielding place to new.
We for our part extend our good wishes to the two parties
directly involved-to Panama and to the United States-in
their continued efforts to find new and mutually agreed
solutions through direct negotiations. A successful outcome
will be of the greatest importance to the two Governments
and peoples concerned and to the world community which
depends on this indispensable route from sea to sea.
174. We in Canada have experienced a long history of
consultations and negotiations with our neighbours across
land and sea frontiers on many matters where vital interests
were concerned. We well recognize, therefore, the need
both to maintain and to enhance the principle and the
practice of national integrity both to maintain and to
enhance the principle and the practice of national integrity
and independence, and to derive on the basis of the free
co-operation of sovereign States the full benefits of fruitful
international co-operation. It is our hope that the Council
as a principal organ of the United Nations, with special
responsibilities in the field of international peace and
security, will act in such a way as to foster and encourage a
climate in which this process of negotiation can move
forward.
[The speaker continued in Spanish.]

175. Mr. President, allow me to say a few words very
briefly to conclude in another of the languages of the
Council, the language of your most beautiful country.
18

176. Another important point which will emphasize the
interest of the Government of Canada in your deliberations
is the visit of the Canadian ministerial mission to several
Latin American countries during the months of October
and November 1968, as part of the policy of the Government of Canada to carry out a general review of our
relations with the countries of Latin America. When our
Prime Minister, Mr. Trudeau, for the first time outlined his
plans to carry out a study of our present foreign policy, he
expressedhimself as follows:

181. It is high time that the international community
showed itself more realistic than idealist. Let us recognize
that detente and peace are a necessary good for the
harmonious development of all peoples. Thus the crises and
confrontations of today’s world, wherever they may occur,
are of conern to us all, for it is the survival of mankind that
is at stake. Nevertheless, it must be recognized that in its
present manifestations the process of detente still seems to
be geographically limited.
182. The third world is now aware that real independence
is an indissoluble whole made up of political, economic and
cultural factors. International peace and security are
intimately linked with the concomitant problems of development. International co-operation, which the international
community promotes with all its strength, can be harmoniously fostered only in a climate of peace and security,
and only when social inequalities, racial discrimination,
colonial domination and economic aggression have been
finally eliminated.

“We have to take more into account the ties which
unite us to other nations on this continent-with the
Caribbean and Latin America-and also take greater
account of the economic and social needs. We must find
new forms to expand and strengthen our political,
economic and cultural relations with Latin America.”
177. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): At
its 1699th meeting, held this morning, the Security Council
decided to extend an invitation to Mr. Mamadou Diarra,
Executive Secretary of the Organization of African Unity,
under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. Pursuant to that decision, and with the consent of
the Council, I now invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

183. Unfortunately, we must note, not without bitterness
and regret, that nothing shows more clearly the limits of
the dialogue between the great Powers than the way in
which the problems of Africa are avoided. The problems of
Africa are well known to the Council; so I will not
expatiate on them here. Suffice it to recall that in southern
Africa pseudo-governments organized into systems of tyranny, harassment and racism refuse to recognize the
fundamental principles of human equality and the right to
self-determination and are inexorably creating one of the
most exprosive situations in that part of the continent.
Notwithstanding the pertinent resolutions of the Council,
we all know that there is a continuing ample flow of foreign
capital into southern Africa, that certain countries are
providing arms to the Governments of South Africa,
Rhodesia and Portugal, while others, though condemning
those practices in words, are in other respects aiding those
Governments by maintaining a flourishing trade with them.
Thus the international community is standing idly by while
there is an intensification of racism in that part of Africa,
where the machinery of oppression is being strengthened
daily over the majority of the population, which is
inhumanly exploited and despoiled of its rights. This
system of oppression now entrenched in southern Africa
rests on the unholy alliance of white fascist minorities that
have been elevated into theoretically independent regimes
which, enjoying the assistance of their rich allies, profit on
the blood and the poverty of the black man. In these
circumstances the peoples of the region have no choice left
but armed struggle in order to recover their rights.

178. Mr.

Mamadou DIARRA
(interpretation
from
First of all, on behalf of all Africa, may I thank
you, Mr. President, and all the members of the Security
Council for allowing me to take part in this debate. I should
also like to take this opportunity of conveying to the
Government and the valiant people of Panama my sincere
gratitude for the warm welcome and the generous hospitality I have been shown since my arrival in your charming
capital.
French):

179. Last year, in Addis Ababa, Africa had the honour to
be host to the first series of meetings of this Council held
away from Headquarters. The Council’s debates at that
time gave its members an opportunity to acquaint themselves closely with the complex and various problems of
concern to the States of that region, Today it is to Panama,
in Latin America-Panama that links the Pacific Ocean and
the Atlantic Ocean, which bathes the coasts of Africa-that
the honour falls to be host to this special series of meetings
of the Council.
180. The Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, Mr. Nzo Ekaganki, and the African Group in the
United Nations, which it is my honour to represent at these
meetings, sincerely welcome this visit of the Council to
Panama, in a continent which is bound to Africa in a
common destiny by special and fraternal bonds going back
to the beginnings of history. So it is in this dual capacity as
plenipotentiary that I am charged to convey to you,
Mr. President, and through you to all Latin America, the
warm congratulations of the Organization of African Unity,
the testimony of its active and continuing solidarity and its
moral support. These sentiments unquestionably reflect
eloquently the unity of action, the common fighting front
traditionally established between Asia, Latin America and
Africa for the purposes of meeting the legitimate aspirations of their peoples for freedom, justice, social equality
and prosperity in a world of peace.

184. In any event, faced with the escalation of the illegal
Rhodesian Government of Ian Smith and the stubborn
refusal of the racist Government of the Republic of South
Africa to withdraw from the international Territory of
Namibia, faced with the system of apartheid practised by
that same Government on the nonwhite populations, faced
with the challenge to the international community from
Portugal, supported by its NATO allies, and, lastly, faced
with the persistent occupation by Israel of territories
conquered by force, the Organization of African Unity,
which for 10 years has spared no diplomatic effort to bring
about a peaceful and just settlement of the situations
19

just referred to, is now firmly resolved to do its duty to the
end vis-a-vis the populations that are victims of this
anachronism of our time. The entire world, the United
Nations and all men who love peace, justice and freedom
are in duty bound to aid the Organization of African Unity
in applying the decisions that flow from the principles of
equality and human dignity to which all States Members of
the United Nations have subscribed.

and self-improvement. We admire that people, but, d~h?
our admiration, we would view it sympathetically il urr
grave situation of extreme disadvantage in which P&;d J,
finds itself as a result of an anachronistic and burde?v I”*<,
treaty in regard to what is now called the Canal Zons wii?““*
changed substantially in accordance with present-da3 YE&
ties and justice.
1%. In recent years the very idea of the word cohkUf
has acquired a dimension which is pejorative, and +j?~~
nations insult others with that word, Today that same * ”
includes the sense of the oppression by some large coi-“‘: ‘I *“’
of other, smaller ones. With the emancipation ci “: ’
colonies of the north, the south and the centre. r! v*-’
emerged in America the concept of genuine nationalit? P: j
since then in the minds of the citizens of America a feel:%
of civic responsibility has been growing and, as a no’-‘!%
consequence, the claiming of rights which have &?*‘?
revoked in some parts of the region where anorna: :;,L:
situations persist, where sovereignty, territorial imeg:+
and the self-determination of peoples are jeopardises g:
well as the right to use their own natural resources F!*
responsibility and this concept are irreversible arid ‘2’”
strengthened from day to day as a mehtal attitude i” ” :A
process of self-improvement,

185. The speakers who have preceded me have sketched
for us in comprehensive and sometimes moving terms the
legitimate concerns of the people and Government of
Panama. We should like simply to reaffirm to the authorities of that country that their problems are our problems,
that their ways and means of finding equitable solutions to
them are also supported by Africa.
186. Once again we assure Latin America of our un.
equivocal support, and, in the sense of the development of
this fraternal co-operation, Africa looks to Latin America,
land of law and justice, for an even more committed and
dynamic solidarity, in the interests of the legitimate
aspirations of the peoples of our two continents.
187, I hope the members of the Council will permit me to
wish it, on behalf of the Organization of African Unity, all
successin its work and to urge them to bring to bear the
full weight of their conscience on behalf of justice and
peace, so that, beyond simple declarations of principle,
there may be adopted effective and appropriate resolutions
for solving the problems of this part of the Latin American
continent which are before it.

195. The doctrine of modern public internation+! :#J”
proclaims the equality of States, whether they are 1
small, This doctrine, which has a wealth of beauti
noble concepts, of just declarations of enormous ti;‘f*”
national legal scope, including the prohibition of the w .’
force as a means of settling disputes between SO~F~~@”
States, is, unfortunately, with, unusual frequency vi;ic~&~::~~.
by powerful peoples to the detriment of weak pc-$““”
which deserve a better fate and better treatment I

188. That is the messageit is my honour to convey to the
members of the Council on behalf of the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity and the African
Group in the United Nations.

196. Panama, a brotherly country, has ‘maintained slrb,:: 1”
emancipation from Colombia, since before the inkursn ::‘.
on the 1903 Convention, a tenacious struggle to reinre$ .a/
into its territory that which has always belonged to ir >A:~~..
which legally is, has been and will be its property. Hon.2 #YL
has always been in solidarity with just and noble c~~~~F
and the demands of Panama are just and noble in regard ‘:
the signing of a new treaty whereby the two ccui”?r’?:
concerned-the United States and Panama-would rcg:*,.;; :
their relations in a fitting manner in accord wi@: 1’2:
postulates of law and with what the civilization of ~YB zii;:quarter of the twentieth century requires.

189. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Honduras, Mr. Silva Argtiello, whom I invite to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
190. Mr. SILVA ARGUELLO (Honduras) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr, President, I wish to express my gratitude to you and through you to the other members of the
Security Council for the invitation extended to me to
participate in this important debate of the Council.

197. It has been held that the Security Council shr:?:~;:‘; *I:’
seized only of conflicts which lead to states of WPT 3
institutions of law develop, and diplomacy can IX PI,
exception, The concept of preventive diplomacy is
ground, not only in the minds of jurists, but among
and Governments. It is more imperative to prevezr ‘::I:
possibility of armed conflict than to apply or to ster
apply a cure to a conflict which is already in flames Y?Y
situation in the so-called Canal Zone has already &x-xF.,
many victims; many have died because of their fervep : 1 h-*
for their country, in a desperate effort to transform a flp&<“,;:
which is patently removed from the legal realities ii?r ‘. (,’
times.

191, I wish to convey the warmest greetings of the people
and Government of Honduras to the people and Government of Panama.
192. My country, which is small like Panama, after
obtaining independence from Spain in 1821, itself experienced the despair of seeing part of its territory occupied
by two Powers, I am referring to the Bahia islands, which
were once occupied by the United Kingdom, and Swan or
Santillana island, which was recently returned by the
United States to the full sovereignty of Honduras,
193. My Government and my people maintain close and
cordial relations with the people and Government of the
United States, whose people is an example of hard work

198. Panama opened up its territory to give the w-c?% i:
inter-oceanic route for the benefit of all ships ~3% 2;
20

peoples of the world, and it is not fair that for this reason it

204. The Security Council meetings in Panama must
consider this situation which has created and still leads to
tension and conflict among the States of the region, and
which could well become a threat to peace and security. In
the exercise of the powers vested in it to prevent future
conflicts, the Security Council should consider the situation
and adopt the most suitable decision to maintain and
strengthen international peace and security in the region,
Any coercive measure that one State would impose on
another, or on various States, spells a violation of the basic
principles of the Charter; but when such coercive action is
directed against peoples struggling against underdevelopment it only increases and aggravates the hunger
and misery of those peoples. Therefore, this grave damage
must ceaseimmediately.

should be suffering, in its very heart, an enclave of

tieo-colonialism.
199. Just as the leader of the Panamanian Revolution,
General Omar Torrijos, rightly said in this forum, quoting
tire famous words of the great Mexican Benito JuBrez,
“Respect for another’s right is peace”. We want our rights
to be respected; we want to have the rights of all States
respected, asth.e only way to have peaceful coexistence and
as the only way to preserve world peace. This respect must
be reciprocal, among all countries, whether of the East or
of the West, In the present case, the Panama Canal, I must
recognize that without jurisdiction there is no sovereignty.
200. In conclusion, the Government of my country,

205. The delegations of Panama, Peru and Yugoslavia,
which sponsored this draft resolution, and the countries of
Latin America and the third world, which, one way or the
other, have condemned international coercion in whatever
form it may take, are awaiting the Security Council’s action
on this draft resolution. The sponsors, Latin America and
the third world all consider that in drawing the attention of
the Council to this matter and requesting it to adopt the
necessary measures, we are contributing positively to the
achievement of the purposes of the Charter and to the
successful outcome of these meetings. Obviously, the
sponsors are very grateful for the announcement of support
that was made by the representative of the Soviet Union
regarding this draft resolution.

through me, expresses its wish that the Governments of

both countries-the United States and Panama-will find a
just, worthy and fair formula that will reconcile the
interests of both States.
201. General DE LA FLOR VALLE (Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): In the course of the debate taking place in
the Security Council, which is now holding meetings in this
city, we have been clearly aware of the fact that one of the
sources of serious concern over the future of peace and
security on the continent is the persistence of measures
intended to break the sovereign will of States and to affect
their decisions. A number of Foreign Ministers and representatives of Latin America and other regions have referred
to this situation and have unequivocally asked that an end
be put to the existence and application of coercive
measures against States of the region.

206. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
Before adjourning the meeting, however, I have the honour
to read out a message from Mr. Mario Gibson Barboza,
Minister for External Relations of Brazil, to Mr. Juan
Antonio Tack, Foreign Minister of Panama. It reads as
follows:

202. That being the case, on behalf of Panama, Peru and
Yugoslavia I have the honour to submit the draft resolution
contained in document S/10932/Rev.l,
in which the
Security Council would urge that an end be put to the use
of any type of coercive measures that might affect the
sovereignty of the States of Latin America. The continued
existence of these types of coercion damages and erodes the
principles of peace and co-operation among States and
undermines the efforts to strengthen peace and security in
the region.

“I should like to express my congratulations on the
initiative of your Government in promoting, for the first
time on Latin American soil, meetings of the Security
Council, the organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are following with
great interest the work of the Council under your
enlightened leadership, and I extend my best wishes for
successful results. Brazil, which has always defended the
ideals of peace, concord and solidarity in the hemisphere,
as well as the resort to peaceful means in settling
international disputes, hopes that satisfactory and just
solutions will be found to the difficulties that led to the
present meetings of the Council, to which, together with
our Latin American brothers, we gave our support from
the very beginning.”

203. The draft submitted here recalls many fundamental
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly which categorically proclaim the indisputable principle of permanent
sovereignty of States over their natural resources, and also
requests other States to abstain from utilizing any form of
coercion, of a political, economic or other nature, so that
no country will be hampered in the free exercise of its
sovereignty and jurisdiction over its natural resources,
servicesand assets.

The meeting roseat 7p.m.

21

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributon
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informer,-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
A : Nations
Unies, Section dea ventes, New York ou Geneve.
RAE

IIOJIY’fHTh

HB~AHUH

OPI’AHMBA~HH

OWbEANHEHHhIX

HAIWH

M3jqaHm
Opranu~aqwu
06zegknennbrx
HaquR MOXHO xyna~b
a KHWXW~~X Mar&%nrax
n arer-rrc’raax
80 ncex patioliax
huipa, HaBogwTe
cnpaakn
06 we~anwax
B
RameM KnmxrioM
Maraanne
ifIIi4 nmnnTe no nnpecy:
Opranusaqua
06~e~mremrhrX
HaqwR,
Cenunsr no nponame
woganug, Hbm-Piopx
WIIA XCenesa.
COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

73-82081-April

1976-1,925:
