90

General Aleemhl;r-'lldrtieth SeHion

(g) The right to intellectual freedoms, as provided
for in article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, shall be guaranteed;
3. Deplores the refusal of the Chilean authorities to
allow the Ad Hoe Working Group to visit the country,
notwithstanding previous solemn assurances given by
the authorities in this regard, and urges them to honour
these assurances;
4. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to extend the mandate of ,the Ad Hoe Working Group, as
presently constituted, to enable it to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-third session on
the situation of human rights in Chile and, in particular, on any developments which occur to re-establish
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Requests the President of the thirtieth session of
the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to
assist in any way they may deem appropriate in the
re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3449 (XXX). Measures to ensure the human
righ18 and dignity of all migrant workers
The General Assembly,
Considering the Convention on Diplomatic Relations24 and ,the Convention on Consular Relations,211
Considering also its resolution 2920 (XXVII) of
15 November 1972 on the exploitation of labour
through illicit and clandestine trafficking,
Recalling its resolution 3224 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974 on measures to improve the situation of migrant workers,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1749 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which the Council affirmed the need for the United Nations to continue examining the situation of migrant workers,
taking into account economic, political, social and
cultural factors with respect to human rights and
dignity,
Noting with satisfaction the awareness of the international community of this problem and the necessity to
protect the human rights of migrant workers,
Noting with satisfaction the work being undertaken
by the specialized agencies in the field of migrant
workers,
Taking into consideration the urgent need carefully
to examine the problem of migrant workers who surreptitiously enter another country to obtain work,
1. Calls upon the United Nations organs active in
the ,field of human rights to continue devoting their
attention to this question;

2. Requests the United Nations organs and the specialized agencies concerned to ut~ in all official
documents the term "non-documented or irregular
-migrant workers" to define those workers that illegally
and/ or surreptitiously enter another country to obtain
work;
24 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. SOO, No. 7310, p. 95.
25 Jbid., vol. ·S96, No. 8638, p. 261.

3. Appeals to the Governments of Member States
to remind their competent administrative authorities of
their obligation to respect ,the human rights of all
migrant workers, including those that are non-documented or irregular;
4. Urges the Governments of Member States to
grant all facilities and help to diplomatic and consular
agents accredited in their countries so that they can
fulfil their functions in relation to the protection and
defence of the human rights of migrant workers, including those that are non-documented or irregular.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3450 (XXX).

Missing persons in Cyprua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974,
Noting resolution 4 (XXXI) adopted by the Commission on Human Rights on 13 February 1975,26
Gravely concerned about the fate of a considerable
number of Cypriots who are missing as a result of armed
conflict in Cyprus,
Appreciating the work of the Initemational Committee of the Red Cross in this ,field,
Reaffirming the basic human need of families in
Cyprus to be informed about missing relatives,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to exert every
effort, in close co-operation with the · International
Committee of the Red Cross, to assist in tracing
and accounting for persons missing as a result of armed
conflict in Cyprus;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-second
session with information relevant to the implementation of the present resolution.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3451 (XXX). Alternative approachea and ways
and means within the United Natiom syatem
for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3,136 (XXVID) of 14 December 1973 and 3221 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974,
Considering that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights27 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocol theret<>27 will soon enter into force,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on alternative approaches and ways
and means within the United Nations system for improving the effective enioyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms; 28
2. Urges Member States that have not already done
so to submit their views to the Secretary-General in
accordance with paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 3221 (XXIX);
26 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-eighth ~ession, Supplement No. 4 (B/5635), chap. xxm.
21 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
28 A/10235.

Reeola.tions adopted on the reporte of the Third Committee

91

3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
further replies from Member States and non-governmental organizations in consultative sitatus with the
Economic and Social Council and of the views expressed during the proceedings of_ the thirtieth sess!on
of the General Assembly, to submit an updated version
of his report to the Assembly at its thirty-second
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the status of the international conventions in
the field of human rights for which he acts as depositary;
5. Decides to consider with high priority at its
thirty-second session the question of a1temative approaches and ways_ and _means withi~. the. United
Nations system for 1mprovmg the effecttve enJoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

him for an act he has committed or is suspected of having
committed, or intimidating him or other persons. It does not
include pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions to the extent consistent . with
the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. 31
2. Torture constitutes an aggravated and deliberate form of
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

3452 (XXX). Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment

Each State shall, in accordance with the provisions of this
Declaration, take effective measures to prevent torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
from being practised within its jurisdiction.

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles
proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal ~d
inalienable rights of all members of the human family
is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world,
Considering that these rights derive from the inherent dignity of the human person,
Considering also the obligation of States under the
Charter, in particular Article 55, to promote universal
respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Having regard to article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights29 and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 30 both
of which provide that no one may be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
Adopts the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, as a guideline for all States and other entities
exercising effective power.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

ARTICLE 5
The training of law enforcement personnel and of other
public officials who may be responsible for persons deprived
of therr liberty shall ensure that full account is taken of the
prohibition against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. This prohibition shall also,
where appropriate, be included in such general rules or instructions as are issued in regard to the duties and functions of
anyone who may be involved in the custody or treatment of
such persons.

ARTICLE 2

Any act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment is an offence to human dignity and
shall be condemned as a denial of the purposes of the Oiarter
of the United Nations and as a violation of the human rights
and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
ARTICLE 3

No State may permit or tolerate torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Exceptional
circumstances such as a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency may not
be invoked as a justification of torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment.
ARTICLE 4

ANNEX
Declaration on the Protection of All Per11on11 from Being
Subjected to Tortu.re and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degradinc Treatment or Punishment
1
1. For the purpose of this Declaration, torture means any
act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or
mental, is intentionally inflicted by or at the instiption of a
public official on a person for such purposes as obta.ining from
him or a third person information or confession, punishing
ARTICLE

20 Resolution 217 A (III).
80 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

ARTICLE 6

Each State shall keep under systematic review interrogation
methods and practices as well as arrangements for the custody
and treatment of persons deprived of their liberty in its tenitory, with a view to preventing any cases of torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
ARTICLE 7

Each State shall ensure that a.11 acts of torture as defined in
article 1 are offences under its criminal law. The same shall
apply in regard to acts which constitute participation in, complicity in, incitement to or an attempt to commit torture.
ARTICLE 8°

Any person who alleges that he has been subjected to torture
or other cruel, ,inhuman or degrading treatment or puuiahment by or at the instigation of a public official shall have the
right to complain to, and to have his c.ase impartially examined by, the competent authorities of the State concerned.
ARTICLE 9

Wherever there is reasonable ground to believe that an act
of torture as defined in article 1 has been committed, the competent authorities of the State concerned shall promptly proc:eed
to an impartial investigation even if there has been no formal
complaint.
ARTICLE 10

If an investigation under artide 8 or article 9 establishes that

an act of torture as defined in article 1 appears to have been
committed, criminal proceedinss sba1t be instituted qainst
the alleged offender or offooders in accordance with national
law. If an allegation of other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is considered to be well
founded, the alleged offender or offenders shall be subject to
criminal. disciplinary or other appropriate proc:eedin,s.
3 1 First Uriitc·d N11tions C1>ngrr.rs on tit• PHw,efiolt of Crlltw
e1n,I tlie Trratmrnt of 06rndrrs: rrporl 61 tit• ~
(United Nl\tions publication, Sales No. J956JV.4), annex I.A.
