S/PV.7852

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7852

nd meeting
Friday, 23 December 2016, 11.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/1057)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-46234 (E)
*1646234*

S/PV.7852

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

war, we end 2016 with hundreds of thousands of Syrian
civilians — 700,000 to be precise — still trapped in
besieged locations, while humanitarians continue to
struggle to gain access for aid delivery.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258
(2015) (S/2016/1057)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Responsive Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council Members to
document S/2016/1057, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: I am providing this update to the
Security Council today on behalf of Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien.
As we meet today, the evacuation of the eastern
districts of Aleppo may have concluded, but the situation
in Syria remains catastrophic. Some 13.5 million people
within Syria are in dire need of humanitarian assistance,
including nearly 9 million who are food insecure.
This year has been marked by horrific suffering and
the loss of so many lives in a conflict characterized by ever
increasing inhumanity against the civilian population.
Attacks on civilian infrastructure — including schools,
medical facilities, settlements for the internally
displaced and public markets — have destroyed
institutions otherwise relied upon by Syrians for food,
shelter, education and medical care. At least 126 attacks
have been recorded against medical facilities this year,
more than 770 medical personnel have been killed
during the conflict and one in four schools has ceased
to function, with some 2 million children out of school.
Despite calls for an end to besiegement as a tactic of
2/7

23/12/2016

The conflict in Syria has recently been most
devastating in Aleppo, where the near-complete
destruction of large parts of the city has subjected its
civilian population to unspeakable horror. The United
Nations welcomed the adoption of resolution 2328
(2016) earlier this week, in the hope that it would
finally ensure that civilians in Aleppo were afforded all
necessary protection and assistance. The United Nations
role in Aleppo and in supporting the evacuation of the
city has four main elements: to observe the evacuation
itself, support the evacuees once they have left, seek
access to the retaken areas of eastern Aleppo in order
to provide assistance in those remaining in those areas,
and continue with the ongoing humanitarian operations
to support those across the remainder of the city.
The operation to evacuate people from the eastern
districts of Aleppo drew to a close late last night.
Overall, more than 35,000 people were evacuated,
including some 20,000 people since the adoption of
resolution 2328 (2016). Those evacuated included
civilians and fighters and their families. Some 734
people were medically evacuated by ambulances,
according to the World Health Organization.
To achieve this, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
(SARC) were in the lead, working to ensure people
wanting to leave could do so. Overall, 308 buses, 61
ambulances and 1,231 private vehicles were used in
the evacuation, crossing numerous checkpoints from
besieged eastern Aleppo through the western part of
the city and into western rural Aleppo and onwards
to Idlib. In parallel, an estimated 1,300 people were
evacuated from the besieged villages of Fo’ah and
Kafraya, in Idlib.
Due to lack of approval by the Government of
Syria, the United Nations team did not have access to
eastern Aleppo in recent months, but since 15 December
undertook a monitoring and observation function there.
It was stationed around the clock close to the Ramouseh
checkpoint in the Government-controlled part of
Aleppo. Additional United Nations staff were sent from
Damascus in support. In accordance with resolution
2328 (2016), the United Nations team observed the
evacuation of buses and ambulances and, to the extent
16-46234

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

possible, monitored whether anyone was forcibly
disembarked, detained or otherwise mistreated as they
crossed through the checkpoint area.
The ICRC and SARC teams were present
directly at the evacuation point and accompanied
the convoys as they crossed each of the checkpoints.
Further, humanitarian organizations were present
on the non-State armed group side to receive those
evacuated to ensure they received essential assistance.
The evacuation operation was an extremely complex
undertaking and was punctuated by frustrating stops
and starts due to negotiations between the relevant
parties, which were setting the terms and conditions for
the evacuations, including insisting on synchronizing
evacuations from eastern Aleppo and from besieged
Fo’ah and Kafraya.
Once evacuated from the besieged area, civilians
had the option to go where they wished. The
overwhelming majority went to non-State armed-group
areas. Two reception centres, in Al-Atarib, in Aleppo,
and Sarmada, in Idlib, were set up to receive those
evacuated, and information centres in Orem Al-Kubra
and Kafr Naha continue to provide basic services and
details about additional humanitarian support. While
the majority opted initially to go to reception sites,
many have subsequently moved on to be hosted by
family and friends.
Humanitarian organizations have recorded the
arrival of 23,615 people to the reception centres and
to more than 60 villages. Approximately a thousand
people were reported to have arrived in the camps
along the Turkish border. Meanwhile a small number
of those evacuated also chose to go to Government
areas in western Aleppo city. Those evacuated from
Fo’ah and Kefraya were initially moved to internallydisplaced-person reception centres in Aleppo city;
while some have stayed in Aleppo, others have moved
on to sites prepared by the Government in Tartous,
Homs and Latakia. The United Nations teams in Homs
and Tartous have been providing humanitarian support.
Humanitarian needs among the evacuees arriving
in reception centres have been acute. The evacuees are a
displaced population that has endured months with little
access to food, medical care or other essential items.
Many of them have been physically and psychologically
traumatized by the deprivation and bombardment that
they have endured. Children are particularly badly
affected. Families have been separated throughout the

S/PV.7852

evacuation movement, and there have been reports of
at least 75 children being separated from their families
or otherwise unaccompanied upon their departure from
eastern Aleppo. Multiple cases of moderate and severe
malnutrition have also been reported.
The evacuation process itself was difficult and
many times dangerous. A number of security incidents
were reported during the evacuations. The United
Nations received credible reports of non-Syrian allied
forces in western Aleppo stopping a bus of 800 people
on 16 December, detaining and beating 10 people
and reportedly killing one person. Further, 20 buses
were reportedly attacked and burned on 18 December
by a non-State armed group while en route to the
evacuation site. Other protection issues were reported,
including people stranded in buses in harsh security
and weather conditions, prevention of evacuations of
some civilians by non-State armed groups, sporadic
cases of detention of people at checkpoints, and illtreatment and harassment of some people as they were
being evacuated.
The United Nations and its partners mobilized a
comprehensive response to make sure that evacuees
have basic essentials. Over 30 partner non-governmental
organizations are on the ground in Idlib. Evacuees at
the reception areas are provided basic services to meet
immediate needs, including food, winterized shelter and
non-food items, and hygiene and sanitation products.
Medical and psychosocial services are also available.
Health partners are serving the reception centres
and neighbouring villages through 22 mobile clinics.
Specialized services are also available for individuals
with specific needs, including women and girls, and
children separated from their families or otherwise
unaccompanied. Some 95 serious medical cases have
been transferred to Turkey. The humanitarian teams
on the ground will continue to scale up the response,
as necessary, to ensure urgent and life-saving needs
are met.
I would like to update and notify the Council of the
arrangements undertaken pursuant to paragraph 7 of
resolution 2328 (2016). While supporting the evacuation
process was our immediate priority, the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator in Syria has also submitted
a formal written request to the Government of Syria
seeking a blanket travel authorization to Aleppo
for all United Nations senior staff in country and
humanitarian access to parts of Aleppo retaken by the
Government yesterday.

16-462343/7

S/PV.7852

The situation in the Middle East

There are currently 105 United Nations staff
members in Aleppo. Of these, 34 have been fully
dedicated to monitoring evacuations from eastern
Aleppo within the framework of resolution 2328 (2016),
while the remaining staff have been carrying out their
humanitarian response duties throughout the rest of the
city. As part of the ongoing surge support to Aleppo,
the United Nations is also requesting agreement from
the Government of Syria to surge up to a hundred
additional staff, including 30 international staff, to
strengthen monitoring and response in eastern Aleppo.
Under the auspices of resolution 2328 (2016), we
are ready to implement a plan for all districts of eastern
Aleppo in the coming days, as soon as we receive
agreement from the Syrian Government to deploy. To
date, the United Nations and its partners have been able
to access nearly all formerly besieged neighbourhoods of
eastern Aleppo except those retaken by the Government
of Syria as of yesterday. A team of 16 United Nations
staff, along with four armoured vehicles, are on standby
to deploy to these last inaccessible areas, as soon as
Government permission is granted.
For all areas formerly besieged, in the first
phase, assessments will be conducted of the number
of civilians in these areas, their needs and the status
of civilian infrastructure, including housing, food,
medical care and other essential services. Medical
teams are on standby to evacuate all remaining critical
medical cases, and life-saving items are available for
those in urgent need.
In the second phase, the United Nations and
partners will launch a comprehensive multisectoral
response, in conjunction with partners and other
relevant institutions, as well as the deployment of
additional surge staff as needed. This comprehensive
response will include emergency assistance to
residents, including shelter rehabilitation, solid waste
and debris removal, livelihood support and, as soon as
possible, rehabilitation of basic services. Throughout,
United Nations teams would be on the ground in the
neighbourhoods as much as possible to monitor and
observe the situation and ensure the well-being of
civilians, but all of this is subject to the consent of
and coordination with the Syrian Government, which
is pending.
I take this opportunity to pay particular tribute
to the heroic staff of the ICRC and the SARC, and
the non-governmental organizations and United
4/7

23/12/2016

Nations colleagues working diligently on providing
a life-saving response. To all who have been on the
frontline of this evacuation operation, we salute their
courage, persistence and sacrifice. They inspire us with
their basic humanity, which we should all share.
I turn now to areas outside of Aleppo, where the
humanitarian situation is dreadful. In neighbouring
Idlib governorate, the towns of Fo’ah and Kafraya
remain besieged by non-State armed opposition groups
that otherwise control the vast majority of the territory.
As part of the agreement reached about the evacuation
of Aleppo, evacuations in those towns are scheduled to
resume on a tit-for-tat basis with Madaya and Zabadani
in the coming days. As we have seen with the attack on
the buses going to Fo’ah earlier last week, protection
concerns are very high for the residents of the enclave.
There are also broader concerns that the civilian
population in Idlib is at risk of suffering the same fate
as those in Aleppo if it becomes the focus of a new
and more intense offensive. Of the currently estimated
population of approximately 2 million people, 700,000
of whom are internally displaced persons, including
35,000 from eastern Aleppo this month, the United
Nations and it partners currently access vulnerable
communities through its cross-border work out of
Gaziantep and support approximately 700,000 people
each month with food, and some 340,000 with medical
treatments. Some 230,000 are provided with water and
sanitation assistance each month.
In Al-Wa’er, a besieged neighbourhood on the
outskirts of Homs city, the situation also remains of
critical concern. Immediate humanitarian intervention
is required to prevent the besieged neighbourhood,
which hosts an estimated 50,000 civilians, from facing
acute shortages of basic and lifesaving items. There
is a collapse already of the limited medical services.
Food stocks are running out as we speak and, since
26 November, medical evacuations have reportedly not
been permitted. Two critical cases identified by the
United Nations, one involving a pregnant woman, are
in need of urgent evacuation.
We also continue to follow with concern the
anti-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
operations occurring around Al-Bab and Raqqa. The
reported intensification of fighting from 8 December
around ISIL-controlled Al-Bab town, including through
airstrikes, is expected to result in further displacement.
Preparations are ongoing in the surrounding areas to
16-46234

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

receive potential internally displaced persons from the
town, while United Nations partners continue to support
the 10,000 internally displaced persons displaced by
earlier fighting. In Raqqa the primary concern is the
lack of humanitarian access and protection services.
Reports indicate that people are in need of health
services and food. In that regard, United Nations access
to Hasakeh is a major concern, depending on a costly
air bridge from Damascus.
ISIL advances in Palmyra and nearby areas in
eastern Homs are also of major concern, resulting in the
displacement of thousands of people to Homs city and
surrounding areas. We again commend SARC and other
partners for providing assistance to those displaced in
such difficult circumstances.
I am pleased to report that there has been some
improvement of the situation at the berm along
the Syrian-Jordanian border. On 22 November, the
United Nations and its partners resumed lifesaving
humanitarian assistance at the berm through a newly
constructed distribution point negotiated in September.
The latest figures for the distribution of food and
non-food items are 8,404 households compromising
31,094 individuals in Rukban. In addition, distributions
started in Hadalat, and a new service facility, including
a health clinic has been completed, enabling the
delivery of health assistance. The water infrastructure
is projected to be completed by January 2017.
As has been noted in the Council in the past, the
United Nations and its partners reach some 6 million
people in need every month through all modalities
available. Cross-line inter-agency operations to
besieged, hard-to-reach and other priority locations
are a particularly vital lifeline for civilians in those
vulnerable communities. Nearly 1.3 million people have
been reached this year in those locations multiple times.
Alhough we continue to operate in an environment of
acute humanitarian need, we are hindered by persistent
obstacles in delivering much-needed assistance. For
cross-line inter-agency convoys, ongoing insecurity
in many areas and administrative delays on the part
of Syrian Government in the approval of facilitation
letters and convoy plans continue to hamper our efforts.
What was reduced to a two-step approval process
earlier this year has gone back again to being a 10-step
process. We have secured agreement from the Syrian
Government for only one cross-line convoy so far this
month, reaching 6,000 people. That is despite receiving

S/PV.7852

initial approvals to reach almost 800,000 people in
December. We need timely approvals and simplified
approval procedures. We have immediate capacity to
deliver to 300,000 people in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas per week, should we be given the access by the
parties to the conflict.
We end 2016 at a place where humanitarian and
protection needs are as acute and severe as they have
ever been amid continued fighting across the country.
Despite all the challenges, the United Nations, the
ICRC, SARC and our other key humanitarian partners,
though their heroic staff on the ground, continue to try
to reach every Syrian in need. However, collectively we
are falling unforgivably short in our responsibility at
the global level to support them. I therefore call upon all
Members of the Council and all parties to the conflict
and their allies to redouble their efforts to end this
conflict and in the meantime provide more effective
support to humanitarian action for the innocent victims
of this conflict.
As has been stated so many times, there is no
humanitarian solution to this crisis. We welcome
the announcement by United Nations Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura on the resumption of political talks
in February. As the number of those dying, becoming
displaced and suffering continues to rise, as we end
2016 a new political commitment to peace will be
needed if 2017 is to offer any different prospect than
the death and destruction of the past five years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of all
the members of the Security Council, I should like to
thank Mr. Ging for his comprehensive briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statements.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Mr. Ging and his team for his briefing.
As this is New Zealand’s last opportunity to address
the humanitarian situation in Syria, we wanted to make
a few remarks in the open Chamber.
Over the past two years, New Zealand has worked
with the Security Council to try to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We were honoured
to work with our co-leads Jordan and Spain last year,
and with Egypt and Spain this year. We secured some
modest achievements, most notably the two annual
renewals of the humanitarian access resolutions first
pioneered by Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg.

16-462345/7

S/PV.7852

The situation in the Middle East

In Council terms, those resolutions and resolution
2286 (2016), on attacks on healthcare facilities and
workers, were important achievements, especially
when viewed against a background of near paralysis in
the Council on the political track on Syria. However,
in terms of real-world impacts, what has been achieved
under those resolutions is a tiny fraction of what has been
needed to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
During our term we witnessed some deeply
disturbing trends: systematic attacks on hospitals and
on medical and humanitarian workers; obstruction of
food and essential supplies to civilian populations as a
tactic of war; use of indiscriminate weapons with zero
regard for civilians; and use of chemicals as weapons.
These tactics of war undermine the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law and should concern
us all.
The need to address Syria’s humanitarian crisis
should be something on which all Council members
can agree; and for, the most part, that has been the
case. However, as we saw graphically last month, when
humanitarian objectives do not square with the warfighting aims of those with decision-making powers on
the Council, the humanitarian objectives are the ones
that are pushed aside, which is not how international
humanitarian law is supposed to work.
Last month’s vetoes of the simple draft resolution
that New Zealand put forward with Egypt and Spain was
but the latest example of an attitude that has troubled
New Zealand deeply during our time on the Council:
that is, the apparent indifference of a number of Council
members to human suffering, even on a large scale.
While that has been most apparent in the case of Syria,
in connection with which a series of vetoes has been
cast over the past five years, it is equally apparent in
the Council’s actions and its inability to take effective
action with respect to the crises in Yemen, South Sudan
and the Sudan.
We welcome the recent adoption of the resolutions
allowing the United Nations to observe evacuations in
Aleppo and the renewal of cross-border and cross-line
humanitarian access. The Council’s priority must be to
address persistent efforts by the Syrian Government to
prevent the full and effective implementation of those
resolutions, which we have witnessed with depressing
regularity over the past two years. As Mr. Ging has
reminded us, we must now ensure the protection of the
civilians fleeing eastern Aleppo, Fo’ah and Kefraya. In
6/7

23/12/2016

the longer term, we must ensure that the protection of
civilians is prioritized throughout Syria and in the many
other towns and communities that remain besieged or
undergoing bombardment.
We welcome the determination others have shown
in recent weeks to act when the Council will not.
We hope that the resolution adopted in the General
Assembly this week can lay the ground work for action
to bring justice for the victims of this conflict. We also
welcome the board of inquiry findings on the attack
on the United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy in Orem Al-Kubra. The information that the
attack was highly likely perpetrated by the Syrian air
force is deeply disturbing, as was the obstruction and
delay by the Syrian Government in issuing visas to the
investigators. We hope that the Council will be able to
unite in welcoming that report and in condemning all
attacks on humanitarian workers.
We pay tribute to the dedication and commitment of
many, including United Nations Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura, to achieve peace in Syria, to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and to UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien and Mr. Ging and
their teams for their unwavering dedication and efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to those in need and to
the courage and sacrifice of humanitarian agencies and
workers in Syria and to the generosity of neighbouring
countries in sheltering the millions of Syrian refugees.
We also thank our fellow humanitarian co-leads over
the past two years — Spain, Egypt and Jordan — for
their generous collaboration and their determination to
help improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.
While the provision of humanitarian assistance is
vital, it is only treating the symptoms of the conflict.
External actors must set aside vested interests and
narrow allegiances and prioritize action to end the
conflict and promote genuine reconciliation. As we
all know, only a political resolution with meaningful
reconciliation and genuine political and security sector
reform can provide a lasting peace to the civilians of
Syria.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I understand that this is the final statement
of my colleague from New Zealand in the Security
Council, and I do not want to spoil his swan song.
However just for protocol, just for the record, we do
not agree with a number of the arguments he put forth.
What is particularly unacceptable is the conflation he
16-46234

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

made between the veto and his comment that someone
is pursuing military goals without thinking about
humanitarian consequences. If he is hinting at Russia,
that is not the case.
We have just heard about a very complex operation
in Aleppo to evacuate civilians, so I want to assure
the representative of New Zealand that humanitarian
consequences are of extreme concern to us when it
comes to any planning in Syria.

S/PV.7852

Another even more important problem that the
representative of New Zealand did not mention is the
fact that terror organizations are used to achieve foreign
policy objectives. That is the real problem that, again
and again, the Security Council needs to be address.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

16-462347/7
