S/2011/760

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 December 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 7 December 2011 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached letter dated 2 December 2011 from the
Deputy Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Mr. Claudio
Bisogniero, transmitting a report on the International Security Assistance Force
operations in Afghanistan covering the period from 1 August to 31 October 2011 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-62760 (E) 151211

*1162760*

S/2011/760

Annex
Letter dated 2 December 2011 from the Deputy Secretary General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 2011 (2011),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force in
Afghanistan covering the period from August 2011 to October 2011 (see enclosure).
I would appreciate your making the report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Claudio Bisogniero

2

11-62760

S/2011/760

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report, pursuant to the request under Security Council resolutions
1386 (2001) and 2011 (2011), informs the United Nations on the progress of the
mission of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), covering the period
from 1 August to 31 October 2011. As at 18 October 2011, total ISAF strength stood
at 130,638 personnel provided by all 28 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
nations and 21 non-NATO nations. In September 2011, El Salvador became the
forty-ninth troop-contributing nation and operational partner to ISAF. NATO and
ISAF invite additional United Nations Member States to support this United
Nations-mandated mission by providing mentors and trainers for the Afghan
National Security Forces and to increase their support for the civilian sectors of
governance and development.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF continued to assist the Government of
Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. From 1 August
2011 to 31 October 2011, ISAF suffered 1,968 casualties, including 152 killed in
action, 1,803 wounded in action and 13 non-battle-related deaths.
3.
During the reporting period, the number of partnered and Afghan-led
operations continued to increase, with the Afghan National Security Forces
becoming increasingly capable of responding to complex and high-profile attacks.
The security incidents during the quarter were marked by the assassination of the
Chairman of the High Peace Council, Professor Rabbani, on 20 September. Despite
progress in the south and south-west, security incidents in the east have increased
significantly this year, with this quarter being no exception. This quarter also saw a
huge increase in improvised explosive device activity compared with last year, but a
significant decrease in complex and coordinated attacks compared with the same
period in 2010. Joint ISAF-Afghan forces have continued to maintain military
pressure through partnered operations, and the insurgency has avoided decisive
engagement in order to preserve their forces.
4.

Additional noteworthy events for the reporting period are as follows:

(a) During this quarter, security in the seven tranche 1 areas that began
transition has been maintained in large part owing to the continued expansion and
increasing effectiveness of the Afghan National Security Forces. However,
challenges do remain, and much will depend on the ability of the Government of
Afghanistan to deliver better governance to shore up security gains;
(b) On 25 August, President Hamid Karzai publicly backed the Independent
Election Commission’s decision to replace nine sitting parliamentarians. The
parliamentary election process was brought to a close this quarter, allowing the
Wolesi Jirga to begin executing its responsibilities;
(c) On 6 September, the NATO Senior Civilian Representative and the ISAF
Commander hosted a round table on Afghanistan’s economy, which was attended by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the World Bank,
the European Union, the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great

11-62760

3

S/2011/760

Britain and Northern Ireland and Germany. The meeting was focused mainly on the
challenges facing the domestic economy in light of the drawdown of ISAF through
2014;
(d) On 4 October, President Karzai and the Prime Minister of India,
Manmohan Singh, signed an agreement on strategic partnership between both
countries. The agreement covers trade, the economy, energy, education and security.
India also agreed to assist in the training and equipping of the Afghan National
Security Forces;
(e) On 10 October, the United Nations released a report on the mistreatment
of detainees in a number of facilities of the National Directorate of Security and the
Afghan National Police across Afghanistan. ISAF took immediate action and
suspended transfers of detainees to the facilities identified in the UNAMA report. It
also developed an improved framework for inspection, certification, training of
interrogators and long-term monitoring, which is being implemented at all the
facilities associated with the mistreatment of detainees. ISAF remains committed to
eliminating human rights violations in detainee operations and will continue to work
closely with the Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA on this issue;
(f) On 19 October, the Minister for Finance and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan co-hosted the first meeting of the Joint
Coordination Monitoring Board since November 2010. The meeting, inter alia,
restored the Kabul Process. This outcome is expected to contribute to the Bonn
Conference on 5 December 2011;
(g) On 29 October, a Joint Afghan-NATO Inteqal Board agreed on the areas
that should start the inteqal process as part of the second tranche, and on
27 November, President Karzai publicly announced those areas. Once
implementation of the second tranche begins, approximately half of Afghanistan’s
population will be living in transitioning areas. The Government of Afghanistan and
ISAF are preparing for implementation to begin in December 2011.
Security situation
5.
The inability of the insurgency to execute the guidance of the Taliban senior
leadership to increase operations during May, June and July and the failure by the
insurgents to resume activity following the end of Ramadan support the view that
the 2011 insurgent fighting season was effectively suppressed throughout many
parts of the country. High-profile attacks continued to increase nationwide and
remain focused at discrediting the ability of the Government of Afghanistan and the
Afghan National Security Forces to provide security. The latter has demonstrated an
increasing ability to respond to such security incidents, which is a positive sign for
the future security of the country. Areas in transition have remained largely
unchallenged by insurgent operations. Improvised explosive devices remain a
favourite weapon of the insurgency to avoid direct engagement with and limit the
freedom of movement of ISAF.
6.
Reintegration efforts continued throughout the reporting period with a focus
on expanding reintegration, especially in the south and south-west of Afghanistan,
in an attempt to capitalize on a growing trend of dissatisfaction among lower-level
insurgents. In early September, immediately following Ramadan, a Kandahar
Reintegration Conference was held with the strong support of ISAF in Kandahar

4

11-62760

S/2011/760

City. The Conference was aimed at initiating a reintegration surge in southern
Afghanistan by bringing provincial and national civil-military stakeholders together
to better synchronize security, reintegration and community recovery efforts. As the
needed structures are now in place, including the financial tools at the provincial
level, the governors were encouraged to be proactive in energizing outreach
initiatives in accordance with their responsibilities.
7.
On 20 September, the Chairman of the High Peace Council, Professor
Rabbani, was assassinated while welcoming an alleged former insurgent to
negotiations at his home. Despite the significant impact on the political scene, the
assassination is not likely to have a large impact on reintegration results, as most of
the work is accomplished at the provincial, district and local levels. This tragic
event has also affected the reconciliation process. Despite these events, donor
countries have renewed their commitment to support the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Programme, which is crucial for peaceful transition in Afghanistan.
As of the end of October 2011, the Programme had formally reintegrated more than
2,700 insurgents, up from around 400 at the end of July.
8.

Regionally, the security situation is as follows:

(a) Regional Command South-west. Afghan National Security Forces/ISAF
forces are extending the security bubble into the province’s northern and southern
districts. Central and northern Helmand and the Sangin and Kajaki districts have
experienced increased freedom of movement. Operations in southern Helmand are
disrupting the flow of insurgent fighters and supplies from Pakistan. The capability
of the Afghan Uniformed Police continues to improve, and many units are able to
operate without ISAF support. Overall incidents of violence continue a downward
trend and are lower than in the same period of the previous year;
(b) Regional Command South. Despite attempts by the insurgency to disrupt
Government of Afghanistan gains in Regional Command South, and specifically the
Kandahar area, efforts to improve governance and security have shown progress.
Afghan Taliban will maintain the south as a focus area, but a decreasing trend in
violence during the reporting period has demonstrated their inability to rebound to
levels previously seen in the area over their critical fighting season. ISAF operations
have continued to increase pressure upon the financial and logistical networks of the
insurgents, further limiting their capabilities. As a result, it is expected that focused
intimidation and assassinations will continue to grow in prominence since they
require fewer resources;
(c) Regional Command East. Violence has persisted at higher levels than
anticipated and has spread across the Regional Command owing to the geographical
diversity of the enemy. Supplies and fighters originating in Pakistan and transported
across the border enabled the insurgency in the region to maintain its operational
capability and high operational tempo. Operations of ISAF and the Afghan National
Security Forces, coupled with Afghan local security initiatives, are attempting to
interdict these supply routes and increasingly disrupt insurgent operations in the
region;
(d) Regional Command North. While some threats exist, Regional Command
North experiences relatively low levels of attack and is a largely secure environment
in comparison with the rest of Afghanistan. Local insurgents are capable of
conducting only occasional improvised explosive device attacks, harassing actions

11-62760

5

S/2011/760

and attempts at high-profile attacks, which are often aimed at minimizing Tajik
influence in the north;
(e) Regional Command West. A continuation of successful Afghan National
Security Forces and ISAF operations, increased effective targeting of insurgents and
local populace support are the main reasons for the decrease in security incidents
compared with same time frame last year. As a result, insurgents appear to be losing
their freedom of both movement and action, and are joining the reintegration
programme in increasing numbers;
(f) Regional Command Capital. Fewer security incidents throughout Kabul
City and Province were seen during the past quarter compared with the same time
frame last year. This is likely as a result of operations carried out from May through
August and successful cache-finding operations. Of note were a number of highprofile attacks within Kabul Province, where the Afghan National Security Forces
demonstrated a very capable response. During this period, insurgent attacks were
focused primarily on attempts to challenge the perceptions of improved security
under Afghan National Security Forces responsibility.
Afghan National Security Forces
9.
The Afghan National Security Forces continue to make progress in both size
and capacity as they prepare to assume the security lead and complete the transition
process in 2014. The October 2011 growth goal of 305,600 has been met, and the
Afghan National Security Forces remains on track to reach the October 2012 growth
target of 352,000. With the support and advice of ISAF, the Afghan National
Security Forces units are becoming increasingly capable in general and are
improving their ability to conduct autonomous operations. Efforts are being made to
establish proficient headquarters at the national and regional levels and to improve
planning and coordination capacities. Representation of women is also growing,
with currently around 1,500 of them serving in different positions across the Afghan
National Security Forces, including five female pilots in the Afghan Air Force.
10. The Afghan National Security Forces is progressively assuming more
responsibility for training their own forces. The establishment of training
institutions, which is close to completion, fosters the progressive professionalization
of the Afghan National Army and Afghan National Police within five focus areas:
training Afghan trainers and instructors; accelerating leader development; building
literacy and vocational skills; inculcating an ethos of stewardship; and developing
enduring institutions, systems and enablers. Trainers and advisers from the
international community are still needed to accelerate the professionalization of the
Afghan National Security Forces and to ensure their effectiveness and sustainability.
Afghan National Army
11. The Afghan National Army has grown to just over 173,000 soldiers and has
entered the last fielding phase, the goal of which is to reinforce the sustainability of
a more balanced professional force able to assume the security lead. To this end,
Combat Support and Combat Service Support units, as well as Corps and Brigade
troops, are being formed and trained. A more autonomous logistics branch continues
to be developed, including an Afghan National Army health system with emphasis
on management of medical quality. Furthermore, efforts are being made to finalize
the establishment of a complete training organization allowing the Afghan National

6

11-62760

S/2011/760

Army to professionalize the force by themselves. An Afghan National Army
Training Command was established to this end, and 12 branch schools permanently
work at full capacity with more than 20,000 trainees. The overall training level for
the army is increasing slowly but steadily.
12. Afghan National Army recruiting remains strong and ethnically balanced.
Rates of retention have exceeded objectives but are still challenged by high attrition
rates that generate additional recruitment and training costs. To address this
persistent issue, a comprehensive plan, including mid- and long-term solutions, has
been developed in partnership with Afghan leaders.
13. For operational Afghan National Army units in the field, there are several
areas which must see improvement, namely, leadership skills, high attrition, staff
planning, tactical coordination, and logistics.
Afghan Air Force
14. The development of the Afghan Air Force is under way, and in addition to
personnel recruitment and professionalization highlighted in previous reports,
infrastructure build up has made significant progress. Twenty-two new facilities
have been delivered in support of a self-sustaining force. Important investments are
foreseen to improve Afghan Air Force training institutions and infrastructure, which
are critical conditions for sound development and self-sustainability. Fifty-nine
aircraft are in service within the Afghan Air Force, including 42 helicopters. This
number will increase to 145 aircraft once the Air Force is fully fielded in 2016. The
strength of the Afghan Air Force has reached 4,900 personnel. International support
remains critical for development and training of the Afghan Air Force.
Afghan National Police
15. The current strength of the Afghan National Police is slightly higher than
139,000, with approximately 10,000 police officers assigned to various training
programmes. Greater emphasis is being put on professionalizing the Force. The
Afghan National Police Basic Course (now named the Initial Police Training
Course) has been extended from six weeks to eight in duration. All new recruits will
undergo the training, whether they enter as patrol officers, non-commissioned
officers or officers.
16. For the first time since the establishment of the Force in 2006, a new Afghan
National Civil Order Police brigade was formed. Furthermore, there have been
improvements with the special units of the General Directorate of Police. This force
most notably took on a significant role in successfully disrupting recent attacks in
Kabul City.
Institutional capacity
17. The security ministries, with the assistance of the NATO Training MissionAfghanistan and Combined Security Transition Command-Afghanistan, are
continuously working to develop their capability to generate and sustain the Afghan
National Security Forces.
18. The Ministry of Defence and the General Staff are assessed as requiring some
coalition assistance to accomplish their mission. Progress has been made in strategic
communications, defence budgeting, readiness reporting and the provision of

11-62760

7

S/2011/760

logistics support. Furthermore, during the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence
improved its capability, as demonstrated by the management of the implementation
of transition for tranche 1.
19. The Ministry of the Interior is currently assessed as requiring coalition
assistance and is expected to progress to requiring only some assistance by the end
of 2012. Four of eight regional logistics centres and one provincial supply point
have been built and are currently functioning, although the ability to fill civilian
positions is hampered by the lack of civil service pay and grade reform.
Private security companies/Afghan Public Protection Force
20. During the reporting period, the six-month assessment of progress was
completed, which concluded that the State-owned enterprise was not sufficiently
developed, nor was the Afghan Public Protection Force on track to make the
timelines to meet the requirements of the bridging strategy and Presidential Decree.
As a result, the ISAF Commander and the United States Ambassador approved the
development of a Joint Programme Executive Office, an essential precursor to the
development of the State-owned enterprise within the Ministry of the Interior. The
Joint Programme Executive Office will assist the Government of Afghanistan in the
transition of security services from private security companies to the Afghan Public
Protection Force and will assist the latter in building the necessary capacity to
provide uninterrupted security services throughout Afghanistan. A great deal of
planning activity is being undertaken to establish the Joint Programme Executive
Office to be at initial operating capability by 1 December 2011 with full operating
capability by 1 March 2012. Afghanistan Security Forces Funding has been
approved by the United States State Department and was to have been ratified by
Congress in mid-November. The President of Afghanistan was to have been briefed
on the concept of the Joint Programme Executive Office and progress to date on the
bridging strategy in late November.
Afghan Local Police
21. The Ministry of the Interior-led Afghan Local Police programme continues to
expand. As at 27 October 2011, 53 out of 99 Afghan Local Police districts had been
validated as operational by the Government of Afghanistan. The total number of
personnel is close to 8,500, further improving the security situation as well as public
perception of the Afghan Local Police. The programme has proven to be a
significant threat to the insurgency in key areas throughout Afghanistan. In
response, insurgents have engaged in intimidation campaigns and targeted
assassinations against members of the Afghan Local Police and their families. These
attacks have failed to intimidate local communities, with the Afghan Local Police
effectively protecting their villages against insurgent attacks.
Civilian casualties
22. The second quarterly ISAF conference on civilian casualties was held on
12 October. Civilian casualties, regardless of who causes them, continue to be of
significant concern to ISAF and the Government of Afghanistan. Minimizing the
number and scale of such incidents remains of critical importance for ISAF. Any
incident of civilian casualty is one too many. Moreover, the need to effectively
manage the consequences of such incidents when they do occur is considered as

8

11-62760

S/2011/760

vitally important, and there are a number of procedures in place to address the issues
resulting from civilian casualties as quickly and effectively as possible. Reporting
for this quarter indicates that the insurgents are responsible for causing
approximately 85 per cent of all civilian combat-related deaths and an even higher
percentage of overall civilian casualty-related incidents. However, insurgents can
still exploit and manipulate civilian casualty events to their advantage, since ISAF is
perceived to be accountable by the Afghan population for all incidents in which
casualties occur. The overall number of civilian casualties is down during the
reporting period. The number of civilian casualties caused by ISAF dropped by
27 per cent when compared with the previous reporting period, while those caused
by insurgents decreased by 20 per cent. ISAF efforts to reduce civilian casualties
and the disregard of the insurgents for the Afghan population with their
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices remain key messages.
Counter-narcotics
23. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2011 Afghanistan Opium
Survey showed that poppy cultivation had increased 7 per cent countrywide from
2010 to approximately 131,000 hectares, with 95 per cent of total cultivation taking
place in nine provinces in the southern and western regions. This increase is
predominantly in areas with a lack of security, governance and economic
development where farmers were attracted to the high opium prices as a result of
previous shortages of opium brought on by the 2010 poppy blight.
24. Within the limits of its mandate, NATO/ISAF continued to target the narco-trade
where there has been a clear connection with the insurgency. Partnered Afghan and
ISAF operations provided access to development and law enforcement efforts, which
have been aimed at providing viable and sustainable alternatives to illicit farming.
Observable trends (such as the situation in central Helmand) show that within the
ISAF-generated “security bubbles”, where the presence of the Afghan Government
was strong, poppy cultivation ceased almost entirely. Helmand Province, which is the
largest producer of opiates, registered a third successive year in poppy reduction, with
dramatic decreases in the Marjeh district, the area of focus for ISAF operations. The
extensive engagement of ISAF in Helmand therefore shows that sustainable changes
to the poppy economy can be achieved with coordinated and parallel improvements in
security, governance and rural development.
25. ISAF will continue to work closely with other international community actors
to support the Government of Afghanistan in its comprehensive national drug
control strategy while continuing to refine the understanding of the linkages
between the narcotics trade and the insurgency, as well as the confluence between
the narco-trade and corruption. Sustainable counter-narcotics gains in Afghanistan
are dependent on a holistic approach and long-term commitment.
Governance
26. Governance capacity in Afghanistan experienced marginal improvements over
the past quarter that included continued implementation of the transition process,
renewed progress to resolve the Kabul Bank crisis, and some resolution within the
Parliament over past election results. However, further development of governance
is needed to underpin the transition process, and international civilian support must
be provided to enable future growth, as follows:

11-62760

9

S/2011/760

(a) The Afghan Government continued to work jointly with NATO on the
implementation of tranche 1 areas of transition as well as the planning for tranche 2.
In all respects, this process has been systematic and deliberate and has been
increasingly supported by strong interaction among multiple Afghan ministries.
Thus far, the process of transition remains sound, and initial progress has been
positive. As expected, insurgents have attempted to destabilize the transition
process, but the Afghan Government has been resilient;
(b) The Afghan Government has made substantial progress in addressing the
Kabul Bank crisis during the reporting period. The major hurdles impeding a new
International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme were removed, including
parliamentary approval of the bill on the recapitalization of the Central Bank. A new
IMF programme is expected to be put in place during the next quarter. Some
structural reforms have been established and should assist in helping to prevent a
similar crisis in the future. This progress has restored donor confidence in the Kabul
Process;
(c) The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board held its first meeting in
almost a year, resulting in the endorsement of seven additional national priority
programmes. At least six more such programmes are expected to be endorsed during
the next quarter, marking a significant advancement in the Kabul Process;
(d) During the past quarter, the Wolesi Jirga finally began executing some of
its responsibilities in over a year since its members were elected by the Afghan
people. Regarding the election process, the Independent Election Commission
annulled the membership of nine deputies (not the 62 as heralded in the previous
quarter) and swore in nine new members of Parliament. The office of the NATO
Senior Civilian Representative is actively working with ISAF to remain engaged
with Parliament; this is a critical period, and it is essential that engagement be
conducted with the necessary degree of political sensitivity and respect for Afghan
sovereignty. Close cooperation with the wider international community, in particular
UNAMA, will be vital in this endeavour.
27. On the diplomatic front, President Karzai and the Afghan Government
participated in several regional conferences and increased the level of international
engagement. During the quarter, Afghanistan established its first strategic bilateral
partnership through a signed agreement with India. Negotiations continued between
the United States and Afghanistan towards a similar partnership. Relations between
Pakistan and Afghanistan during the reporting period were strained owing to issues
of cross-border shelling.
28. During the reporting period, a NATO Building Integrity programme team
visited Kabul (9-15 September) and had meetings with Minister of Defence Wardak,
Dr. Ghani (Special Adviser to the President) and a number of senior officers from
the Ministries of Defence and the Interior. The team discussed the Building Integrity
peer review reports (based on Building Integrity self-assessments conducted by both
Ministries) with senior ministry staff to gauge Afghan reaction to the reports and
identify appropriate courses of action. In meetings with the World Bank, European
Police Office, embassies based in Kabul, UNAMA and the United Nations
Development Programme, the team also increased awareness of the NATO Building
Integrity programme among stakeholders and encouraged international community
organizations and stakeholder countries to support the Building Integrity
programme. The visiting team was well received by the Afghans, who have taken a

10

11-62760

S/2011/760

series of measures to support the programme. The Building Integrity programme is a
valuable long-term element of the NATO Enduring Partnership with Afghanistan.
29. Although some progress has been made by the Government of Afghanistan in
addressing corruption within official structures, the situation in Afghanistan remains
highly challenging. The Government of Afghanistan addressed some high-profile
cases, such as one involving the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation being
forwarded to the High Office for Oversight of Anti-Corruption and the 17 Kabul
Bank-related cases being forwarded to the Attorney General’s Office. Recent
achievements in counter-corruption efforts have been encouraging in the areas
where the international community has an important role. The perception of the
Afghan population of corruption within the Government of Afghanistan and its
impact on their daily life is gradually changing. ISAF efforts are focused on
increasing the political will of Afghan leaders to address the problem by
demonstrating that both the country and their interests will benefit from their own
efforts. Through its anti-corruption dedicated structure, task force Shafafiyat
(transparency), the working relationship between ISAF and Afghan officials
improved significantly, as senior Afghan leaders now better understand and want to
participate in ISAF anti-corruption initiatives, especially within the Security
Ministries and the Judiciary. Gaining the sponsorship of President Karzai, Afghan
leaders have established on ISAF initiative high-level forums with the international
community to jointly address the issue of official corruption.
Provincial Reconstruction Teams evolution
30. During the reporting period, the NATO Senior Civilian Representative
suggested to the Provincial Reconstruction Teams contributing nations that they
submit draft evolution plans by mid-November 2011. The evolution plans will
ideally explain how the Provincial Reconstruction Teams concept will shift from
direct delivery to building capacity; what the anticipated end-state of the evolution
of the Provincial Reconstruction Teams will be as the province completes the
transition process; what critical functions the Provincial Reconstruction Teams are
currently providing; and which Afghan entities will assume those functions after the
Provincial Reconstruction Teams have been phased out.
Development
31. During the reporting period, the combined efforts of ISAF and the Afghan
National Security Forces created a favourable context to transition in several areas.
The improved security situation across the country allowed a number of
development projects to be implemented. There were notable improvements in
strategic infrastructures as well as in Afghan welfare owing to the improved security
conditions achieved by ISAF and the Afghan National Security Forces. Noteworthy
points from the reporting period include:
(a) The road network has continued to make progress. The rehabilitation
works at Salang Tunnel are projected to be completed before winter. However, the
East-West corridor and the last segment of road in the Helmand River upper valley
from the Kajaki dam to the Ring Road are still waiting for funding;
(b) In August 2011, the tender for the first phase of construction of the
Kamal Khan dam on the Helmand River was awarded. As the dam will have an
impact on the flow of water from the Helmand River into Iran, transnational water

11-62760

11

S/2011/760

agreements to facilitate its implementation as well as potential international
investments in other dam constructions in Afghanistan will be required;
(c) The development of Afghanistan’s rail system is critical to the country’s
economic expansion, particularly in the mining sector. An operations and
maintenance contract with the Uzbek Railway Company was signed, making the rail
line from Mazar-e-Sharif to Hairatan ready for operation. In addition, an ISAFenabled Rail Advisory Team was established in October 2011 to work closely with
the Government of Afghanistan, donors and the mining industry in supporting the
plans of the Government for railway development and its links into the wider
regional railway networks;
(d) Work is in progress for the first phase of the Kabul International Airport
transition plan, which will take into account training for Afghan staff working in
aeronautical-specific functions. This plan will serve as a reference basis for the
plans being developed by the aviation authorities in Kandahar, Mazar-e-Sharif and
Herat. In addition, the Multilateration System, which is currently being
implemented, will provide an increase in flight safety and efficiency. ISAF is
working with the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, and the aviation
authorities of the United States and Germany to develop the Afghan civil aviation
authority in order to tighten governance in this critical sector;
(e) The Afghan Government is looking to generate increased tax revenues by
introducing a value added tax on consumer goods in 2014 in order to offset
declining aid funding. This will be an important step in enabling the Government of
Afghanistan to leverage post-ISAF operations and maintenance costs for the Afghan
National Security Forces, the fiscal gap created by operational expenditures and the
impact on both human and financial capacities of the Government of Afghanistan to
continue and uphold its functions.
32. Simultaneous progress in security, governance, development, reconciliation
and regional cooperation, with a particular focus on Afghanistan, is necessary to
support the transition to the Afghan lead for security in 2014 and enable the Afghan
authorities to effectively assume responsibility for their country.

12

11-62760
