S/PV.7669

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7669th meeting

Tuesday, 12 April 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Letter dated 15 March 2016 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2016/254)
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (S/2016/297)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10267 (E)
*1610267*

S/PV.7669

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Letter dated 15 March 2016 from the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning
Côte d’Ivoire addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/254)
Special report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(S/2016/297)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under- Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/254, which contains a letter
dated 15 March 2016 from the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/297, containing the
special report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ladsous and by His Excellency
Mr. Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative of
Uruguay, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Council members
will recall that in its report last year (see S/2015/446),
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
indicated that the peacekeeping operations of recent
2/7

12/04/2016

years have tended to last longer than in the past and
that it is therefore all the more important to conclude
their various stages as soon as conditions allowed. It is
therefore my pleasure to present the special report of
the Secretary General of March 31 on the Côte D’Ivoire
(S/2016/297), in which he submits to the Council
his proposals with respect to the conclusion of the
peacekeeping phase in that country.
I welcome in particular the fact that since the
finalization of the report last month, the Government
of Côte D’Ivoire has continued to pursue reforms
allowing for the expansion of the political space and
the strengthening of unity and national cohesion. For
example, last week the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
adopted a bill on the status of the political opposition,
which the opposition had long called for. The bill
establishes the post of opposition leader with the rank
of Minister of State, sets the rules and procedures for
his or her designation, and — importantly — provides
public funding for political parties. The opposition
leader will be the candidate or the leader of the party or
political grouping that had come in second in the most
recent presidential election. In this case, that would
be Mr. Pascal Affi N’Guessan, leader of the Front
populaire ivoirien.
Meanwhile, discussions are under way to hold
a constitutional referendum towards the end of the
year for the adoption of a new constitution that
would better reflect the evolution of the sociopolitical context in Côte d’Ivoire over the past decade.
The amendments under consideration include the
question of the nationality of the candidates in the
presidential elections and the establishment of the
post of Vice-President. The Independent Electoral
Commission, for its part, has established a committee
to review the redistricting proposals called for by
the political parties of the opposition in view of the
upcoming parliamentary elections.
Although the security situation is more or less
stable, there are still several weak points, such as those
highlighted in the special report that has been submitted
to the Council today, including intracommunal conflicts
in some regions of the country and military threats
in the south-east. The country is riven with pockets
of tension, in particular in the Boukani region in the
north-east of Côte d’Ivoire, where violent clashes broke
out on the night of 23 to 24 March between herders and
farmers in Bouna and led to the deaths of 30 individuals
and a massive displacement of more than 2,000 persons,
16-10267

12/04/2016

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

mainly women, children and the elderly. The United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) deployed
a detachment of its quick-reaction force to the town of
Bouna to participate in protection of civilian efforts
and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Mindaoudou, accompanied by members of the
Ivorian Government, visited the region and called for
calm and restraint and made it clear that the path of
dialogue should be followed in order to peacefully
manage such clashes.
I must also point out that the relationship between
the Ivorian security forces and the population remains a
source of concern. For example, on 28 March there was
an attack on the Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire
(FRCI) by unidentified individuals near Tabou in the
south-west, which resulted in the injury of two FRCI
soldiers.
Following the terrorist attacks in GrandBassam on 13 March — for the commission of which
Al-Mourabitoun, a group based in northern Mali and
affiliated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
claimed responsibility — the Government took
proactive measures to identify and bring to justice
those responsible for those attacks. The Government
also launched criminal investigations and arrested the
alleged attackers. At the same time, the Government of
Mali, in close cooperation with the Ivorian Government,
arrested two alleged assailants.
It is worth noting that, faced with these terrorist
threats, the Governments of the subregion have decided
to step up their cooperation at the subregional level as
part of their common fight against terrorism and violent
extremism. Last week, Côte d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso,
Mali and Senegal convened a quadripartite meeting of
ministers responsible for security. During the meeting,
they established a security platform and adopted a
series of measures intended to prevent terrorist attacks.
The ministers also decided to pool their efforts and
to strengthen the links among their security services.
Four days after the attack in Grand-Bassam, the
Governments of Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, the forces of
UNOCI and the representatives of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia held a quadripartite meeting in
order to support the strengthening of border security
cooperation between Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia.
In general, since the post-election crisis that shook
Côte d’Ivoire in late 2010 and early 2011, tangible

S/PV.7669

progress has been made on all fronts. We have seen
significant headway made at the political level,
especially in terms of political dialogue, even though
there is much to do in order to establish national
reconciliation and social cohesion. There has also been
notable progress in strengthening the legal system and
efforts to respect human rights. The economy of Côte
d’Ivoire has also undergone a remarkable transition,
characterized by a rapid and sustained economic
recovery and a general increase in production rates,
with a gross domestic product in double digits in recent
years. We welcome the Government’s commitment
to translating this economic recovery into a better
standard of living for its people and to ensuring that the
benefits of its growth are shared.
It must be reiterated that the country’s security
situation remains fragile and characterized by the
presence of militias and the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. Therefore, the full re-establishment
of the rule of law and a strong security environment
throughout the country is still a challenge to be
overcome. However, I also note that the stabilization
seen throughout the country has enabled many displaced
persons and refugees to return to Côte d’Ivoire, and
indeed the country has avoided a humanitarian crisis.
There may be some remaining needs and pockets of
vulnerability here and there, but there is no humanitarian
crisis in Côte d’Ivoire.
(spoke in English)
Later this year, two significant political processes
will be launched. The first is the national referendum,
which I referred to earlier, and the second is the
legislative elections. All political stakeholders have
expressed their intention to participate, provided that
conditions are in place to ensure the credibility and the
legitimacy of the process. Additionally, the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire expressed confidence when it received
our strategic review team. That review is the basis for
the report before the Council. The Government of Côte
d’Ivoire expressed confidence that national security
forces are now fully competent to secure those sensitive
processes without security support from UNOCI.
Taking into account the situation in the country
and our assessment of the positive trajectory of
Côte d’Ivoire, the Secretary-General recommends
that UNOCI be extended for a final period, until
30 June 2017. By 30 April 2017, UNOCI should have a
streamlined, prioritized mandate focused on the tasks

16-102673/7

S/PV.7669

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

that are most essential for consolidating peace, as
detailed in the report.
The Secretary-General also recommends a final
phase of the drawdown of UNOCI’s military and police
components, which would be reduced to 2,000 and 670
personnel, respectively, in the coming months. During
the last year of their deployment, the troops and formed
police units of UNOCI would support the Ivorian
authorities in protecting the population in the event of
incidents that could threaten a strategic reversal of its
stability, while individual police officers and military
observers would continue to provide operational and
command-level mentoring and advice to their national
counterparts.
All UNOCI military and police personnel and
the vast majority of civilian personnel would leave
Côte d’Ivoire by 30 April 2017 and the full closure of
the Mission would occur by 30 June 2017. Given the
positive trend in Côte d’Ivoire, the Secretary-General
does not recommend the establishment of a successor
United Nations mission there. It is therefore even
more essential that every effort be made to ensure a
seamless transition from peacekeeping during the next
14 months.
Over the course of its final year, UNOCI will
prioritize the handover of its priority tasks to the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations
country team. Therefore, we are exploring options
for engaging the country team in the mandated tasks
of UNOCI while the Mission is still deployed and
supported by UNOCI’s budget, in keeping with the
recommendations of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations. It would also be
important for other partners to be closely associated in
the exit strategy of UNOCI. We are therefore exploring
options for setting up a transition mechanism that would
involve all the stakeholders, including the Government,
the United Nations, regional organizations, donors
and other partners in the transformation of the United
Nations engagement in the country.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I would say that UNOCI has made
considerable progress since its deployment in April 2004,
12 years ago. The country is currently firmly anchored
on the path of peace, stability and economic recovery. I
want to commend and pay tribute to the Ivorian people’s
determination to move forward in building a stable and
prosperous country. Congratulations are also in order
4/7

12/04/2016

in particular for President Alassane Ouattara, for his
determined leadership and for his tireless efforts to
build peace and promote democracy and the rule of law
at a very crucial time in the country’s history. I would
also like to thank the Council for the key role it has
played, including through the deployment of UNOCI
and through its political support for our Mission at all
levels. In the same vein, we think it important to thank
our regional and subregional partners — the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the European Union — and our many bilateral
partners for the constructive roles they have played
through the years in Côte d’Ivoire and its region.
Côte d’Ivoire’s trajectory is a positive one. In my
opinion, it would be prudent to wind up the current
phase of our collective commitment represented by a
peacekeeping mission in the country; in other words, the
Mission needs to be drawn down. I therefore welcome
the fact that the Security Council is ready to make a
determination in the near future that the situation in
Côte d’Ivoire is no longer a threat to regional peace and
security and that it is open to defining the future role of
United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire in order to uphold all
efforts to build peace, stability and democracy in the
country and the surrounding region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Rosselli.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to address the members of the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire.
At the outset, I would like to summarize the main
findings in the final report of the Group of Experts
on Côte d’Ivoire pursuant to paragraph 27 of Security
Council resolution 2219 (2015), contained in document
S/2016/254, and a review of the Group’s findings arising
from the informal consultations the Committee held on
11 March.
The Group highlighted that Côte d’Ivoire achieved
important progress with regard to the overall stabilization
of the country since the end of the post-election crisis
in 2010-2011. It noted the good cooperation of the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire throughout its mandate. It
also recognized that the sanctions regime, since it was
established in 2004, has succeeded in preventing the
import of heavy weapons systems, including combat
16-10267

12/04/2016

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

aircraft and tanks, and the escalation of the conflict. The
political and security situation in the country is stable
and, in the period from 14 June 2015 and 22 February
2016, the Group identified only one violation of the
arms embargo, with respect to night vision devices, a
violation that Côte d’Ivoire subsequently disclosed to
the Committee, showing that its compliance with the
sanctions regime has improved dramatically.
The Group highlighted the positive developments
in the country, the success of the presidential elections
of October 2015 and the role of the sanctions regime,
which was positively reviewed in the past, taking into
account the progress made. However, the Group did
express concern about the significant quantities of
arms and ammunition that remain beyond the control
of the Ivorian authorities. The Group emphasized that
more efforts need to be made by the Ivorian authorities
to control unregistered weapons and ammunition and
that there is a need to address major issues including
the improvement of the Ivorian security forces’
functionality, dealing with former zone commanders
and the integration of ex-combatants.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, which ended on 30 June 2015, was an important
achievement for the stabilization process. The Group
deemed it only partially successful, given that at least
16,500 ex-combatants still need to be fully reintegrated,
and large quantities of weapons and ammunition remain
unaccounted for. Although significant progress was
made with regard to the security sector reform process,
the Ivorian security forces continue face challenges.
The former zone commanders, who occupy key roles
in the Côte d’Ivoire security apparatus, continue to
have access to private assets, financial resources and
weapons.
With respect to weapons, the Group acknowledged
the progress made in the cooperation with the Ivorian
authorities, who gave the Group access to military
cantonments and allowed it to conduct inspections. The
Group continued to identify and document materiel
acquired by the Forces Nouvelles in the immediate
aftermath of the crisis of 2010-2011 in violation of the
arms embargo. In this context, the Group expressed
concern that such materiel could be diverted to armed
and terrorist groups such as Ansar Dine and Boko
Haram.
On the issue of customs and transport, the Group
noted progress in the redeployment of the customs

S/PV.7669

administration, but also highlighted the need to develop
the capacity of the customs administration to monitor
effectively cross-border-related traffic, implement a
comprehensive and coordinated border-management
strategy and provide adequate training, personnel,
equipment and infrastructure. As a result of capacity
shortfalls, large quantities of goods, including natural
resources, cross the borders of Côte d’Ivoire without
customs control.
In terms of natural resources, the Group referred
to positive developments in the fight against the
smuggling of cotton, cashew nuts, coffee and cocoa
in the east and north of the country. Despite the
commendable efforts of the Government, the smuggling
of diamonds, artisanal gold, coffee and cocoa in the
west of the country continues. In particular, the Group
expressed concern that illegal gold mining in northern
Côte d’Ivoire, along the border with Mali, could pose
a threat if used to finance terrorism. It is important
to underline that, although the diamond embargo was
lifted almost two years ago, at present large quantities
of Ivorian rough diamonds production are smuggled
outside the legal chain of commerce certified through
the Kimberley Process.
With regard to finances and individual sanctions,
the Group acknowledged the Government’s efforts
to dismantle illegal taxation networks, reduce the
number of checkpoints and prevent incidents of
racketeering. Nevertheless, the Group ascertained that
illegal checkpoints continued to exist, particularly
on secondary roads and in border areas. The Group
expressed concern about the non-application of the
asset freeze and travel ban, by both Côte d’Ivoire and
the countries of the region since they were first put
into effect in February 2006. In the ensuing discussion,
some Committee members acknowledged the progress
made by Côte d’Ivoire and expressed their support for
the lifting the sanctions measures targeting the country,
while others expressed concern about the challenges
the country is continuing to face.
Finally, the recommendations contained in the
final report of the Group of Experts are still under
consideration by the members of the Committee.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Rosselli for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.

16-102675/7

S/PV.7669

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to convey to you,
Mr. President, my sincere and warm congratulations
on China’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. I am confident that
your experience and leadership will be valuable assets
when heading up the work of the Council work during
this period. I would like to thank the Security Council
for this platform to discuss issues pertaining to the
development of the situation in Côte d’Ivoire.
Once again, I take the opportunity to extend my
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative, Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, and her
team for their outstanding work in collaboration with
the Ivorian authorities and the French forces in Côte
d’Ivoire.
In referring to the progress made in Côte d’Ivoire
in his December 2015 report on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), the SecretaryGeneral stressed that
“the successful conduct of the presidential election
is the most powerful demonstration of the progress
made in Côte d’Ivoire” (S/2015/940, para. 89).
He went on to indicate his optimism about the country’s
future. Three months after that report, it is with the
same confidence and conviction that I take the floor
today before the Council to say that Côte d’Ivoire is
determined and will continue its march forward.
Following the successful presidential election, a
new Government was set up and given specific new tasks
focused on national reconciliation, social cohesion,
good governance, the improvement of living conditions
and the people’s purchasing power, the promotion of
youth employment and equal justice for all. Putting
words into action, the President of the Republic and
the Government have since undertaken a wide range
of actions. After his re-election, the President of the
Republic undertook consultations with an important
sector of society, including traditional kings and
chiefs, religious leaders, the National Commission for
Reconciliation and Compensation of Victims of the
Ivorian crises and the Front populaire ivoirien, the main
opposition party.
I would like to take this opportunity to also inform
the Council that, in the context of the Head of State’s
resolve to enable all political actors to participate
actively in the life of the nation, the Ivorian Government
6/7

12/04/2016

has decided to promote the candidate who came in
second in October’s presidential election, the head of
the opposition, to the position of Minister of State.
The President of the Republic, convinced that
national reconciliation and social cohesion are essential
to laying the foundations of a unified nation, and
echoing the wishes expressed during consultations, has
taken several important steps, including the provisional
release of several individuals detained during the postelection crisis who were awaiting trial, the unfreezing
of the accounts of several opposition figures, the
voluntary return of several exiles from Liberia, the
announcement of the establishment of a high authority
for rural land ownership, as well as the revision of the
Constitution. That is in order to remove all conflicting
elements in the fundamental law and to strengthen
State institutions.
In addition to national reconciliation, security
also remains key to stability and peace. As such, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform processes have attracted the
attention of the Government and partners. There has
been an implementation rate of 94 per cent for the former,
and promising results for the latter. Efforts continue, as
indicated in the Government’s latest report on security
sector reform and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, which was conveyed to
the Sanctions Committee in March. In particular, the
adoption of a law on military programming 2016-2020
and a law on programming domestic security forces
2016-2020, and the establishment of the coordination,
monitoring and reintegration cell were undertaken in
order to take control of the residual activities of the
former Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Authority.
Unfortunately, the cowardly and heinous terrorist
attack suffered by innocent people in Grand-Bassam
on 13 March reminds us of our duty to be vigilant and
alert at all times. I would like to once again honour
the memory of all those who were so cruelly torn from
their families and loved ones. On behalf of the Ivorian
Government, I take this opportunity to reiterate our
gratitude to all countries and friendly institutions that
lent their support during the ordeal that my country
went through.
Far from being a discouraging factor, that
unfortunate situation has only served to dramatically
increase the resolute will of the Ivorian Government to
16-10267

12/04/2016

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

adopt, at the national, regional and international levels,
measures to strengthen security, in particular with
regard to the domestic deployment of security forces in
all strategic sites and public areas, as rightly identified
in the report of the Secretary-General. I would therefore
reiterate once again the Ivorian Government’s request
for the total lifting of all sanctions on both individuals
and weapons to Côte d’Ivoire, in particular to enable the
appropriate equipment to reach our defence and security
forces, to better control our borders — particularly in the
west — and to promote effective military cooperation
with friendly neighbouring countries so as to enable the
national security forces to fulfil their sovereign duties.
With regard to the issue of justice and the human
rights situation, the credo of the President of the
Republic has always been zero tolerance for impunity.
That inclination for equal justice for all resulted,
during the establishment of the last Government,
in the creation of new ministries for rights and civil
liberties, solidarity and social cohesion, and for the
compensation of victims. Proceedings against people of
all political persuasions have been and will be brought
progressively, based on the independence of the judicial
system. The ability of Ivorian justice to henceforth
handle its duties led the Head of State to affirm that
from this point forward, no other Ivorian citizen would
be handed over to the International Criminal Court.
The Government’s programme of action also
provides, as mentioned earlier, an important place for
the promotion of youth employment because of the
role that young people can play not only in economic
growth, but also in the restoration and consolidation
of peace. My delegation welcomes the actions taken
on the ground by the Peacebuilding Office, alongside
the Ivorian Government, through two priority plans
for peacebuilding and the cross-border cooperation
programme between Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia.

S/PV.7669

My delegation welcomes the fact that most of the
progress achieved by the Ivorian Government in terms
of stabilization, social well-being and lasting peace was
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General. My
delegation takes note of that report and endorses the
proposals seeking to extend for one last time UNOCI’s
mandate before its full drawdown on 30 June 2017.
My Government hopes that the transitional assistance
phase will give high priority to training and assisting
the Ivorian defence and security forces, as well as to
preparing the United Nations country team so as to
ensure a smooth handover to the Ivorian Government.
It is to be noted that tremendous ongoing and
continuous progress has been made, especially if we
consider where we started from. My Government
will continue its efforts to overcome any residual and
emerging challenges. To that end, my country does
indeed warrant encouragement and support from by the
Council and the international community.
Before concluding, I should like to say that the
commitment of the United Nations to Côte d’Ivoire
under Chapter VII of the Charter represents for
numerous observers a real success story that should go
down in the history of our institution’s peacekeeping
operations throughout the world. The Council, the
Secretary-General, friendly countries, the international
community and the Ivorian Government should be
extremely proud of the work that has been done and the
major successes we have achieved. I would therefore like
to convey on behalf of my Government my country’s
esteem for and gratitude to all of the stakeholders that
I have just mentioned for their involvement and their
belief in a Côte d’Ivoire that is based on peace and
progress.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

16-102677/7
