S/PV.8047

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8047th meeting

Wednesday, 13 September 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Ilnystskyi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on situation in the Lake Chad Basin region
(S/2017/764)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-28519 (E)
*1728519*

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Lake Chad Basin region (S/2017/764)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Nigeria to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam, Director of the Network
of Civil Society Organizations in Borno state.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Imam,
who is joining us via video teleconference from
Maiduguri, Nigeria.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/764, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Lake Chad
basin region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for this opportunity
to brief the Council on the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/764) on the situation in the Lake Chad
basin. Allow me to comment first on security and
political developments.
Thanks to coordination among affected countries,
we have witnessed encouraging progress in the
fight against Boko Haram. The Secretary-General
commends the Governments of the region for their
efforts, including through the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF). Without question, Boko Haram’s
combat capacity has diminished, but to compensate for
that, Boko Haram has changed tactics by increasing the
use of suicide attacks.
We thank the Government of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
2/22

13/09/2017

efforts to the release of an additional 82 girls kidnapped
from Chibok in the north-eastern part of Nigeria in 2014.
The recent visit to Nigeria by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UN-Women
served to shed further light on the plight of women
and girls in the Lake Chad basin. Unfortunately the
fight is far from over. One hundred and thirty attacks
attributed to Boko Haram in the four affected countries
in June and July resulted in 284 civilian fatalities — a
significant increase as compared to 146 attacks and 107
civilian fatalities in April and May. The most affected
countries remained Nigeria, followed by Cameroon, the
Niger and Chad.
In terms of political advocacy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa and his Special Representative for Western
Africa and the Sahel, respectively, regularly visit the
affected countries to promote enhanced interregional
cooperation. They propose a regional strategy to address
the root causes of the crisis. Such a strategy should be
owned and supported by the affected countries as well
as the relevant subregional organizations, including the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The Oslo Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and
the Lake Chad Region, held in February, and the visit
by the Council in March brought needed attention to
the long-neglected crisis in the Lake Chad basin. The
United Nations and international partners are working
to sustain the momentum generated by those events.
Last week in Berlin, the United Nations participated
in the first senior officials’ meeting of the Oslo
Consultative Group on Prevention and Stabilization in
the Lake Chad Region. The meeting brought together
representatives of the affected countries, donors and
regional and subregional organizations. Discussions
focused on addressing the structural causes of the crisis
and included community stabilization, the restoration of
services, local governance systems and the prevention
of violence.
Turning to development challenges, I note that
the Lake Chad basin crisis has wreaked havoc on
basic infrastructure assets and Government services.
Insecurity has sparked large-scale unemployment
and left 1 million school-aged children deprived of
education. The substantial economic impact of the
crisis has reached nearly $9 billion across north-eastern
Nigeria alone. Poverty, the low legitimacy of the State,
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

human insecurity and climate change, among other
challenges, compound that dire situation. As is so often
the case, women and the youth are key risk groups.
Conflict and displacement have eroded, and
in some cases ruptured, the bonds between and
within communities. Intra-communal structures and
processes that traditionally regulated violence and
resolved conflicts have weakened. We detect worrying
signs of social fragmentation as tensions emerge from
ethno-religious, social and other divisions, including
between internally displaced persons (IDPs) and host
communities. Unless robust peacebuilding efforts
are introduced, the reintegration of ex-combatants,
including from Boko Haram and vigilante groups, risk
generating additional tensions and to heighten the risks
of secondary conflict. Furthermore, the report notes
the need for greater attention and funding to support
development interventions, including community
stabilization, economic revitalization and prevention,
so as to build community resilience and ensure
durable solutions.
Yesterday, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs concluded his first visit to the Niger and Nigeria
to increase international visibility of the humanitarian
situation, discuss with the Governments and consider
practical steps to further strengthen the response.
Despite the significant progress made in reaching
the affected people in the Lake Chad basin, the
humanitarian needs in the region continue to be
staggering. Approximately 10.7 million people require
humanitarian assistance. With 8.5 million people in
need, north-eastern Nigeria is again enduring the worst
of the crisis. Funding continues to fall significantly
short. At present, the regional appeal requesting
$1.5 billion for 2017 is funded at only 40 per cent.
The region now faces the rainy season, when food
insecurity is at its worst, with thousands of farmers
having missed four planting seasons in a row owing
to conflict, resulting insecurity and displacements.
Across the region, 7.2 million people are severely
food insecure, including 5.2 million in north-eastern
Nigeria, where an estimated 50,000 people are at the
highest risk of famine. The crisis has displaced an
estimated 2.4 million people, including 1.5 million
children. New displacements are occurring alongside
the return of IDPs and refugees. Given the continued
insecurity and lack of basic services in many affected

S/PV. 8047

areas, the involuntary and unsafe return of refugees and
IDPs must be avoided at all costs.
Concerning human rights, we are deeply concerned
about the continued violations by Boko Haram,
including killings, the forceful use of children as suicide
bombers and sexual and gender-based violence against
women and children. Perpetrators must be brought to
justice. The United Nations has also received numerous
allegations of serious human rights violations committed
in the context of counter-terrorism operations. The
United Nations continues to advocate strongly with
MNJTF to put forward a clear strategy to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse, including by recruiting a
dedicated gender adviser within its civilian component.
The report notes our conviction that we must develop a
common understanding that human rights violations are
among the root causes of instability in the Lake Chad
basin and that impunity will fuel the crisis. Investing in
traditional justice mechanisms at the community level
is essential to sustainable reconciliation and stability.
The prevention of terrorist activities, stabilization
and recovery initiatives must integrate the human
rights dimension.
Sexual violence remains appallingly widespread
in the region. It is a driver of forced displacement and
a particular risk in displacement settings, in which
conflict-affected women and children are exposed
to daily risks of exploitation. Those suffering from
acute physical or psychological trauma need urgent
medical and psychosocial care. The United Nations
is exploring options for the deployment of dedicated
expertise on conflict-related sexual violence to northeastern Nigeria.
The United Nations faces a serious funding shortage
to deploy human rights monitors across the region.
We reiterate our call on the international community
to generously contribute funds to enable the United
Nations to support the establishment of national and
regional mechanisms for the systematic monitoring and
reporting of the human rights situation.
Allow me to touch upon the issues of security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. The lack of a comprehensive approach
in addressing Boko Haram defectors, including clear
and transparent criteria that are human rights compliant
and in line with the international terrorism framework,
produces multiple challenges. Despite good faith, ad hoc
efforts result in thousands of persons being irregularly

17-285193/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

detained and/or unpredictably processed. This situation
is not productive, sustainable or in accordance with the
rule of law, and justice is not served.
In our view, the efforts of the MNJTF remain
indispensable in resolving the crisis. However, the
heavy financial investment borne by regional countries
comes at a high cost: Governments have no choice but to
divert much of their national budgets from development
to addressing national and regional security. Within the
United Nations, Member States are careful to make
sure that we do not shift development and humanitarian
funds to peace and security work. We would hope
that the affected countries could attract the support
to do the same. We welcome the pledges already
made and encourage the further timely disbursement
of contributions to enable the MNJTF to address the
challenges it faces.
In conclusion, I note that the complex and
increasingly protracted nature of the Lake Chad basin
crisis calls for innovative and integrated solutions
that bridge traditional divides between humanitarian
and development strategies. The United Nations is
committed to adopting a new way of working that will
address the urgent needs of the affected populations
and the root causes of the crisis in a coordinated and
phased manner. I urge all partners to redouble their
efforts to provide lifesaving humanitarian assistance to
the affected populations, as well as early and longerterm recovery. That is the basis to build resistance and
assure durable solutions to the crisis.
Once again, we encourage the affected countries to
jointly elaborate a regional strategy to address the root
causes of the crisis. We hope that the planned regional
conference on stabilization to be held in N’Djamena in
October will be the first step towards the development
of such a strategy.
We in the United Nations remain committed to
working with regional countries on ending the violence,
protecting civilians, promoting human development
and alleviating the suffering in the Lake Chad basin.
We can prevent this crisis from growing, but that
would require greater political and financial support
to the Lake basin region. The side event to be held on
21 September at the margins of the General Assembly
session will be a key opportunity for the international
community to reaffirm its support for the region.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
4/22

13/09/2017

I now give the floor to Ms. Imam.
Ms. Imam: I would like to begin by thanking the
Ethiopian Ambassador, and President of the Security
Council for this month, for inviting me to provide
a civil society perspective as part of the Council’s
deliberations on the Lake Chad basin region.
I am Fatima Shehu Imam, the current Chairperson
of the International Federation of Women Lawyers in
Borno state. Today I also represent the Network of Civil
Society Organizations in Borno state.
The Network is a coalition of more than 100 civil
society, community and faith-based organizations
engaged in a wide range of activities geared towards
providing humanitarian aid and assistance to victims of
the over four-year-long insurgency. In Borno state, where
I live and work, families, livelihoods and communities
have been repeatedly torn apart by insurgent activities
of the Jama’atu Ahlus-Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal Jihad,
otherwise known as Boko Haram. Borno state remains
the epicentre of the Boko Haram insurgency.
In March this year, Council members met with me
and other women-led civil society organizations during
the Security Council mission to Maiduguri. Sadly,
there has been no significant improvement in providing
for protection needs or humanitarian assistance to the
growing number of victims of the insurgency who have
been displaced.
The non-participation of women in decision-making,
peacebuilding processes, and in aid and relief delivery
in camps remains a serious concern. Borno state
currently hosts the highest number of internally
displaced persons (IDP), who remain in need of urgent
humanitarian protection and assistance owing to the
level of insecurity in the State. The dire humanitarian
conditions in north-east Nigeria are arguably brought
on by the security challenges and the almost neartotal collapse of societal and institutional apparatus
of the Government, which has been unable to keep
up with the increasing numbers of internationally
displaced persons.
I wish to highlight the following key concerns we
have identified in the context of the work we do as
humanitarians, enumerate the main areas for urgent
intervention and touch on the challenges we face as
a coalition. I will then conclude with an appeal to the
conscience of the Security Council.
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

On security, the general situation in and around
Maiduguri remains tense and fragile. While there have
been several reports forecasting improvements and
gains by the Nigerian armed forces in the region, that
progress has been grossly overestimated. That has left
room for a false sense of security, which has also led
to a resurgence of armed attacks on civilians and other
soft targets in and around the state. People still live in
fear in their communities, and many who have been
displaced as a result of the insurgency are reluctant
to return. That has resulted in poverty, a lack of food,
malnutrition and a total collapse of economic activities
within the region and the threat of famine.
Threats to the life and property of marginalized
populations, especially women and girls, seem to
be on the increase in the light of the resurgence of
violent attacks. Local civil society organizations
working on the ground, such as mine, are largely
incapacitated in reaching out to large sections of those
communities, including to women and girls who are in
urgent need of humanitarian aid. Unlike international
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies, which are accompanied by security details
during field operations, local groups are continuing
to carry out their work unaccompanied by any form
of security apparatus, thereby making access a major
challenge and compromising the lives of individuals
who engage in such operations.
There is continuing and clear abuse of the rights
of individuals living in the camps in Maiduguri and
surrounding areas. As have been detailed in numerous
reports to the Council, there are severe shortages of
food and other supplies. That has led to a situation
where ther is a trade in sexual favours for food. From
the various visits I have personally made to the IDP
camps as part of my mandate to improve and promote
the welfare and rights of women and children, it is
pertinent to note that most of the women and girls in the
IDP camps are ignorant of their basic human rights and,
as such, do not even know when their rights are being
violated. That is partly a result of culturally induced
factors where women do not have a voice and, in a few
cases, do not know where to go when violated. The
insurgency has taken its toll on those women who are
now heads of households and are compelled to give their
bodies for food — which ultimately results in unwanted
pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases — in
the name of survival sex just to be able to provide for
their family.

S/PV. 8047

With regard to the women and girls who have been
abducted by Boko Haram, women and girls have been
used as targets in the recent trend of violent attacks
perpetrated by insurgents in utilizing them as suicide
bombers. The issue of stigmatization faced by those
women and girls cannot be overemphasized. A case at
hand is that of a married woman who was abducted by
Boko Haram and returned after a few years with another
child. Her husband is forcing her to choose between
him and the child. The psychological trauma faced by
that woman, and the many others who have lost their
self-esteem as a result of stigmatization, needs to be
urgently addressed. A sharper focus must be placed on
women’s reintegration, while tackling stigmatization
and ensuring that they are part of the strategies aimed
at addressing Boko Haram.
In terms of the threat to farming, the fragile state
of security in the region has led to a situation where the
normal lifestyles and customs of the population have
been truncated. Due to inherent security challenges,
members of some communities are afraid to go to
their farms because it is risky to travel beyond a
three-kilometre radius from their communities. About
a week ago, 12 people were abducted from their farms
and are yet to be found. Reports of such abductions
are numerous, which is of course of great concern to
my Network.
The Network faces myriad challenges, as do many
civil society groups, that affect our ability to deliver
the lifesaving work we are trying to carry out. Those
challenges cover, but are not limited to, operations, such
as funding, institutions, policy and law and security.
There currently appears to be more rigidity than
flexibility in the level of donor funding available for
humanitarian assistance, thereby creating a situation
whereby highly professional and experienced
institutions, such as United Nations agencies and
international NGOs, are expected to access funding
based on the same evaluation criteria. Those quite clear
and noticeable differences in terms of institutional
capacity undoubtedly impedes the availability of
funding opportunities available to smaller local groups
in the field that carry out lifesaving interventions.
There is an urgent need to ensure that local civil
society organizations and affected populations are
critical components in the design and implementation
of interventions. The fragile and tense situation still
makes it extremely challenging and risky for local

17-285195/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

groups to engage in operations in the field. As a
result, those groups lack the accompanying security
apparatus available to United Nations agencies and
NGO colleagues.
Despite the extreme humanitarian situation in
the country and the apparent global focus on Nigeria
arising from the insurgency and the increasing number
of people who have been displaced and are in need of
protection and assistance, it might interest the Council
to note that the country still lacks any comprehensive
legislation and/or policy that holistically targets
humanitarian responses. The result is that most of work
currently being carried out is non-transparent and ad
hoc, with no accountability mechanism.
In conclusion, while I am immensely grateful
for the apportunity afforded to me to address the
Security Council, I must reiterate the important role
that perception plays in the context of humanitarian
intervention and bringing hope. The perception on the
ground today reflects the diminishing hope of the huge
population affected by the conflict, as they believe
responses to be insufficient, despite the huge funding
allocation reported by the Government and development
partners. I urge the Council to see this as an urgent
and dire call — given the highlighted challenges and
analysis of the situation, it should galvanize a strategic
and adequate response mechanism to bring assistance
and aid to the millions of people in need of protection
and humanitarian assistance.
The President: I thank Ms. Imam for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his valuable
briefing and Ms. Imam for sharing her thoughts.
It was six months ago, in a dusty internally
displaced person’s camp in Maiduguri, that we heard
Ms. Imam’s testimony, together with those of many
others. It really brought home to me, and probably to
several of us who were there, the human cost of the
crisis in the Lake Chad basin. It was therefore very
good to hear from Ms. Imam again today. It is vital that
the Security Council continue to hear from those most
affected by the issues on our agenda and continue to
use those analyses and from-the-heart interventions to
inform our decision-making.
6/22

13/09/2017

Sadly, as both Ms. Imam and the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/764) make clear, six months
on from our visit to the Lake Chad basin, the situation
remains deeply troubling. Boko Haram has indeed been
degraded and territory has indeed been reclaimed, but
Boko Haram is far from a spent force. It is down but not
out, shifting its tactics from land grabs to opportunistic
attacks. Maiduguri now faces weekly suicide attacks,
many from girls who are forced into suicide bombing.
Over 400 people have been killed since we visited. Boko
Haram’s shameful and sickening abductions of young
women and girls continue unabated. Those who return
continue to face stigma and discrimination, which is
why the United Kingdom will host a ministerial event
here on 18 September, in order to launch a new set of
global principles to tackle such stigma.
The continuing barbarity is only exacerbating the
humanitarian crises. Since we visited, the number of
Nigerians seeking refuge in neighbouring countries
has only marginally decreased, with nearly 2 million
people still displaced in north-east Nigeria and over
8 million in need of urgent, lifesaving assistance. While
the number of forced returns has fallen, we have seen
thousands of people pressured back into areas where
they do not feel safe. It is therefore clear that we should
all redouble our efforts to implement the commitments
that we made in resolution 2349 (2017).
The United Kingdom will play its part. We remain
committed to partnering with Nigeria and its neighbours
to degrade and defeat Boko Haram. We remain committed
to helping people in need in the region, having scaled
up our humanitarian support to $130 million this year.
We have announced an additional $260 million over
the next four years, as part of the north-east Nigeria
transition to development programme.
We all need to play our part. The Nigeria
Humanitarian Fund was launched in February with
an appeal for $1 billion this year. As of last month,
that appeal is less than half funded. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report makes clear, insufficient funding from
the donor community continues to limit the provision
of food aid, development and recovery activities.
Just as the international community must act, so
too should Governments in the region. We look to
the Government of Nigeria and affected countries
to provide greater resources where they can and to
further prioritize the humanitarian response. We also
call on them to expedite all remaining registrations
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

for humanitarian organization in the region, as the
Secretary-General’s report notes.
We welcome the increased civil-military coordination
in the humanitarian effort and urge that to continue.
However, we deeply regret the raid on the United
Nations red roof compound by the Nigerian military
last month. Nevertheless, we do welcome the swift
response by the authorities.
It is clear that a long-term solution will be found
only by addressing the root causes that led to Boko
Haram’s emergence, which I think was the main lesson
for many of us on our visit. That search for longerterm solutions and root causes requires a regional
plan to address the political, economic, governance,
transparency and accountability issues. If such an
effort is to succeed, it must respect human rights. The
ongoing reports of torture, arbitrary arrests and sexual
exploitation are deeply concerning and must stop. We
therefore support calls for greater funding to strengthen
the United Nations monitoring presence on the ground.
Finally, the role of women in the crisis cannot be
overlooked. We reiterate the Council’s call for greater
engagement between regional Governments, the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and women’s
civil society, as well as the deployment of a gender
adviser to the MNJTF.
In short, there is a lot more that all of us need to
do. Six months on from our visit we cannot afford to
lose focus. I hope that through briefings like the one
we heard today from Ms. Imam and Mr. Feltman we
will all be reminded of what is at stake, just as we were
in Maiduguri.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Ms. Imam for sharing her important
perspective with the Security Council. I agree that,
in all of our work, we must endeavour to listen to the
voices of those who are most affected. I did not have
the opportunity to join the Council during its visit,
so I am even more appreciative of Ms. Imam’s very
honest description, even in cases where she pointed to
harshness and insufficiencies.
The challenges that face the Lake Chad basin
region are multidimensional — a security crisis, a
humanitarian emergency and development deficits.
During its visit earlier this year, the Council had an
opportunity to see how the interplay between those

S/PV. 8047

elements affects the lives of people in the region.
Resolution 2349 (2017), adopted on our return, and to
which today’s briefing responds, was forward-looking
and underlined our solidarity with, and full support of,
the conflict-affected populations and the Governments
in the region.
We commend the subregional, regional and
international efforts being undertaken to mitigate the
consequences of the Boko Haram insurgency. At the
same time, we continue to be deeply concerned about
the alarming scale of the humanitarian crisis. Despite
progress in expanding the humanitarian response,
it is clear that we still need to step up our efforts,
while building on commitments made at the Oslo
Humanitarian Conference in February. We must not let
our attention to the situation wane. I would like to raise
three points that we believe are critical to successfully
responding to the challenges.
First, a holistic and regional approach is necessary.
There are many root causes of instability and insecurity
in the region, including climate change, economic
fragility, marginalization, human rights violations
and demographic challenges. Responding to the
immediate security challenges must go hand in hand
with development efforts that seek to address long-term
instability by improving the daily lives of people on
the ground.
We welcome the plans announced by the African
Union Commission and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission to hold a stabilization conference in
early October. That meeting will present an important
opportunity for countries to work together on the
development of a regional strategy to address the
root causes.
The effects of climate change and its links to
stability and security are evident. We cannot hide from
that reality if we want to truly address the challenges
in the region. The lack of follow-up in this area in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/764) serves
once again to underline the need for improved risk
assessment and risk-management strategies by the
United Nations, as clearly highlighted by the Security
Council in resolution 2349 (2017). The Council must
remain alert to the threats to stability as a result of the
adverse effects of climate change.
There is an inherent link between security,
development and human rights. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s assertion that funding for United

17-285197/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

Nations human rights monitoring tasks must be
safeguarded. Nigeria’s establishment of a judicial
commission to review the compliance of its armed
forces with human rights obligations and rules of
engagement is a welcome development, and we call on
all parties concerned to implement the Abuja Action
Statement. We also encourage the swift deployment of
the remaining civilian personnel to the Multinational
Joint Task Force, not least adequate gender expertise.
The second point I would like to make is on the need
for broad partnerships, particularly with the African
Union (AU) and development actors. As shown by our
visit to Addis Ababa last week, the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council are united in
our analysis of the situation and the required responses.
In order to operationalize those responses, we should
seize the momentum created through the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security.
Similarly, no sustainable peace can be achieved
without
effective
partnerships
spanning
the
humanitarian, reconstruction and development nexus.
The Berlin meeting earlier this month underlined
the need for early recovery, prevention and joint
stabilization efforts. Complementarity and cooperation
must be sought with a number of actors, including the
International Financial Institutions (IFI).
My third point is on the role of women as agents of
change. Women’s empowerment cannot be overlooked
in reconstruction and stabilization efforts. With the full,
equal and effective participation of women at all levels
of society, policies will be better adapted to realities
on the ground, thereby creating better conditions for
long-term stability and peace. I am particularly pleased
that we have benefited from Ms. Imam joining us here
today. Women from civil society can provide unique
insights to underpin our discussions and decisions.
We are appalled by the finding in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that Boko Haram is increasingly
resorting to suicide attacks, often carried out by
forcibly recruited girls. That is why a key priority of
Governments must be rehabilitation opportunities for
children and their mothers, including the sensitization
of communities to avoid stigmatization and to facilitate
return. We also support the Secretary-General’s call
for the development of a strategy to engage women in
the prevention of violent extremism, while taking into
8/22

13/09/2017

account the complexity of the categories that women
fall into.
The adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) was an
important acknowledgement of the many challenges
facing the Lake Chad basin region and of the Council’s
commitment to supporting efforts towards long term
and sustainable peace and development. We must not
lose focus. We see three opportunities going forward.
First, we would welcome further information on
the planning for the joint visit by the leaders of the
United Nations, the AU and the IFIs, as requested in the
resolution. Secondly, we would be interested in hearing
from the United Nations system how the Security
Council can best support the AU-Lake Chad Basin
Commission stabilization conference. Finally, we look
forward to the Secretary-General’s report in October
in response to the presidential statement on the risk of
famine in Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan and north-east
Nigeria (S/PRST/2017/14). This briefing will help add
to our understanding of, and response to, the challenges
being faced in the region and beyond.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
I also thank Under Secretary-General Feltman for
his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council
this afternoon. Of course, I would also like to thank
Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam for her insightful perspective.
Just like Mr. Rycroft, I have fond memories of the
meeting with her and her colleagues on a very hot,
dusty morning in the internally displaced persons
camp in Maiduguri. That was an important visit by the
Security Council — its first in many years to a region
that has been affected by a crisis for many years. But
the news that we receive weekly, if not daily, from
Maiduguri shows that the crisis is far from ending, and
we therefore need to maintain our focus on the region.
In that regard, over the past several months the
Council has devoted considerable attention to the Lake
Chad basin region and, as proof of that, the situation
was most recently discussed during the annual United
Nations-African Union joint consultative meeting.
The crisis involving the Lake Chad basin and the
territory of four countries is one of the world’s largest
humanitarian emergencies, with several million people
in need of assistance. During our visit to the region,
we became directly aware of just how urgently we
need to act to strengthen our response in confronting
the challenges in the region. While catalysed by the
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Boko Haram insurgency, the crisis is multidimensional.
Its root causes include climate change, poverty and
underdevelopment — issues that people in the region
have been tackling for many years, if not decades.
As the international community came together
in Oslo to provide the humanitarian relief that was
desperately needed, it is essential that the underlying
causes of vulnerability in the Lake Chad basin region
also be urgently addressed, lest dependence upon
external assistance will be prolonged for many years to
come. As a result of the commitments made at the Oslo
Humanitarian Conference, Italy continues to contribute
bilaterally through United Nations agencies, by funding
projects aimed at promoting and strengthening the
resilience of the local population while reducing the
risk of internal displacement and migration.
While the Niger remains among the priority
countries of our cooperation, we are about to launch a
programme that will extend our priority on a regional
basis. The project will have a longer duration, with
the specific aim of sustaining youth using a wide
range of tools — cash for work, microloans and
on-the-job training. I would also like to mention Italy’s
commitment to sustaining a national development
programme, recently presented in Paris by the President
of Chad, Idriss Déby Itno, with a financial contribution
of between €20 to €30 million. Furthermore, in the
framework of the Secretary-General’s famine response
strategy in the Lake Chad basin region, we have already
disbursed our financial pledge.
As highlighted comprehensively in the report by
the United Nations Development Programme launched
last week, a lack of resources, marginalization and
weak governance are the primary forces driving young
Africans to violent extremism. The situation in the
Lake Chad basin region serves as a powerful reminder
of the relationship between climate change, insecurity,
population growth, unmet humanitarian needs and the
risk of radicalization. A crisis of this magnitude affects
all of us, because it forces the mass displacement of
people and fosters conditions for illicit activities such
as human trafficking and smuggling. It also underlines
our responsibility in the framework of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which was also created
to prevent and mitigate the impact of these kinds
of emergencies.
In that context, respect for human rights must be
guaranteed by any means. Abuse against women or

S/PV. 8047

children or carrying out attacks against schools or
hospitals cannot be tolerated wherever, whenever or
by whomsoever it is committed. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate the fundamental role of women
in preventing potential conflicts and strengthening the
process of national conciliation by ensuring a genderinclusive perspective on issues of security, justice and
governance. We commend the United Nations and the
African Union for having devoted to a country of the
Lake Chad region the first-ever joint high-level mission
focused on womens’ meaningul participation in peace,
security and development. We support a regional,
integrated and comprehensive approach to effectively
address the security, economic, social and judicial
dimensions of the crisis. We welcome the announcement
of the October conference to be held in N’Djamena.
We also commend the initiatives taken by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The dimensions of this crisis are broad, interregional
and interconnected with instability in the Sahel. The
terrorist threat and the scourge of trafficking in persons,
drugs and arms are spreading across the whole region.
I would like to commend the efforts carried out by the
countries of the region to provide stability and security,
as in the case of the Multinational Joint Task Force and
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
I would also like to recall the important role played
by the European Union (EU), one of the key partners
of the region. The multidimensional action of the
EU encompasses security, political and development
cooperation and is based on an integrated paradigm
of policies that consider the Lake Chad region and
the Sahel as a whole geographical continuum. At the
regional level, we strongly support the efforts of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, as well as initiatives such as the G-5 Sahel force
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
peace and security strategy. Those are important
steps towards a more proactive role for regional
organizations and charting a path towards peace,
security and development.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the holding of this
Security Council meeting on the situation in the Chad
Lake basin, exactly six months after our visit to the
region and following the adoption of the resolution 2349
(2017), which was devoted to this topic. My delegation
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General

17-285199/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

Jeffrey Feltman for providing clarity in his presentation
on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/764), which
informs us of progress made and challenges yet to be
met. We would also like to convey our gratitude to
Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam, Director of the Network of
Civil Society Organizations in Borno state, for having
so kindly shared with us her experience in the field.
In adopting resolution 2349 (2017) following our
visit to Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad, the
Security Council again focused on the humanitarian
and security crisis raging in the Lake Chad basin as a
key priority of the international community. Following
the visit, international mobilization in support of the
region has considerably increased with the successive
visits by representatives of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union and by staff of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa. Along the same
lines, a regional conference will be held in N’Djamena
from 3 to 5 October on the issue of stabilizing the
region. It will be the first meeting of a set of three aimed
at determining a regional strategy to stabilize affected
regions. I am sure that such international mobilization
has contributed to the retaking of territory by the Joint
Multinational Task Force, and I pay tribute to the
courage and devotion of its contingents. The retaking
of areas formerly controlled by Boko Haram has led to
an improvement in the security situation in those areas,
the freeing of hostages and, of course, the surrender
or arrest of many of the group’s combatants. On the
humanitarian level, we should note the growing access
of the civilian population to health care, sanitation
and food.
However, as important as it is, all of that progress
should not mask the difficult situation experienced by
millions of women and children in the Lake Chad Basin
region — as seen in the growing number of terrorist
attacks in the past few months. Once again, on behalf
of my country, I condemn those attacks in the firmest
possible terms.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, 245
attacks were carried out, most of those by female
suicide bombers, during the months of June, July and
August — in the north-east of Nigeria, in the north of
Cameroon and in the Chad border regions, resulting in
225 casualties. While those attacks clearly bear witness
to the ability of Boko Haram to continue its terrorist
activities, the fact that the group is now increasingly
10/22

13/09/2017

resorting to asymmetrical tactics is undeniable proof
that it is now in an unfavourable position. Nevertheless,
we continue to deplore the lack of logistical resources
available to the countries in the region in their fight
against those asymmetric threats. All of that clearly
shows the pressing need to bolster the capabilities of the
States of the region in terms of early warning and rapid
response sytems when faced with suicide attacks. That
requires the involvement of the population to develop a
community police force.
Similarly, regional and subregional cooperation
remains crucial to securing borders in order to
effectively combat trans-national organized crime,
such as arms-smuggling and human trafficking, which,
we must remember, are at heart of the crisis. There is
also a need to step-up international support to meet the
needs set out in the humanitarian appeal launched by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
which calls for the mobilization of $1.5 billion — of
which, unfortunately, to date has been funded only the
level of 30.9 per cent.
We should not make any mistake about it:
development must be part of the solution, especially
since poverty is most rife in the areas severely impacted
by Boko Haram in the four countries concerned. That
is why my delegation welcomes the meeting of the Oslo
contact group — made up of Germany, Nigeria, Norway,
Cameroon and Chad — scheduled for 6 September on
the issues of prevention and stabilizing the region,
which aims to identify ways to tackle the deep-rooted
causes of the crisis.
In that regard, in order to make it possible for the
countries concerned to effectively take the steps needed
on the security and humanitarian fronts in order to meet
the most difficult challenge — stabilizing the region
and ensuring development — Senegal believes that the
following important areas merit particular attention.
First, there is a need to foster private investment,
which is essential to creating jobs, especially for young
people, who remain the primary target of terrorist
recruiters. We must also promote private investment so
as to reduce the heightened dependence of the region’s
population on agriculture, livestock rearing and fishing.
Secondly, there is also a need for particular attention
to addressing environmental challenges, for example,
the drying up of Lake Chad, which, as we all know, has
a very negative effect on agriculture in the region.
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Thirdly, it is important to bear in mind the need
to empower women both in the economic and political
fields, with a view to reducing their vulnterability and
augmenting their contribution to development.
Lastly, reducing the high level of dependence of the
affected countries on oil and other mineral resources
remains a priority. This step is necessary to avoid
adverse budgetary consequences as a result of the drop
in oil prices.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the urgent
need to bolster the coordination of local, national,
regional and international efforts in order to ensure
the effectiveness of our collective action against
Boko Haram. I pledge the full support of Senegal
in that endeavour — one of the most important for
the continent.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman and Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam
for their briefings.
We welcome the holding of this meeting, which
once again allows us to exclusively address the
situation in the Lake Chad basin. It undoubtedly gives
greater visibility to a grave crisis with relatively little
media coverage. The multidimensional character of the
Lake Chad basin crisis forces us to address all of its
causes simultaneously, jointly and in an interconnected
manner. The security, humanitarian and human rights
situations, as well as the effects of climate change
and socioeconomic stagnation in the region, call for
comprehensive attention if we are to responsibly tackle
the crisis. We commend the efforts of the Lake Chad
basin countries to address these challenges even with
limited capabilities and resources. In that regard,
we acknowledge the important role of international
partners and United Nations agencies that promote the
mobilization of regional resources.
The security efforts of the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the fight against Boko Haram, which have
made important progress, are laudable. They serve
as a clear example that coordinated regional efforts
are crucial in crises of this nature, where those who
undermine stability know no borders or countries and,
worse still, violate the fundamental human rights of
whole communities — particularly women, girls and
children. Similarly, the creation of the Group of Five
for the Sahel joint force will also provide a significant
boost to regional efforts in the fight against terrorism.

S/PV. 8047

However, there is concern about the repeated
allegations of human rights violations committed by
the Task Force and the security forces of the Lake
Chad basin countries. In that regard, Uruguay urges
that all security activities, including those in the fight
against terrorism, be carried out in strict compliance
with the standards of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law, and calls for all
due process guarantees to be provided to the alleged
victims of such violations.
The situation of women in the Lake Chad basin
merits particular attention given their vulnerability,
mainly due to Boko Haram’s actions. We note with
great concern the systematic use of sexual violence as
a terrorist tactic, as evidenced by the abduction and
sexual abuse of thousands of women and girls at the
hands of that terrorist group, as well as the increasing
use of female suicide bombers, infamously known as
women bombers or girl bombers.
On the other hand, very little information is
available regarding the impact of gender in a complex
humanitarian crisis, nor regarding the role that
women’s participation and leadership and gender
equality considerations play in peace efforts, such as
the struggle against violent extremism, the restoration
of State authority and the protection of human rights. In
that regard, my delegation identifies several key areas
that require special attention, such as assistance in
addressing the stigma of victims of sexual violence and
their children; the provision of sexual and reproductive
health services and education in the field; and ensuring
that national and regional strategies recognize survivors
of sexual violence as victims of terrorism so that they can
benefit from comprehensive and adequate assistance.
The Lake Chad basin has for many years witnessed
a multifaceted and structural crisis, which must be
addressed by identifying activities that not only
mitigate the terrorist threat and provide food to the
needy population, but also promote long-term stability.
That message was clearly transmitted to Heads of State,
ministers and senior officials during the mission of the
Security Council in the Niger, Cameroon, Chad and
Nigeria in March.
It is therefore crucial and imperative that the
Governments of the four countries implement public
policies that prioritize the allocation of resources to
address the structural causes of the crisis and promote
activities aimed at improving health services, education,

17-2851911/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

job creation and the resilience of communities with a
view to improving their ability to adapt and respond to
such disastrous developments.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
delighted, at the outset, to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for the briefing pursuant to resolution 2349
(2017). I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/764) and Ms. Imam for her briefing.
The Lake Chad basin region has witnessed genuine
progress in the fight against terrorist group Boko
Haram. First of all, many regions have been recovered
by Nigerian so Boko Haram no longer has such a strong
hold over so much territory, and many members of Boko
Haram have also been arrested. We commend the efforts
of the States of the region to overcome their challenges
despite their lack of resources. They are clearly taking
this multidimensional crisis seriously, and we are
seeing greater cooperation among them. Significant
national efforts have also been made, particularly in
the legal sphere, where there is greater cooperation
and where measures are being taken to respect human
rights, to allow refugees to return to their homes and to
free many young women kidnapped by Boko Haram.
The States of the region are today a model to be
emulated. Indeed, the humanitarian crisis is being
managed diligently and humanitarian aid has reached
the affected regions rather seamlessly. Additionally,
significant financial contributions have been made to
the region, primarily to benefit refugees. Nevertheless,
we are concerned about the humanitarian crisis in northeastern Nigeria, where 5.2 million people are affected
by a humanitarian crisis that today is looking very much
like a famine. That is why we call on donors to honour
the commitments they undertook in Oslo early this year
to avoid a full-blown humanitarian disaster. We call on
the various international and regional humanitarian
organizations to redouble their efforts to address and
combat the crisis. We are also deeply grateful to the
Secretary-General, who has spared no effort to raise
early awareness of the signs of this crisis this year and
to mobilize the funding needed to address it.
We strongly condemn any act that violates human
rights, including barbaric actions by Boko Haram against
the civilian population of the States in the Lake Chad
region, and especially violations against women and
girls, and the devastation wrought on schools, hospitals
and Nigeria’s medical and educational infrastructure in
general. We demand that all the perpetrators and their
12/22

13/09/2017

supporters be brought to justice and that they do not
enjoy impunity.
In that context, we would like to note that, despite
the achievements by the Multinational Joint Task
Force in combating Boko Haram, the Force still needs
more support from the international community in
restoring stability in the Lake Chad region. We urge
all the international and regional partners concerned to
provide more support to the Task Force at every level,
including equipment, training, logistics and capacitybuilding. We call on international partners to make
good on the commitments they announced at the donor
conference held in Addis Ababa on 1 February 2016
with regard to launching an African fund to support the
Multinational Joint Task Force.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary General Jeffrey Feltman
and Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam, Director of the Network
of Civil Society Organizations in Borno state, for
their briefings.
France is encouraged by the recent progress that
has been made in the fight against Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad basin region. We commend the joint efforts
of the countries of the region in that regard and the
central role that the Multinational Joint Task Force has
played. However, the terrorist threat continues to weigh
on the countries and peoples of the region, as the tragic
record of the many recent attacks shows. We firmly
condemn the serious human rights violations that are
being committed against children. Children are killed
and mutilated every day; they are victims of sexual
violence or of attacks on schools and hospitals; they are
recruited as child soldiers. The growing use of children
in suicide attacks and the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war are disgusting and a source of concern
and indignation that should haunt our consciences.
The countries of the region continue to mobilize in
response to the terrorists’ violence, with the support of
the international community. It is the Security Council’s
responsibility to provide support to the African States
that have been uniting at the regional level to fight
terrorism. France is playing a full part in that effort
through the logistical and intelligence support that
Operation Barkhane is giving the Multinational Joint
Task Force. We have also been providing bilateral
support to the armies of the region against Boko
Haram, totalling more than €30 million since 2015,
and we expect the rest of the international community
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

to take part in that effort as well. The countries of
the region, quite rightly, have major expectations for
United Nations involvement, as we saw last week in
the Council’s recent consultations with the African
Union Peace and Security Council, and we must not
disappoint them.
That international support for the efforts of
the countries of the region goes hand in hand with
certain responsibilities. In particular, the fight against
terrorism must not admit violations of human rights
of any kind. We therefore expect the countries of the
Multinational Joint Task Force to act in full respect
for the relevant provisions of international law. The
measures that have already been taken to deal with this
issue are steps in the right direction. Lastly, we deplore
the delay in disbursing the €31 million in funds that
the European Union allocated to the African Union a
year ago. It should be used to equip the regional force
that, owing to inadequate equipment, has been unable
to effectively pursue the Boko Haram fighters who have
taken refuge on the islands of Lake Chad during the
current rainy season.
The response to the crisis in the Lake Chad basin
region is not just a security matter. If we are to achieve
a lasting solution to it, we must pay close attention
to the humanitarian and development challenges and
to the protection of civilians. The first point to make
is that the gravity of the continuing humanitarian
emergency in the region must compel us to strengthen
our efforts to support the countries that are on the front
lines in the fight against terrorism and that are hosting
a considerable number of refugees. Given the size of the
needs to be met, it is crucial to ensure a comprehensive
approach and improve coordination between donors. If
United Nations action is to be truly effective, it can come
only in the form of support to the efforts of the countries
of the region. In that regard, the tripartite mechanism
established between Cameroon, Nigeria and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
is an important step forward that we should welcome.
It is also essential that all the countries concerned
ensure that United Nations and humanitarian personnel
have unhindered, safe access wherever people are in
need of emergency assistance. Lastly, we are particularly
worried about the risk of famine, particularly in northeastern Nigeria, where more than 5.2 million people,
including 450,000 children, are suffering from severe
food insecurity. This situation, which is the result of the
insecurity produced by Boko Haram, is not inevitable

S/PV. 8047

and should compel us to take action, which is why
France took the initiative of convening an Arria-formula
meeting on the issue in June, and why the Council has
asked the Secretary-General for a specific briefing on
it in October, under France’s presidency of the Council.
The second point I have to make is that the fight
against terrorism must go hand in hand with a tireless
effort to promote the protection of civilians. That
includes ensuring the continued security of populations
dealing with Boko Haram and supporting the voluntary
and lasting return of displaced persons and refugees
where security conditions permit. We also have to
come up with concrete, immediate answers to the issue
of women who are refugees or displaced, about which
they should be fully consulted.
My third and last point is that, in grappling with
the multifaceted security, humanitarian and economic
crisis in this region, the only possible approach is one
that engages with the virtuous circle of development.
If we are to succeed, we must tackle the security,
humanitarian and development challenges head on
and in a complementary way. It would be an illusion
to imagine that we can defeat terrorism without
eradicating extreme poverty and malnutrition or
improving education and employment for young people.
That is why France has maintained its financial effort
by contributing €14.5 million in humanitarian aid in
2017 and implementing a Lake Chad initiative for the
empowerment of refugees and displaced populations
amounting to a commitment of €36 million.
Conversely, it will not be possible to give
development genuine momentum if we do not defeat
Boko Haram. We encourage the States of the region
and the Multinational Joint Task Force to pursue
their coordinated military efforts to combat the two
branches of this terrorist group. Reconciliation must
begin, and we urge States to initiate political processes
aimed at encouraging combatants to surrender by
establishing a clear legal framework and reintegration
programmes. The only way to succeed, therefore, is to
take an approach that combines all the tools available
to the United Nations in the service of a comprehensive
strategy that is fully aligned with the reform of the
Organization that the Secretary-General is working on.
I would like to conclude by reminding the Council
once again that the Lake Chad region has not always
received the attention it deserves from the international
community. The Council’s visit to the region in March

17-2851913/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

enabled us to begin to redress that mistake and initiate
a new dynamic in that regard. It is important that this
issue remain a priority in the long term for both the
Council and the international community, and France
pledges its support in this respect.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
Ms. Imam for their briefings.
China has been closely following developments
in the Lake Chad basin and appreciates the firm
commitment shown and the unremitting efforts made by
the countries of the region in the fight against terrorism.
China welcomes the formation of the Multinational
Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and its positive progress in
the joint operations against terrorism.
At present, the Lake Chad basin region is plagued
by terrorist and violent extremist activities and the
threats posed by transnational organized crimes,
including trafficking in arms, drugs and human beings,
and the security situation there remains precarious.
Meanwhile, the countries of the region face the grave
challenges posed by the humanitarian crisis, with
massive displacement of civilians in dire need of
humanitarian assistance, including food and medicine.
The United Nations and the international community
must closely follow developments in the Lake Chad
basin and jointly help the countries of the region to
respond to the current challenges.
First, effective measures must be taken to ease
the humanitarian crisis in the Lake Chad basin. The
countries of the region and subregion and their peoples
have hosted large numbers of internally displaced
persons, and the international community should lend
a helping hand. China has promptly responded to the
crisis through bilateral and multilateral channels,
providing emergency food assistance to the countries
of the region, including Nigeria and Chad. We call on
the international donors to honour their humanitarian
assistance commitments as soon as possible and to
continue to provide the countries of the region with
massive assistance in terms of improving food security
and medical care.
Secondly, support should be given to the countries
of the region in their efforts to fight terrorism. Counterterrorism in Africa is an important component of the
international counter-terrorism struggle and has made
a significant contribution thereto. The international
community should support African countries in seeking
14/22

13/09/2017

African solutions to African problems, on the basis of
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the countries of the region, helping them to
enhance their counter-terrorism capacity and providing
them with assistance in the areas of funding, equipment
and technology training support so as to support the
MNJTF in carrying out effective operations.
Thirdly, we should take a longer-term perspective
on this problem and focus on providing assistance to
the countries of the region in upgrading their capacities
in the area of economic and social development.
The United Nations should scale up its contribution
to post-conflict reconstruction and economic
development and effectively improve living standards,
thereby eliminating the breeding ground for conflict
and terrorism.
We hope that the countries of the region will
strengthen their coordination with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Lake Chad Basin Commission and jointly respond
to the challenges.
The international community should better align
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development with the African Agenda 2063 so as to
achieve lasting peace and development as early as
possible in Africa.
China has maintained close political and economic
relations with the Lake Chad basin countries, actively
providing assistance in their economic and social
development. China will continue to pursue an Africa
policy based on sincerity, practicality, affinity, good
faith, justice and shared interests, fully implementing
all of the outcomes of the Johannesburg Summit of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation.
China stands ready to work with the international
community and the countries of the region to support
Central and West African countries in achieving
lasting peace and common prosperity and to make a
new contribution to peace and development in Africa.
Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): I should like to join other
speakers in expressing our gratitude to all of today’s
briefers for their important inputs into our discussion.
In March, the Security Council, following its
visit to the Lake Chad basin, adopted resolution 2349
(2017), which was a timely and dedicated instrument
for responding to the complex crisis in the region.
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

The Lake Chad Basin region continues to endure
a dire humanitarian and security situation. Extreme
poverty, severe food insecurity, weak governance,
climate change and the destructive activities of Boko
Haram all contribute to this disastrous state of affairs.
Boko Haram continues to pose a threat to the
civilian population in the region. Like a drowning man
grasping at a straw, terrorists resort to the use of all
available means, including suicide attacks. This only
proves that they are losing their combat capacity. In this
regard, we commend the efforts of the Multinational
Joint Task Force and other actors that are fighting this
terrorist group. But the countries of the region need
additional support from the international community to
prevail in this fight once and for all.
The United Nations and other relevant partners
should continue their efforts in helping the Force
prevent and address violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law in the context of their
military operations. In this regard, we commend the
efforts of the relevant United Nations entities that are
working closely in the region towards the establishment
of a human rights due diligence policy framework.
Without such an instrument, the countries of the
Lake Chad basin will face additional obstacles with
regard to the deradicalization and reintegration of former
Boko Haram combatants, as well as to reconciliation.
To ensure lasting peace in the areas liberated
from Boko Haram, the Governments of the Lake Chad
basin region need to rebuild critical infrastructure,
restore a State presence and grant unimpeded access
to humanitarian actors. The absence of governmental
involvement in these areas would mean that people
would continue to be compelled to leave their homes
and seek support and assistance in neighbouring
countries or, much worse, join the ranks of terrorists.
Another question that requires our attention is
the need for the Lake Chad basin countries to ensure
the full implementation of their commitments in the
area of the protection of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). We are concerned by the news that some
countries continue to undertake forced returns of IDPs.
Refugees should return to their homes only voluntarily,
once they are sure that it is safe to leave the camps. If
not, we are risking the creation of frequent back-andforth movements across the borders and other areas of
the region.

S/PV. 8047

At the same time, we are encouraged by the efforts
of the Lake Chad basin Governments in responding
to the needs of the peoples affected, including those
in Nigeria. It is paramount that the region and the
international community be able to provide the urgently
needed support to the 10.7 million people across the
Lake Chad basin.
Last but not least, in resolution 2349 (2017) the
Council recognized the adverse effects of climate change
and ecological challenges among other factors affecting
the stability of the region, and emphasized the need
for adequate risk assessments and risk-management
strategies by the Governments of the region and the
United Nations. The issue of climate change was also
dealt with by the Council at the Arria-Formula meeting
on the security implications of climate change, which
was organized by Ukraine in April.
In this regard, we look forward to seeing this
problematic issue discussed in the upcoming reports of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Lake Chad
basin region.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing. I thank also Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam for
joining us; it is good to hear from her. It was very good
to have met her on the Council’s trip earlier this year to
Maiduguri, and I thank her for the important work she
does in north-east Nigeria. The contributions of civil
society are so very critical.
The Lake Chad Basin is one of Africa’s most
pressing challenges. For years the United States has
strongly supported efforts to eradicate the terror
perpetrated by Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), and this fight is far from over.
But all of us in the Security Council must recognize
that a military solution alone will not bring sustainable
peace to the Lake Chad basin.
Although the counter-terrorism mission is vital, we
also need to support the stabilization and development
of liberated areas and demand respect for human
rights and accountability for human rights abuses and
violations for all perpetrators. That is why, following
the Council’s trip to the region, we adopted resolution
2359 (2017) and its mandate for the Secretary-General
to regularly report on the situation in the Lake Chad
basin so that the Council can respond to the grave
circumstances faced by so many in the region.

17-2851915/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

This first report (S/2017/764) is an important step
in that regard, and we are committed to ensuring that
the region remains on the Council’s agenda. Discussing
the situation in the Lake Chad basin in the Security
Council should not be at all controversial. Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) are
clear and present threats to international peace and
security. We have seen unspeakable human rights
abuses committed in the Lake Chad basin. The region
is on the brink of famine, and we still do not have
unfettered humanitarian access to those in need. It is
therefore long past time for the Council to step up its
involvement. Boko Haram persists in its brutal tactics
and human rights abuses.
The United States is deeply troubled by the
increase in attacks and deaths that we have observed at
the hands of Boko Haram and ISIS since the adoption
of resolution 2359 (2017) earlier this year. In June and
July alone, according to the United Nations, 60 female
suicide bombers have launched attacks across Borno
state. Hundreds of civilians have been killed this year.
There is a long way to go to defeat Boko Haram and
ISIS in the Lake Chad basin, and that is why the United
States is deeply committed to its partnerships across
the region to eradicate those groups and to stop the
senseless violence.
As we discovered during the Council’s trip in March
in the course of our meetings with women and girls
in Maroua, Cameroon, and Maiduguri, Nigeria, that
conflict, like so many others, has a disproportionate
impact on women and girls — a point that Ms. Imam
just underscored for us. The fact that Boko Haram
increasingly relies on young girls to commit suicide
attacks is the clearest example. We were so struck
by that terrible reality during our trip. Just as those
girls lives where beginning, they were abused and
brainwashed to commit the most unspeakable of acts,
thereby cutting short their all-too-brief lives and those
of the innocent victims around them.
There is no question that Boko Haram and ISIS must
be destroyed, but success against those groups requires
more than a simple show of force. The most successful
counter-terrorism campaigns are those that adhere to
international humanitarian law, respect the human
rights of all citizens and hold violators of human rights
accountable. We therefore remain troubled by reports
of regional security forces using inhumane and brutal
tactics or failing to distinguish terrorist combatants
from civilians. Failing to uphold and protect human
16/22

13/09/2017

rights or hold security forces accountable only serves
to boost the recruitment efforts of the very terrorists
whom we seek to eradicate. Regional Governments
must ensure that their security forces protect civilians
and uphold their fundamental human rights. There
must be a better way to both investigate and prevent
those and other abuses from happening.
We were concerned to read in the SecretaryGeneral’s report about the delayed opening of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) in Chad to enhance regional
monitoring and reporting. We believe that the Council
should consider mandating a formal OHCHR mission
to visit the region to report first-hand on abuses by all
parties. But the challenges in this conflict do not end
when areas are liberated from Boko Haram and ISIS.
In those areas, local authorities need to quickly restore
the basics: the rule of law, respect for human rights and
basic services. That is how we can all ensure that groups
like Boko Haram and ISIS do not return. Such efforts
to restore local governance deserve strong international
support. Governments in the Lake Chad basin also need
to establish the conditions for millions of internally
displaced persons and Nigerian refugees to voluntarily
return to their homes in safety and dignity.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call on Nigeria
and Cameroon to work with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to achieve
the full implementation of the tripartite agreement to
ensure no forced returns of refugees, and call upon
all other Governments to avoid any involuntary or
unsafe returns of those displaced. The United States
remains committed to supporting the Governments of
the Lake Chad basin in meeting those very difficult
challenges. We have contributed over $640 million to
the international humanitarian response in the Lake
Chad basin since October 2015, of which more than
two-thirds was provided this past year alone.
Many other countries have stepped up to provide
assistance to the region, including the Niger’s
$4.4 million-dollar contribution to its own national
appeal. We commend those pledges, but more must
be done. We would therefore urge all Member States
to examine ways in which they can support counterterrorism, the humanitarian response in all the affected
countries, economic development, human rights and
stabilization in the region.
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

The United States will continue supporting regional
leadership and the people of the Lake Chad basin in
their arduous efforts to rid the region of Boko Haram
and ISIS and establish stability, good governance and
prosperity. We urge our fellow Council members and
the entire United Nations system to continue focusing
our collective attention and efforts on the region and
its challenges.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his informative briefing
and welcome Director Imam to our deliberations.
The visit of members of the Security Council to the
countries of the Lake Chad basin enabled us to learn
more about the Multinational Joint Task Force, as well
as the humanitarian situation. That will help in devising
a future comprehensive strategy focused on addressing
the root causes and the socioeconomic dimension of
the crisis. The measures of the Multinational Joint
Task Force and the national armies of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria have resulted successfully
in combating Boko Haram. Notwithstanding those
gains, much needs to be accomplished. To fight Boko
Haram, we have to robustly strengthen the framework
of integrated assistance for countering terrorism
for the joint force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Resolving the humanitarian situation requires the
resettlement of displaced people and refugees and
immediately addressing the level of critical food
insecurity. Returning to villages of origin is vital to
beginning a new life and restarting agriculture to avert
a potential famine.
Access to areas remains a challenge, despite efforts
to overcome them, and therefore the establishment of
humanitarian assistance in Nigeria and other measures
should be supported. It will also be essential to
implement the tripartite agreement between Cameroon,
Nigeria and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to manage the voluntary
return of refugees across the countries’ borders.
Care for the half-million children suffering from
severe, acute malnutrition and disease should be
administered in the light of destroyed health facilities.
The detention of children must be stopped during
counter-terrorism responses, with the prohibition of
the use of schools and hospitals for military purposes.
Furthermore, the abduction of and violence directed
against women and girls by Boko Haram, as well as

S/PV. 8047

the responses of security forces and vigilante groups in
counter-terrorism operations, demand global attention.
Headquarters, together with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and UN-Women, must continue to advocate with the
Governments and the Multinational Joint Task Force
to advance a strategy to prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse. That could be facilitated by recruiting
dedicated gender advisers at all phases of the peace and
development process.
The complex plight of people living in affected
areas continues to impede the recovery in progress. In
that regard, implementing the tripartite convention to
strengthen judicial cooperation signed by Chad, Mali
and the Niger would offer them better legal protection.
The trip to the Lake Chad basin region vividly
demonstrated that we need to strengthen the role of
the United Nations system, in close consultation with
national authorities within the context of the United
Nations development assistance framework so that the
United Nations delivers as one. The coordinated activity
of all United Nations agencies and programmes across
the board will help deliver assistance in an effective,
economically rational and transparent manner.
Moreover, investments are essential to reducing
poverty, providing education, health care and social
services, and encouraging opportunities, which would
considerably improve the socioeconomic situation.
We are convinced that long-term stability and
sustainable peace can be achieved only through the nexus
linking peace, security and development. Above all, the
recent two visits by members of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to Africa, respectively, have
amply demonstrated the need to promote a regional
approach, which is the only way forward. Threats to the
region, such as terrorism, environmental degradation
and underdevelopment, cannot be successfully
addressed in one country alone. They are interregional
in nature and must be addressed accordingly.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for the information he provided to us
in connection with the first report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Lake Chad basin region
(S/2017/764). We also thank Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam
for the statement she delivered to the Council today.

17-2851917/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

Bolivia expresses its concern over the ongoing
threat posed by Boko Haram to the Niger, Chad,
Cameroon and Nigeria. The terrible attacks perpetrated
by the group against the civilian population — murders,
kidnappings, the use of girls as suicide bombers,
sexual violence against women, the recruitment of
children — all clearly show the urgent need for the
international community to join forces in countering
the extreme violence of Boko Haram. As a result, the
region faces a devastating humanitarian situation.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report,
10.7 million people need humanitarian assistance.
This is an alarming number that must force us to sit up
and take note and compel us to undertake efforts that
will allow the Governments of the Lake Chad basin to
move forward.
In the short term, we are focusing on the fight
against food insecurity and the basic needs of internally
displaced persons, refugees and the most vulnerable
people and, in cases of return, ensuring that their
return be voluntary, safe and dignified. We echo the
appeal made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for the necessary funds to be
earmarked and for assistance to be provided to the
people in need.
Recalling the message conveyed by the Deputy
Secretary-General to the Council at our meeting
of 10 August (see S/PV.8022), we must pay special
attention and respond to the impact that this conflict
has on women in the region. While sexual violence
in conflict does not distinguish based on gender,
it primarily affects affect women and girls. They
are victims of violence, rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced marriages, forced sterilization and
other forms of violence, in addition to stigmatization
when they return to their communities. All of this is the
result of Boko Haram’s violent extremism.
In this regard, the empowerment of women in
the fight against that terrorist group is crucial. The
full and equal participation of women in conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution processes must
be ensured in the strategies that are being executed.
It is therefore fundamental to ensure compliance with
Security Council resolutions related to women and
peace and security, especially resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 2242 (2015).
We express our concern about the effects of climate
change on the Lake Chad basin, such as water scarcity,
18/22

13/09/2017

desertification, drought, among others, all of which
increase the instability of the region. We must develop
strategies that address these risks as they largely affect
socioeconomic development and food insecurity. In
view of this terrible situation, we must acknowledge
and commend the work of the Governments of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission — Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria — in the fight against terrorism.
Thanks to the committed and coordinated work of these
four countries, significant progress has been made in
reducing Boko Haram’s capacity.
In that respect, we welcome the Commission’s
initiative to hold the first regional conference in
October, which will allow us to define mechanisms
to tackle the region’s crisis, in addition to dealing
with the root causes of the conflict. We are confident
that the leadership of these countries will allow us to
establish a regional strategy that will address these
root causes, as that is one of the main shortcomings
that we are currently facing. In that connection, we
should also consider developing a regional strategy to
address disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration of former members of Boko Haram.
The participation of regional organizations in
these efforts is also essential. The African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, and
the Economic Community of Central African States
have assisted in the establishment of the Multinational
Joint Task Force, which has considerably reduced the
capacity of Boko Haram in recent years. In this regard,
we call on donors and the international community to
honour their pledges, to cooperate with countries in the
region and to strengthen their governance and State
institutions, as well as to contribute to the efforts of
the subregion and the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the fight against terrorism, as stated in resolution 2349
(2017). Boko Haram is not only a threat to the Lake
Chad basin region, it is also a threat to the international
community as a whole.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman and Ms. Imam for their briefings.
Boko Haram represents an ongoing threat to the Lake
Chad basin, with devastating near-term humanitarian
impacts and long-term socioeconomic effects. We are
encouraged by the efforts of the countries in the region,
including gains made through the Multinational Joint
Task Force during the reporting period. However, much
more needs to be done to implement resolution 2349
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8047

(2017) and stabilize the region. Allow me to highlight a
few areas that need particular attention.

humanitarian crisis and a gender-responsive approach
is a must.

More than anything else, there are massive and
immediate humanitarian needs. The large-scale food
insecurity and nutritional emergency requires not
only more aid, but also delivery and access. There is
a commendable effort under way to strengthen civilmilitary cooperation among humanitarian actors,
the Multinational Joint Task Force and national
security services. We encourage these actors to share
information and best practices. We also call for full
implementation of the tripartite agreement between the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Cameroon and Nigeria, which is essential
for the safe and dignified return of refugees. Japan is
actively considering additional humanitarian assistance
to counter food insecurity and nutritional emergency.

All actors must integrate gender analysis into their
substantive work, including by adopting a genderspecific approach for the protection and empowerment
of women and girls victimized by or formerly
associated with Boko Haram. As a recent example of
efforts to implement resolution 2349 (2017), Japan has
funded a subregional workshop, hosted by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in Yaoundé
in July, to better integrate a gender perspective into
criminal justice responses to terrorism. This workshop
supported multisectoral efforts by four countries,
as well as the African Union (AU) to strengthen the
criminal justice response while ensuring that women’s
rights are respected.

In addition to the immediate humanitarian response
to the crisis, long-term investment in socioeconomic
development is required for early recovery. Following
the Oslo Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and
the Lake Chad Region in February, the first senior
officials meeting of the Oslo Consultative Group last
week expanded the focus to long-term stability and
development, including through enhanced institutions.
Our efforts must build on this growing global attention
to ensure that the United Nations technical expertise in
development and peacebuilding is deployed coherently
and effectively across the Lake Chad basin.
Both the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council have visited the field
individually. These missions led to a shared awareness
of the challenges facing the Lake Chad basin and
of the need to do more. It has become clear that the
deterioration of the economy raises the risk of terrorist
recruitment. Local calls for job creation, education and
vocational training for youth are common throughout
the region. The long-term impact of climate change
on the socioeconomic stability of the region and
community also needs to be examined. The importance
of enhancing community resilience to violent
extremism by addressing the root causes of the Boko
Haram insurgency cannot be overemphasized.
I would also like to draw attention to the
disproportionate impact of sexual and gender-based
violence on women and girls in the region by Boko
Haram, as well as other actors. Female internally
displaced persons are also most vulnerable during a

In a similar vein, we commend the recent United
Nations-AU joint mission to Nigeria under the Deputy
Secretary-General to support efforts to advance peace
through women’s well-being and empowerment.
Empowering women and promoting their active role
is essential to rebuilding society and strengthening
community
resilience
against
terrorism
and
violent extremism.
Japan strongly supports the United Nations regional
approaches to the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel.
We also encourage UNOWAS and UNOCA to focus
sustained attention on and follow up to resolution 2349
(2017) in that regard. Japan looks forward to working
together with international and regional partners to
secure a better future for the region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Lake Chad Basin region.
Terrorism remains the main threat facing the
entire world, and the African continent in particular.
The increased activity of militants of the terrorist
group Boko Haram in north-eastern Nigeria and northwestern Cameroon is of great concern. Attacks on
civilians, refugee camps and humanitarian convoys
have become more frequent. Terrorists are not afraid to
use women and children as suicide bombers. By some
estimates, over the past six months there have been
several hundred victims.

17-2851919/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

13/09/2017

We strongly condemn the criminal ideology and
practices of Boko Haram. We should abandon the
harmful classification of the fight against Boko Haram
as a conflict. That organization is classified as a terrorist
entity by the Security Council. The fight against it is
therefore a counter-terrorist operation. Attempts to
represent terrorists as one of the parties to a conflict
only serves to create the illusion that punishment for
their crimes can be avoided.

to the threats and challenges faced by the countries
of the Lake Chad basin. It is important to ensure the
coherence of approaches to assisting countries of the
region. At the same time, outside support should not be
turned into the imposition of ready-made formulas that
are alien to African states. The international role must
be supported by the coordinating role of the United
Nations, in close coordination with African structures
and individual African States.

We are convinced of the importance of coordinated
action by Africans, including its subregional
organizations, in the fight against terrorism. We note
the relevant efforts of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
and the Multinational Joint Task Force, formed by
Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria, Chad and Benin. We
welcome the results achieved to date.

We welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to
develop a comprehensive strategy for the region. We
believe that it should serve as a consolidating and
cementing element for external support for the region.
In our view, it is important to take into account the
experience garnered from the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the
real impact of which has yet to be seen.

Fundamental advances in counter-terrorism
activities are hampered by the close link between
terrorists and various criminal groups, pirates and
smugglers. Bandits exploit gaps in national and crossborder security to engage in their illicit activity. As a
result, the region is witnessing a flourishing trade in
drugs and arms and uncontrolled and illegal migration.
One cannot but be alarmed by the fact that in profiting
from the chaos and suffering of the population, criminal
elements provide material support to terrorists.
Despite the priority of the counter-terrorism
element, the situation in the region cannot be rectified
by force alone. To achieve sustainable political
stabilization, it is necessary to work to address the
root causes that have led to the deterioration of the
situation and the creation of Boko Haram. Terrorists
and extremists of every kind must be deprived of fuel
to grow. It is important to resolve acute social and
economic problems and to strengthen the institutions
of State authority in that part of the African continent.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report on
the situation in the Lake Chad basin (S/2017/764),
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate.
Resources that national Governments could allocate
to alleviating the suffering of the population are being
redirected to fight Boko Haram. A vicious cycle has
therefore been created; people cannot be fed until
terrorism is defeated, but terrorism cannot be defeated
so long as extremist groups thrive on a despairing and
desolate population.
In that regard, we support a decisive and adequate
response on the part of the international community
20/22

For our part, we stand ready to continue to support
African States in addressing the problems facing
them in the context of the fight against Boko Haram
and in helping refugees and the victims of natural
disasters. We will continue to provide humanitarian
and other assistance, both bilaterally and through
international organizations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.
At the outset, I wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his comprehensive briefing on the
security, humanitarian, human rights and social and
economic situations in the Lake Chad basin. We also
thank Ms. Fatima Imam for joining us via teleconference
from Maiduguri, Nigeria.
We welcome the first six-month report of the
Secretary-General on the Lake Chad basin (S/2017/764),
pursuant to resolution 2349 (2017). In that regard, we
take note of the progress that countries of the region
have made in the fight against Boko Haram, and we
commend the crucial role played by the Multinational
Joint Task Force. However, it is only by addressing the
root causes of the conflict in the subregion, including
challenges resulting from climate change, underdevelopment and unemployment, among other things,
that long-term solutions to the crises in the region can
be found.
That was indeed strongly underscored during the
discussion we had with the African Union Peace and
Security Council in Addis Ababa on the situation of
17-28519

13/09/2017

Peace and security in Africa

the Lake Chad basin. We welcome the plan by the
Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) and the African
Union to organize the first regional conference in
N’Djamena next month, with a view to developing
a regional strategy. The regional dimension of the
security threats in the subregion and their cross-cutting
nature no doubt require an integrated approach, and the
initiative of the LCBC and the African Union is a step
in the right direction.
In spite of the progress seen in scaling up
international support, the increasing humanitarian
needs in the Lake Chad basin require continued
mobilization and support. The plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons is a matter of particular
concern. We hope that the United Nations and the
international community will redouble efforts in
that regard.
I will conclude by underlining the importance
of further coordination of the efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as their
respective regional mechanisms, to meet the needs of
the countries of the Lake Chad basin. Developing a
regional strategy to address the root causes of the crises,
encouraging international support for the Multinational
Joint Task Force and urging donors to fulfil pledges for
humanitarian needs are some of the priorities before the
Council. We hope to see progress along those lines over
the coming six months.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): I wish to thank the Ethiopian
presidency and the membership of the Security
Council for organizing this briefing. It is illustrative
of the positive disposition of members of the Security
Council towards resolving the myriad challenges of the
Lake Chad Basin region. Our special appreciation goes
to the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/764),
which contains far-reaching recommendations. We also
commend Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
insight on the situation in the region and we note the
perspectives shared by Fatima Shehu Imam.
The Boko Haram insurgency has negatively
impacted virtually every facet of human endeavour,
including the economy, the polity, and the lives and
livelihoods of people not only in the north-east of
Nigeria, but across the region.

S/PV. 8047

The insurgency has been met with resolve and
resilience of the Nigerian people and Government. The
Multinational Joint Task Force has had great success in
weakening Boko Haram. We have continued to witness
the emergence of rescued survivors and victims,
hitherto under the brutal oppression of Boko Haram
in the north-east. Communities have pulled together to
provide succour.
For its part, the Nigerian Government has made
significant progress in the fight against Boko Haram.
The Nigerian military has successfully taken over the
Sambisa forest and its environs. In that success story, we
acknowledge the critical support of our neighbouring
countries, namely, Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Benin. That progress notwithstanding, the Nigerian
Government is aware of other development challenges
in the region, including the shrinking of Lake Chad.
Averting that consequence will require dedicated
international intervention to recharge the lake.
As we celebrate our gains in the war against Boko
Haram, we are not oblivious of the humanitarian
challenges resulting from the massive displacement of
persons, the abandoned farmlands and the disruption
of the educational system, among others. In that
regard, the Government of Nigeria has embarked on
programmes to support the reintegration of victims into
their communities.
I am glad to report that the Presidential Committee
on the North-East Initiative has been mandated to
coordinate and provide synergy, leadership and
direction for the various initiatives to help bring
normalcy to the region. That encompasses Government,
development partners, private foundations and civil
society. We are also accelerating the implementation of
existing legal and institutional frameworks to alleviate
the suffering of our people, in the spirit of the Istanbul
World Humanitarian Summit of May 2016.
We acknowledge and welcome the critical support
provided by the United Nations agencies to the girls
released by Boko Haram. For its part, the Nigerian
Government has continued to provide food, integrated
healthcare, shelter, psychosocial support and access to
water and sanitation amenities for those in need. We
are also engaging highly respected community and
religious leaders to discourage vulnerable youth from
being radicalized. We continue to accord the highest
premium to increasing the resilience of internally

17-2851921/22

S/PV.8047

Peace and security in Africa

displaced persons through vocational training and
skills acquisition programmes.
We hope that at this critical juncture, when there
is an improvement in the security situation as a result
of the recent military gains, the Security Council and
the international community will continue to engage
the Governments in the region in the search for lasting
peace, security, protection of civilians and resolution of
the humanitarian situation caused by the activities of
Boko Haram.
May I seize this opportunity to reiterate the
commitment of Nigeria to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, in recognition of the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
national jurisdiction. This conviction underlines our
Government’s resolve to take all measures necessary to
protect civilians in the battle against the terrorist group
Boko Haram and its ilk. All such measures are being

22/22

13/09/2017

taken within a framework designed to simultaneously
address the short- and medium-term development
needs of the region.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the future
of the people of the Lake Chad basin region rests on
durable security and the sustainability of resources
around the lake. We are confident that by enhancing
collaboration and consolidating strong partnerships
through the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
African Union, we will swiftly overcome the challenge.
The upcoming N’Djamena meeting is a consolidation
of such efforts.
We renew the call for rededicated international
action, increased global attention and active
engagement with countries of the Lake Chad basin
region to accelerate the recovery efforts and to address
the root causes of terrorism.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

17-28519
