S/PV.7978

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7978th meeting

Tuesday, 20 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr.Llorentty Solíz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Klein
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17647 (E)
*1717647*

S/PV.7978

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, in
his capacity as the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Lauber will be joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I am thankful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on developments in Burundi
and the efforts of the United Nations and partners to
help resolve the crisis in the country.
As members of the Security Council are aware,
on 5 May, the Secretary-General appointed former
President of Burkina Faso, Mr. Michel Kafando, as
his new Special Envoy to lead and coordinate United
Nations political efforts on Burundi, and to provide
assistance to the mediation and facilitation led by the
East African Community (EAC). Mr. Kafando visited
New York from 30 May to 7 June for briefings and
introductory meetings and consultations with Member
States and the Secretariat. He will travel to the region
shortly to meet with Burundian stakeholders, the
East African Community Mediator and Facilitator,
the African Union and other relevant actors. That
engagement in the region will give us a better insight
into the status of the political process, the assessment of
regional leaders of the situation and on the way forward.
Since the most recent briefing to the Security
Council on 9 March (see S/PV.7895), the situation
in Burundi has remained volatile. With regard to the
2/9

20/06/2017

political process, after some delays, an EAC Summit of
Heads of State and Government was held on 20 May in
Dar es Salaam, at which President Museveni of Uganda
was elected Chair of the Eastern African Community
and the progress report and recommendations
presented by EAC Facilitator, former President Mkapa,
were approved. In the report, Mr. Mkapa highlighted
nine points to, as he put it, clean the polluted political
environment to allow for effective preparations for
the 2020 elections, including confidence-building
measures, inclusivity and political space, the return of
refugees and exiled political leaders and the preservation
of the Constitution and the Arusha Agreement.
Mr. Mkapa expressed concern over the slow
progress in the dialogue and called on all parties to
engage in good faith without preconditions. He also
expressed concern over the Government’s demand to
repatriate the EAC-led dialogue to Burundi. Mr. Mkapa
urged the leaders of the region to put their full weight
behind his facilitation, including by providing
appropriate funding for the process. The next round of
consultations is scheduled to take place in Arusha in
early July. The joint EAC-United Nations-Africa Union
working group continues to meet regularly in Arusha,
with the participation of a team from the Office of the
Special Envoy in Burundi in support of the efforts of
the Facilitator.
The security situation in Burundi remains fragile.
Recent weeks have seen grenade attacks in the capital
and repression and intimidation by security forces and
associated groups. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as human
rights non-governmental organizations, continues to
report targeted arrests, arbitrary detention, torture and
ill-treatment of real or perceived opposition members
and supporters, as well as extrajudicial killings and
forced disappearances.
Reports of incitement to hatred and violence have
increased since April, with regular testimonies and video
recordings of rallies by the Imbonerakure, the youth
wing of the ruling Conseil national pour la défense de
la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie
(CNDD-FDD). The dissemination of one such video
on social media prompted the CNDD-FDD to issue a
statement on 5 April condemning the inflammatory
lyrics and attributing the events to influences outside
the party. On 18 April, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights issued a strong statement condemning
the hateful rhetoric and incitement to violence.
17-17647

20/06/2017

The situation in Burundi

The Government of Burundi has not resumed its
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner
since it was suspended in mid-October 2016. The
High Commissioner has been awaiting a response
from the Government regarding amendments to a
proposal for a new memorandum of understanding. The
Commission of Inquiry on the human rights situation
in Burundi, established by the Human Rights Council,
presented its second oral briefing on 15 June. The
three commissioners regretted the lack of access to the
country and the lack of cooperation by the Government
of Burundi. The Commission of Inquiry has collected
more than 470 testimonies of human rights violations
allegedly committed in Burundi since 2015. The
Commission will present its final report to the Human
Rights Council this coming September.
In its final report, issued on 12 May, the Commission
Nationale de Dialogue Inter-Burundais (CNDI) stated
that the majority in Burundi supported a revision of the
Constitution, the lifting of presidential term limits and
changes to other provisions of the Arusha Agreement.
Subsequently, President Nkurunziza appointed a
constitutional review commission, which has yet to
be established, with a six-month mandate to submit
proposals to amend the Constitution. The CNDI report
and the creation of the constitutional review commission
were denounced by opposition parties, including the
Conseil national pour le respect de l’Accord d’Arusha
pour la paix et la réconciliation au Burundi et la
restauration de l’état de droit. Civil society leaders in
exile also condemned the move, which they consider a
potential catalyst for unrest.
It is of great concern that those developments
are taking place against the backdrop of widespread
restrictions on civil liberties and political freedom.
Implementing the proposed changes in the current
climate will likely lead to an escalation of the crisis.
Since the Secretariat’s previous briefing, the
socioeconomic and humanitarian situations have also
deteriorated. Three million people in Burundi are in
need of humanitarian assistance. Nearly 2.6 million
others experience acute food insecurity, with over
700,000 in need of emergency food assistance. Mass
displacement continues due to natural hazards, food
insecurity and sociopolitical factors. About 209,000
people are internally displaced. The number of
Burundian refugees in neighbouring countries exceeds
400,000. Humanitarian actors have scaled up their
response, but have yet to reach the capacity required

S/PV.7978

to meet emerging life-saving needs. The Government
has eased some restrictions on humanitarian access.
The humanitarian community has appealed for
$73.7 million to assist a third of the estimated 3 million
people in need. The appeal is currently funded at only
35 per cent, and the humanitarian community urgently
needs additional financial support.
The International Monetary Fund projects a growth
rate of 0 per cent and an inflation rate of more than
12 per cent in 2017. Severe fuel and electricity shortages
further disrupt business and social activities and drive
up prices. Blackouts, lasting several days at a time,
have reportedly caused an uptick in criminal activity
in some areas.
The Secretariat remains fully committed to
assisting the people of Burundi and supporting the
EAC-led dialogue process. Regional actors and
international partners need to put their full weight
behind the EAC-led dialogue and continue to press for
the implementation of confidence-building measures to
help create conditions conducive to the holding of an
inclusive and credible political dialogue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing to the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council from
the perspective of the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As usual,
my statement has been subject to consultation with,
and approval by, the members of the configuration,
including the country concerned, Burundi.
Let me start by welcoming the two appointments
just mentioned by the Assistant Secretary-General:
those of Mr. Michel Kafando as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General and of Mr. Garry Conille as
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi.
We also acknowledge the rapid accreditation by the
Government of Burundi. We furthermore welcome
Mr. Kafando’s visit to Burundi, scheduled for the end
of the month, to make the first contact with the national
authorities in Bujumbura. I very much look forward to
the cooperation between Mr. Kafando, Mr. Conille and
the configuration.
One of the key events that marked the period
since the previous Council briefing on Burundi (see
S/PV.7895) was, as the Assistant Secretary-General just

17-176473/9

S/PV.7978

The situation in Burundi

mentioned, the East African Community (EAC) Heads
of State Summit on 20 May in Dar-es-Salaam. The
Summit demonstrated once again the importance of
regional engagement. Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President
of Uganda, now assumes the chairmanship of the EAC,
and he reiterated his personal commitment to the EACled Burundi mediation. He also called for a resumption
of socioeconomic cooperation with Burundi.
Furthermore, the Summit provided clarity about
the direction of the mediation process. Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, EAC Facilitator and former President of
Tanzania, presented a proposal on the way forward
that outlines a series of steps towards overcoming
the current situation and creating the necessary
preconditions for peaceful and democratic elections in
2020. The EAC Heads of State welcomed that proposal,
and I hear similar positive reactions from Burundi’s
major socioeconomic partners.
Political dialogue, security and human rights,
as well as socioeconomic development, are closely
interlinked, and it is important to see progress in all
three areas. In the political area, the plan outlined by
President Mkapa, and endorsed by the EAC Summit
on 20 May, offers a clear pathway towards progress.
The inter-Burundian dialogue, led by the Commission
nationale de dialogue inter-Burundais, as well as
recent initiatives by the Ombudsman, should evolve in
synchronization with the EAC-led process. A greater
international presence can considerably contribute to
improvements in the area of human rights and security.
Whereas the Government of Burundi has signalled its
readiness to accept a continued presence of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) in Burundi, the modalities of the
cooperation between the Government and OHCHR
remain to be agreed. I furthermore hope that the rest
of the 200 agreed military and human rights observers
of the African Union (AU) can soon be deployed to
Burundi and complement those AU observers who are
already in the country. The monitoring and reporting
of both institutions, in cooperation with the host
Government, have the potential to contribute to a
further stabilization of the situation.
Besides these two areas, we must not neglect the
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. In recent
months, the PBC Burundi configuration focused in
particular on socioeconomic development, which was a
key aspect in the consultations that I held in Burundi and
Tanzania from 27 to 31 March. A written report on the
4/9

20/06/2017

outcome of that visit was submitted to the PBC and the
Security Council in April. During the visit, I co-hosted a
socioeconomic meeting in Bujumbura together with His
Excellency Alain Aimé Nyamitwe, Burundi’s Minister
of External Relations and International Cooperation,
and Mr. Bo Viktor Nylund, the then United Nations
Resident Coordinator ad interim.
On the one hand, this working lunch provided for
an open exchange on the current socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges and on the ongoing national
and international responses in the three priority
sectors — food security, health and education — that had
been identified during the socioeconomic consultations
in Geneva in November 2016. On the other hand, the
meeting was an opportunity for the Government and its
United Nations partners to jointly reflect on modalities
of cooperation.
At the end of that meeting, I agreed with the
Foreign Minister and the United Nations Resident
Coordinator ad interim to continue the socioeconomic
dialogue in the format of a joint retreat to be held with
the Government and its main international partners in
Bujumbura in July.
On 21 April, I travelled to Washington, D.C.,
where I met Burundi’s Minister of Finance, Budget and
Privatization, as well as representatives of the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund. They
updated me on the current socioeconomic situation
and all welcomed the idea of organizing a retreat
between the Government and key multilateral partners
in Bujumbura.
The PBC Burundi configuration has now started
to prepare that socioeconomic retreat, which is
tentatively scheduled for 11 July. The retreat will allow
the Government and its international partners to share
updated macroeconomic and socioeconomic data,
inform one another about ongoing humanitarian and
socioeconomic assistance, and discuss the modalities
of cooperation. We hope that the participants will agree
on concrete steps to make cooperation more efficient
and overcome existing obstacles.
I am glad that Burundi’s major bilateral partners,
EAC Facilitator President Mkapa and the representatives
of the EAC member States, also see value in continuing
the socioeconomic dialogue. Of course, and as
mentioned before, this dialogue cannot take place in
a vacuum. The political dialogue in Arusha and the
socioeconomic conversations are complementary. The
17-17647

20/06/2017

The situation in Burundi

socioeconomic track can inform the Arusha process,
and vice versa.
The PBC Burundi configuration remains a platform
where actors from all three areas — political dialogue,
human rights and security, and the socioeconomic
situation — can compare notes and exchange
information on and assessments of the developments in
Burundi as we jointly, together with the Government
of Burundi, strive for progress in all three areas. I
will gladly inform the Council about the outcome of
the planned socioeconomic retreat and the further
engagement of the configuration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lauber for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
Burundi configuration, our colleague Ambassador Jürg
Lauber, for their respective briefings.
Uruguay reiterates its concern at the current state
of affairs in Burundi, which is still picking up the
pieces from the 2015 electoral crisis and continues to
face a host of further challenges, in particular serious
and persistent violations and abuses of human rights,
an economic slowdown and the mass displacement of
its population.
Uruguay notes with interest the convening of
the East African Community summit on 20 May, at
which the countries of the region reach reiterated their
commitment to finding a peaceful solution to the crisis
in Burundi. Moreover, during the summit, the facilitator
of the inter-Burundian dialogue, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
presented a road map containing a series of steps aimed
at ending the current stalemate in the political process
and promoting the necessary conditions for transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections in 2020.
Uruguay therefore urges the countries in the region
to support Burundi in a united and coordinated manner.
Similarly, we urge the Burundian parties to resume
dialogue in good faith so as to ensure the implementation
of the road map proposed by facilitator Mkapa on the
basis of respect for the Arusha Agreement.

S/PV.7978

Given the deteriorating human rights and security
situation in the country, Uruguay is concerned
that currently, for various reasons, the cooperation
between Burundi on the United Nations is at a low
ebb. We are particularly concerned by the suspension
of cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the further problems encountered in the relationship
between the authorities and the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in the country.
We believe that it is essential to restore mutual trust
between the Government of Burundi and the United
Nations system, which would make it possible to pool
our efforts to ensure the stability and development of
the country and the well-being of its people. Here we
advocate for fresh engagement between the United
Nations and Burundi, which can take the guise of
specific actions such as the concluding of an agreement
for the renewal of the activities of OHCHR in Burundi.
By the same token, almost one year after the
adoption of resolution 2303 (2016), we call upon the
Government of Burundi to acquiesce to the deployment
of human rights observers and military experts by
the African Union as well as to the deployment of the
United Nations police component, as provided for in
the resolution.
To conclude, we would like to express Uruguay’s
support to the recently appointed Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and we wish him every success in his role. We eagerly
await the outcome of his visit to Burundi at the end of
this month. We also pay tribute to the work of the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Jürg Lauber, for his
unstinting efforts to build peace in Burundi.
We also look forward to the outcome of the
socioeconomic retreat that is set to take place next
month, which we understand will be a crucial forum
for the Government of Burundi and its international
partners to discuss various modalities for cooperation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time that I am taking the floor under your
presidency, Sir, I should like at the outset to congratulate
you personally as well as your country, Bolivia, on
your well-deserved accession to the presidency of the

17-176475/9

S/PV.7978

The situation in Burundi

20/06/2017

Security Council. You may, of course, count on the
full support and cooperation of Burundi throughout
your presidency.

process, met here in New York for a working lunch
on 31 May. At the end of the meeting, consensus was
reached on the following items.

I should like to take this opportunity to share with
the Council the latest developments in my country at
the political, security and human rights levels and the
efforts undertaken by the Government to normalize
relations with its partners and the United Nations.

First, the people concerned and the region must
retain their leadership role in the management of the
situation in Burundi. The international community’s
contribution should be limited to providing assistance.
Secondly, the social and economic aspects must
continue to receive the attention of Burundi’s
development partners. Just as the recent EAC Summit
did, the Permanent Representatives called for the
lifting of the economic sanctions on Burundi that
affect vulnerable people. My delegation hopes that
this passionate appeal from the region will be heeded.
Thirdly, there was also consensus on the fact that the
two dialogue processes — the internal and external
processes — complement one another; they do not
compete. They need to benefit on an equal footing from
the attention of our partners, because they constitute
the very benchmarks for the road map for peaceful
elections in 2020.

As regards the political situation, I should like to
recall that, following 26 April 2015, the Government of
Burundi began a process of inter-Burundian dialogue,
with the facilitation of both the Commission nationale
de dialogue inter-Burundais (CNDI) and that of the
East African Community (EAC).
On the domestic level, the Inter-Burundi dialogue
has made significant progress. On 12 May, the
Commission nationale de dialogue inter-Burundais
submitted its final report to the appropriate parties.
Since its inception, it has spent about 600 hours in
listening and exchange sessions with approximately
26,000 Burundian citizens in the 18 provinces and 119
communes of the country. The CNDI also met with
organized groups — such as women’s groups, youth
groups, trade unions, accredited political parties,
religious groups, journalists, students, economic actors,
police officers, civil society as a whole and so on. In
addition, the Commission met with representatives of
the East African Community Legislative Assembly,
the diplomatic and consular corps, the international
organizations present in Burundi and, of course, the
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
and the Burundian diaspora living in such Scandinavian
countries as Norway, Denmark and Sweden.
At the regional level, the East African Community
is working hard to assist Burundians in finding lasting
solutions to the political consequences of the 2015
crisis. Those consultations are on the right track despite
some pending challenges. The Government of Burundi
remains very committed to the process of political
dialogue. Recently, consultations at the highest level
between Burundi and mediators have been stepped up
and will continue to move forward.
Also at the regional level, upon the initiative of the
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Permanent Representatives of the
countries of the region, together with the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, whose country has
played an important role in the inter-Burundi peace
6/9

The culture of dialogue in Burundi goes beyond
those two processes. In recent months, the Burundian
Ombudsman has increased the number of meetings
among all the parties involved in the peace process,
in the form of retreats and what we call political
coffeehouses. The next retreat is scheduled for
tomorrow — 21 to 23 June. This internal dynamic is
supported at the highest level by the Head of State and
should be supported by our partners as well.
With respect to security, the shared view is that
security in Burundi is good throughout the territory,
except in a few isolated cases. The fact that a grenade is
thrown once every six months is not a cause for concern
about security in Burundi just because we see such
occurrences elsewhere. The country as a whole is calm,
with citizens and foreigners residing in Burundi calmly
going about their business.
There is no longer a political crisis in Burundi
in the true sense of the term. Let me explain this to
you, Mr. President. A political crisis is the absence
of institutions or institutional paralysis or general
insecurity in a country. Burundi has none of that
today. The democratically elected institutions function
normally from top to bottom. Security in the country is
real. We are today managing the political and economic
consequences of the 2015 crisis through dialogue
about those consequences and by mobilizing domestic
17-17647

20/06/2017

The situation in Burundi

resources and winning back the trust of partners so
that we can address the economic consequences of the
crisis. That is what is at stake.
This return to normal security in the country has
been confirmed by several regional and subregional
organizations, such as the East African Community,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the African Bar Association and the African
Union. Following the return to peace, several regional
meetings, including that of the East African Standby
Force, in February 2017, the ECA Health Ministers
meeting, in March 2017, and the eighth ECA Petroleum
Conference and Exhibition, from 7 to 9 June 2017, have
been held successfully and peacefully in Bujumbura.
This reflects the region’s confidence in the Burundi
authorities. We are also preparing to host the fifth annual
ECA Secretary General’s Forum for Private Sector,
Civil Society and Other Interest Groups, from 22 to
23 June 2017, and the Summit of the Common Market
for Eastern and Southern Africa, in October 2017.
In the area of human rights, which I think is the most
sensitive topic for everyone, Burundi, like other nations
in the world, is continuing to make efforts to promote and
ensure the protection of human rights. It is an ongoing
battle for everyone, including for the Government
of Burundi, which is committed to fighting for the
protection of human rights so as to meet the remaining
challenges in this area. In order to achieve that end, it
would be best not to point fingers, but rather to adopt a
cooperative approach. We must definitively foreswear
politicization, selectivity, bias and subjectivity in the
process of human rights protection. Only international
cooperation and a mutually beneficial partnership
that respects the foundational pillars of all States,
namely, sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence, can contribute to the genuine protection
of human rights in Burundi and elsewhere. In that
regard, I would like to cite an authority from a State
that is a member of the Security Council who said only
a few days ago that “if our human rights laws get in the
way” of their leaders’ ability to ensure their citizens’
security, they “will change the law so we can do it” in
order to adapt to the current situation. That may be an
approach that works for other countries dealing with
terrorism and serious crime as well.
It is no longer even an open secret that everything
that has happened in Burundi since 2015 is the result
of a meticulously conceived plan to destabilize
Burundian institutions by known outside elements. One

S/PV.7978

example of this, among many others, is the European
Union contract documents assisting the financing and
evacuation of the key players — who recently fled — in
the 2015 insurgency that led to the failed coup d’état of
13 May 2015. The numerous Council members that do
not have a hidden agenda where Burundi is concerned
have the right to understand that reality. On top of that, a
humanitarian war is being planned behind Burundians’
backs, as if the recent successive failures of this type
of interference disguised as humanitarian assistance in
Africa and elsewhere have not been lessons enough in
ending such aggressive behaviour for good.
Basically, every possible strategy has been
employed since 2014 to effect regime change in Burundi.
The plan to destabilize the country was carried out in
several stages, each supported by a plan B in case of
failure. It all began with the creation of some confusion
in interpreting the Constitution, and thereby flouting
the authority of Burundi’s constitutional court and the
East African Court of Justice, which had validated the
legitimacy of the candidacy of Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
President of the Republic of Burundi. The second
phasewas to be a continuation of the experiments in mobled regime change in black Africa that, as the Council
is aware, had just succeeded in Burkina Faso and in
some countries of the Maghreb. Thanks to Burundians’
unity and patriotism, the mob insurgency failed.
The destabilizing machinery then switched to
plan B through its planning and financing of the coup
of 13 May. Like the first plan, the coup d’état failed
miserably, thanks to the overwhelmingly patriotic
majority of the forces of law and order. The third
plan was to use both internal and external actors to
create death squads, whose mission was to conduct
targeted killings in both camps with the goal of
dividing Burundians and getting them to retreat back
into themselves. After several months of such sinister
efforts, the regime-change machinery once again came
up against Burundians’ unity and decided to move
to a fourth stage, still going on today, of a campaign
demonizing and slandering Burundi and its elected
leaders, this time through the wholesale politicization
of the human rights situation in Burundi.
Biased, politically motivated resolutions and
reports on the human rights situation in Burundi have
been regularly adopted in Geneva at the urging of the
same external actors. Commissions of inquiry have
been created in their wake and are putting out reports
from afar, without ever setting foot in Burundi. As far

17-176477/9

S/PV.7978

The situation in Burundi

as we are concerned, a fact-finding report on the human
rights situation produced without evidence gathered on
the ground and based solely on the testimony of refugees
and information collected from social networks is pure
theatre, aimed at achieving the regime change that the
same well-known axis desires so much. Besides that,
having been a refugee myself, I do not know a single
refugee anywhere in the world who speaks well of the
politics of his country of origin. That applies all the
more when the refugees being interviewed are the same
people who have taken part in incursions into Burundi
after undergoing military training in a neighbouring
country that United Nations experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have exposed, as the Security
Council well knows. So claiming to produce a report
on a country’s human rights situation based solely
on refugee testimony is simply all the more likely to
diminish that mandating body’s credibility.
I should also point out that the avalanche of biased
and politically motivated reports that have emerged
since 2015 with the intention of damaging my country
only add fuel to the fire and help to destabilize Burundi
rather than pacify it. The crisis that some external actors
continue to speak of is now more artificial than real, and
it is therefore high time that the political and diplomatic
harassment that Burundi has endured since 2015 came
to an end and gave way to cooperation. To the outside
forces that continue to harass the Burundian people
directly or by proxy, I say that Burundi’s sovereignty,
unity and dignity are priceless. Burundi will never give
in to unjust pressure from those who want to wrest from
it the three values that are the very foundation of our
nation. Burundi may be a small country, but it is also a
great nation that treasures its sovereignty and dignity.
With regard to cooperation, this time with the
United Nations, the Government is working to restore
peaceful relations with its development partners in a
spirit of mutually beneficial and respectful partnership.
It was in that spirit that Burundi gave quick assent to
the appointment of Mr. Michel Kafando as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and has also just
confirmed his first visit to Burundi so that he can meet
directly with the national authorities. The Government
of Burundi stands ready to cooperate fully with him
in full respect for the principles and values enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. In its eagerness
to restore the trust that had been lost among some of
its partners, Burundi also recently swiftly approved the
appointment of the new United Nations Development
8/9

20/06/2017

Programme country representative and Resident
Coordinator of United Nations agencies with a view to
contributing to its sustainable development efforts.
The process of negotiating a consensus on a new
host country agreement that will enable cooperation to
be resumed between the Government of Burundi and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights is following the normal course and
should be finalized in the near future with the consent
of both parties. Keeping the Office’s presence in
Burundi is therefore a foregone conclusion and should
no longer be a major concern. The only thing left to do
is to finalize the host country agreement.
Still with its contribution to United Nations
activities in mind, Burundi continues to participate
actively in peacekeeping operations in other countries,
with approximately 6,500 troops on the ground, mainly
in Somalia and the Central African Republic. Our
participation in peacekeeping around the world is one
way we can give back to the international community
and the United Nations, which have always supported
us at difficult times in our history. And it follows that
Burundi also expects its partners to make reciprocal
efforts to ensure peace.
In conclusion, I would like to briefly share with
the Council the three challenges that Burundi is
currently facing.
First, it is clear that the economy is Burundi’s
greatest challenge. Poverty continues to fuel political
instability because politicians manipulate young people
who are frustrated by the lack of guarantees for a
better future. Burundi, like other countries, is trying
to implement the United Nations 2030 Agenda and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063. Political discussions
should not take the place of discussions on economic
and social aspects. Everything must be done in parallel
with the three pillars of the United Nations, which
constitute our foundation. I welcome the new approach
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which since November 2016 has tended
to emphasize socioeconomic recovery.
The second challenge is the return of refugees. The
Government of Burundi has undertaken a wide-ranging
awareness-raising campaign for refugees to encourage
their voluntary return. Local administrations also have
a duty to supervise the land and property of those who
have left, so as to avoid conflict when they return. As a
result of those efforts and renewed peace, I emphasize
17-17647

20/06/2017

The situation in Burundi

that 156,000 refugees, which no non-governmental
organization or foreign actor has spoken about and which
include some political party leaders, recently returned
to their homes. The Head of State has just asked the
Ombudsman of Burundi to continue awareness-raising
efforts for refugees and non-violent political actors for
them to return to their country in preparation for the
2020 elections.
As you know, Mr. President, the repatriation of
refugees is an indication of subregional stability. It is
recognized that, some of those who fled their country,
whether for economic reasons or because of rumours of
an impending war, were recruited, trained, supervised
and then entered the stillborn ranks of rebel movements
against Burundi, in flagrant violation of the 1951
Convention relating to the status of refugees and other
international laws, as well as the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, of 24 February 2013.

S/PV.7978

Our third and last challenge is national
reconciliation. The need for a successful conclusion to
the process of national reconciliation through the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission is extremely important
for us Burundians. The Burundian people must learn
about their history before definitively turning the
page of their painful past. In that respect, we advocate
once again for maintaining support for the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, which has a major role
to play in seeking truth, fixing broken hearts and
genuinely rewriting our history, which has always been
deliberately falsified.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

17-176479/9
