General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Seasion

108

particular the dispatch of visiting missions to those
Territories, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3158 (XXVIII). Question of the Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Havíng examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Jpecial Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 57
Recallíng its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,,
Recalling also its resolutions 2985 (XXVII) of
14 Oecember 1972 concerning the question,
. Rea{firming that the Seychelles should accede to
~ndep:ndence without any prejudice to their territorial
mtegnty,
Deploring that it has not been possible to send a
special. mission of the United N ations to the Territory,
as env1saged under General Assembly resolution 2866
(XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
!he Seychel_Ies tt? self-determination and independence
m conform1ty w1th General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls u pon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as
the administering Power, to take all necessary meas~res
to enable the people to exercise that right without
further dclay;
. 2. Request~· .the administcring Power, in accordance
w1th thc prov1s1ons of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of
the United Nations envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI) and to make the necessary arrangements in
consultation with the special mission, for the holding as
soon as practicable of a referendum on the future
status of the Territory;
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
~nd P~ople~ to co~tinue its examination of the question,
mcludmg m particular the dispatch of the special
mission rcferred to above, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3159 (XXVIII). Question of Brunei
The General Assembly,
llaving considered the question of Brune~,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
n Ibid .. chaps. III, V and X.

to the Implernen,tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 58
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for thc full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its resolution 2978 (XXVII) of
14 December 1972, whereby it reaffirmed ínter alia
that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has
attained a full measure of self-govemment in terms of
Chaptcr XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the
administering Power concerned should continue, to
transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
with respect to that Territory,
1. Reatfirms the inalienable right of the people of
Brunei to self-determination in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Brunei;59
3. Requests thc administering Power, in accordance
with the recommendation of the Special Committee,
to furnish such information as may be required by the
Special Committee and, in partirular, to participate, in
conformity with the provisions of related resolutions of
the General Assembly, in the relevant proccedings ofthe
Special Committee, as well as to receive in the Territory
a United Nations visiting mission composed of mcmbers
drawn from thc Special Committee;
.4. Req_uests the Special Committee to report on
th1s quest1on to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3160 (XXVIII). Question of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas)

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas),
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 2065 (XX) of 16 December 1965, in which it invited the Governments of
Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Nort~e~n Ireland to proceed without delay with
the negotiat10ns recommended by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples with a
view to finding a peaceful solution to the problem of
the ~~lkland Isla~ds (Malvinas), bearing in mind the
prov1s1ons and obJectives of the Charter of the United
Nations and of resolution 1514 (XV) and the interests
of the population of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
11s !bid., chaps. III and XXI.
11 9 Jbid., chap. XXI.

Reaolutions adopted on the reporta of thc Fourth Committee

Gravely concerned at the iact that eigbt years have
elapsed since the adoption of resolution 2065 (XX)
without any substantial progress having been made in
the negotiations,
Mindful that resolution 2065 (XX) indicates that
the way to put an end to this colonial situation is the
peaceful solution of the conflict of sovereignty between
the Govemments of Argentina and the United Kingdom
with regard to the aforementioned islands,
Expressing its gratitude for the continuous efforts
made by the Government of Argentina, in accordance
with the relevant decisions of the General Assembly,
to facilitate the process of decolonization and to promote the well-being of the population of the islands,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 6º and, in particular,
the resolution adopted by the Special Committee on
21 August 1973 concerning the Territory;61
2. Declares the need to accelerate the negotiations
between the Governments of Argentina and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland called
for in General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX) in
order to arrive at a peaceful solution of the conflict of
sovereignty between them concerning the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas);
3. Urges the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom, therefore, to proceed without delay
with the negotiations, in accordance with the provisions
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, in
order to put an end to the colonial situation;
4. Requests both Governments to report to the
Secretary-General and to the General Assembly as soon
as possible, and not later than at its twenty-ninth
session, on the results of the recomrnended negotiations.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3161 (XXVIll). Question of the Comoro
Archipelago

The General Assembly,
H aving considered the question of the Comoro Archipelago,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,62
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of the Mouvement de libération nationale des Comores,61
Taking note of the Joint Declaration on the Accession to lndependence of the Comoro Archipelago,
containing the text of an agreement reached on 15' June
1973 between the Minister for Overseas Departments
and Territories of the Government of France and the
President of the Government Council of the Comoro
Archipelago,64

m

60 lbid., chaps.
and XXVIl.
61 lbid., chap. XXVII, para. 12.
112 lbid., Twenty-eighth Session,

Fourth Committee, 2064th
meeting.
88 Jbid., 206Sth meeting.
114 [bid., Twenty-elghth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev.1), chap. XI, annex, appendix n.

109

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Coloni::., Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Convinced of the vital importance of sending a
visiting mission to the Territory as a meaos of securing
adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
political, economic and social conditions therein,
Noting with regret the failure of the administering
Power to participate in the related work of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of the Comoro Archipelago in their efforts freely to decide their own future,
1. Reaffi,rms the inalienable right of the people of
the Comoro Archipelago to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the question;611
3. Takes note with interest of the statement by the
representative of France that the French Government
has affirmed "the readiness of the Comoro Archipelago
for independence" and "its intention to 1 ~ ,pond faithfully to the aspirations" of the Comorian people, and
has stated that the Comorian Govemment can request
independence for the Territory at any time; 66
4. Affi,rms the unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoro Archipelago;
5. Requests the Government of France, as the administering Power, to ensure that the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago are preserved;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
necessary measures to ensure the full and speedy attainment of freedom and independence by the people of
the Territory, on the basis of their freely expressed
wishes, in accordance with the objectives of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Requests the administering Power to extend its
co-operation to the Special Comrnittee in the discharge
of the tasks entrusted to it by the General Assembly
with respect to the Territory, in conformity with the
relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular by
enabling the Special Committee to send a visiting mission for the purpose of securing adequate and first-hand
information on the situation obtaining in the Territory,
as well as on the wishes and aspirations of its people
as regards their future status;
8. Invites all States to render all the necessary help
to the people of the Territory in their efforts to achieve
the objective_s of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
011 lbid., cbap. XI.
1111 lbid.,

Twenty-eighth Sesslon, Fourth Committee, 2064th
meeting, paras. 22 and 27.
