United Nations

A/RES/69/278

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 May 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 18

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 May 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.62)]

69/278. Further modalities for the third International Conference
on Financing for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/279 of 30 June 2014 on modalities for the third
International Conference on Financing for Development, to be held in Addis Ababa
from 13 to 16 July 2015, and resolution 69/208 of 19 December 2014 on follow-up
to the International Conference on Financing for Development,
Reaffirming that the third International Conference on Financing for
Development will assess the progress made in the implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development1 and the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Followup International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, 2 reinvigorate and strengthen the
financing for development follow-up process, identify obstacles and constraints
encountered in the achievement of the goals and objectives agreed therein, as well
as actions and initiatives to overcome these constraints, and address new and
emerging issues, including in the context of the recent multilateral efforts to
promote international development cooperation, taking into account the current
evolving development cooperation landscape, the interrelationship of all sources of
development finance, the synergies among financing objectives across the three
dimensions of sustainable development, as well as the need to support the United
Nations development agenda beyond 2015,
Reiterating that the outcome of the third International Conference on
Financing for Development should constitute an important contribution to and
support the implementation of the post-2015 development agenda,
Noting the appointment of the Secretary-General for Conference,
Acknowledging with appreciation the voluntary contributions received to date
by the Trust Fund for the Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing
_______________
1
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2
Resolution 63/239, annex.

15-07436 (E)

*1507436*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/278

Further modalities for the third International Conference on Financing for Development

for Development, in order to support the activities involved in the preparations for
the Conference and the travel and participation of representatives from developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries,
1.
Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the proposed
organization of work of the third International Conference on Financing for
Development;3
2.
Recommends the provisional rules of procedure and the provisional
agenda of the Conference, set forth in annexes I and II, respectively, to the note by
the Secretary-General, for adoption at the Conference;
3.
Decides that the Conference shall be conducted in accordance with its
rules of procedure and the modalities contained in General Assembly resolution
68/279 and the present resolution, as well as any additional decisions regarding
arrangements for the Conference to be taken by the President of the Assembly;
4.
Also decides that the Conference will consist of eight plenary meetings,
including an opening and a closing meeting;
5.
Further decides that statements and reports to be made at the opening
plenary meeting, as well as at the beginning of the second plenary meeting, both on
13 July 2015, will be delivered as proposed in paragraphs 11 and 12 of the note by
the Secretary-General;
6.
Decides that the Conference will include six multi-stakeholder round
tables, held in parallel with the plenary meetings, as follows:
13 July 2015, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
14 July 2015, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
15 July 2015, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
16 July 2015, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.;
7.

Also decides that the six round tables will be on the following themes:

Round tables 1, 3 and 5: “Global partnership and the three dimensions of
sustainable development”;
Round tables 2, 4 and 6: “Ensuring policy coherence and an enabling
environment at all levels for sustainable development”;
8.
Further decides that the round tables will be interactive and
multi-stakeholder in nature and that each round table will be open to participation
by representatives of all participating States, up to 15 representatives of observers,
relevant entities of the United Nations system and other accredited
intergovernmental organizations, up to 6 representatives of accredited civil society
organizations, and up to 6 representatives of accredited business sector entities, that
each representative may be accompanied by 1 adviser, and that the list of non-State
participants in the round tables will be established on a first-come, first-served,
basis; and encourages Member States and other participants to be represented at the
round tables at the highest possible level;
9.
Decides that each round table will be co-chaired by two Chairs, to be
appointed by the President of the Conference from among the Heads of State or
_______________
3

2/3

A/69/542.

Further modalities for the third International Conference on Financing for Development

A/RES/69/278

Government and ministers attending the Conference, in consultation with the
regional groups, and that high-level officials from the major institutional
stakeholders will be invited to act as moderators of the round tables;
10. Also decides that the Secretary-General of the Conference, in
consultation with the President of the General Assembly, will identify up to four
panellists and a moderator for each of the round tables, and that the panel discussion
will be followed by an interactive debate among States and other relevant
stakeholders.
89th plenary meeting
8 May 2015

3/3
