S/PV.6408

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 October 2010
Original: English

Official communiqué of the 6408th (closed) meeting of the
Security Council
Held in private at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday,
21 October 2010, at 11.15 a.m.
In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, the following communiqué was issued through the Secretary-General in
place of a verbatim record:
“At its 6408th meeting, held in private on 21 October 2010, the Security
Council considered the item entitled ‘The situation in Somalia’.
“Pursuant to the decision taken at the 6407th meeting, the President
recognized the presence of His Excellency Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
“In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the President extended invitations to the representatives of
Burundi and Ethiopia, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
“Pursuant to the decision taken at the 6407th meeting, the President
recognized the presence of Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union Commission, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
“In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the President extended an invitation to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
“The members of the Council, His Excellency Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim,
the representative of Burundi, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Mr. Pedro Serrano,
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for the Department of Field
Support, and Major General Nathan Mugisha, Force Commander for
AMISOM, had an exchange of views.”

10-59743 (E) 211010

*1059743*
