United Nations

S/PV.5673

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5673rd meeting
Thursday, 10 May 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Khalilzad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Ikouebe
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Arias
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Mr. Sangqu
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission on the Kosovo issue (S/2007/256)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-33839 (E)

*0733839*

S/PV.5673

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission on the
Kosovo issue (S/2007/256)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/256, containing the report of the
Security Council mission on the Kosovo issue.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by
Ambassador
Johan
Verbeke,
Permanent
Representative of Belgium and Head of the Security
Council mission on the Kosovo issue.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Verbeke.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): On 2 May, I had the
opportunity to brief the Council on the Security
Council mission on the Kosovo issue, in my capacity
as Head of the Mission. At that time, I recalled the
nature and the objectives of the mission. I also briefly
commented on some of the highlights of its
programme.
After last week’s meeting, Council members
worked together and agreed on the mission’s report,
which was then distributed by the Secretariat as an
official United Nations document. Since the Council is
familiar with the content of the report, I will limit this
briefing to a brief overview of some of its conclusions.
Security is an essential pillar of any society, and
this is even more so for societies emerging from
violent and brutal conflict such as that in Kosovo. The
current security situation in Kosovo is often defined as
“calm but tense”, and this is also how NATO
Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer described it
when we met him in Brussels on 25 April. The
mission’s report subscribes to that assessment. While
the situation is calm, the conflict of 1998-1999 and the
violence that shook Kosovo in March 2004 have left
their traces.

2

One of those traces is that to a large extent
Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs still live
separately from each other. Full and lasting
reconciliation, with a view to the establishment of a
truly multi-ethnic society, will require a sustainable
commitment by all stakeholders. During the mission’s
meetings with Kosovo’s leaders, including Prime
Minister Ceku and President Sejdiu, they all
emphasized their committed to a multi-ethnic society
and their readiness to work responsibly towards that
goal.
Achieving that goal will to a large extent depend
on continued implementation of the standards for
Kosovo. Over the years, the Provisional Institutions,
with the support of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, managed to make
serious progress in this regard. More is to be done, as
was recognized by Prime Minister Ceku and other
Kosovo leaders, who, in meetings with the mission,
expressed their commitment to continue and strengthen
standards implementation.
This is particularly important in two fields that
received considerable attention during the mission’s
visit to the region — the living conditions of Kosovo’s
non-Albanian communities, and the return of internally
displaced persons, a critical element in the
implementation
of
resolution
1244
(1999).
Interlocutors in Belgrade, including President Tadic
and Prime Minister Kostunica, as well as
representatives of Serbian civil society, stressed that
the number of returns continued to be very low, despite
the fact that, as the mission noticed in Svinjare, houses
have been rebuilt and, more generally, that structures to
facilitate returns are in place. During the mission’s visit
several explanations were given, such as the lack of
economic prospects or security-related concerns. The
mission heard opposing views on the question as to
whether a solution to the status of Kosovo would
facilitate or hinder the return process.
More than in previous Security Council missions
to the region, the status issue was a very important, if
not dominant, element. On Kosovo’s status, the
positions of the sides remain far apart. Authorities in
Belgrade, as well as Kosovo Serbs who expressed
themselves on the issue, firmly rejected any form of
independence for Kosovo, in particular the settlement
proposal presented to this Council by Special Envoy
Ahtisaari. They asked for further negotiations, which
should lead to a solution based on substantial

07-33839

S/PV.5673

autonomy. In general, the Kosovo Serb community is
apprehensive about its prospects for the future.
The Kosovo Albanian community, on the other
hand, is confident about its future; it has very high
expectations for an early resolution of Kosovo’s
status — a status that brings independence to Kosovo.
Kosovo Albanians, as well as non-Serb minority
communities,
expressed
strong
support
for
Mr. Ahtisaari’s settlement proposal and status
recommendation, and they look to the Security Council
to move rapidly to a solution.
Despite the strongly opposed positions, both
parties agree that the status quo is not sustainable. That
message was also brought to us by representatives of
NATO and the European Union, who are prepared to
take up their responsibilities and look to the Security
Council to provide the necessary mandate.
I am confident that the first-hand information
which the Security Council received during this
mission will enable the Council to live up to its
responsibilities and take an informed decision on the
issue that is now before us.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation is grateful to our colleagues
in the Security Council for the support they gave to the
Russian initiative to organize a Council mission on the
Kosovo issue. We are fully convinced that the outcome
of this trip to the Balkans is reflected in its report and
that this initiative was timely and necessary.
For us, the idea of the mission was that in order
to resolve the Kosovo issue, the Security Council
needed full information on the current situation of the
settlement process. It is difficult to overestimate the
importance of Council members having the opportunity
to form their own objective view, on the ground, of the
situation with regard to the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), including achievement of the
standards that have been approved by the international
community for Kosovo, particularly with regard to
ensuring equal rights and security for ethnic minorities
in the province.
I would like to express our thanks to the
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador
Verbeke, for the high professional leadership he
provided to the Council mission. We are also grateful
for the leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and of

07-33839

the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and also to the staff of the
Secretariat here in New York for providing assistance
in the conduct of the mission.
The mission’s programme was wide-ranging and
multifaceted. The central elements in its intense
working meetings were the substantive talks between
the members of the Security Council and President
Tadic, Prime Minister Kostunica and other Serb
politicians in Belgrade, as well as the exchange of
views with leaders in the province of Pristina. Also
important were the meetings with representatives of
Albanian and Serbian communities, the Serbian
Orthodox Church hierarchy and other faiths in Kosovo
and delegates of Kosovo minorities, as well as with the
leaders of UNMIK and KFOR. The mission’s contacts
with representatives of NATO and the European Union
in Brussels and with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Vienna were informative.
What the Security Council members saw and
heard during the trip to the Balkans is reflected in the
mission’s report. It gives in general a complete and
balanced picture of the current situation in Kosovo, and
it shows what has been achieved and what still needs to
be done in terms of filling the gaps in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999) and the standards.
Council members saw some progress in terms of
legislation and in the process of establishing functional
provincial institutions. However, the results that have
been achieved in Kosovo in terms of establishing
normal and dignified living conditions for all the
population and establishing the basis for a multi-ethnic
community in which all members of all communities
could live together in equal conditions of security can
in no way be called satisfactory.
No peripheral positive elements can compensate
for the shortcomings in implementing the key elements
of resolution 1244 (1999) and the international
standards, particularly with regard to the return of nonAlbanian internally displaced persons. We cannot
accept the situation where, of more than 220,000 Serbs
who previously lived in the province, eight years later
no more than five per cent have returned; where, of a
Serb community once 40,000 strong in Pristina, today
there are only 87; and where, in Pec, there were
formerly 18,000 Serbs, there are now fewer than 10.
The efforts by the international presence clearly
have not brought the necessary results. It seems that
the structures have been set up and the mechanisms

3

S/PV.5673

have been provided, but the people are not returning to
the province. We have seen the situation in Svinjara,
where there are still empty houses for internally
displaced persons. Mission members could see for
themselves that the Kosovo Serbs, with all their heart,
want to return to their homes in Kosovo.
All this clearly demonstrates the continuing
serious obstacles in the return process. As stated in the
report of the mission, the most important of these were
the concerns of Kosovo Serbs regarding security and
freedom of movement, the lack of economic prospects
and the problems and lack of coordination in the
structures intended to assist the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The return of refugees
would not be facilitated by early decisions
predetermining Kosovo’s status.
During the mission on the Kosovo issue, Security
Council members could see for themselves the
miserable situation of isolation still experienced by the
majority of Kosovo Serbs, particularly in village
enclaves. A clear example of that is the situation of
Serbs in Orahovac. I should mention that this situation
is very different from the one in northern Mitrovica,
where a significant number of Albanians live alongside
Serbs.
Meeting with representatives of the Serbian
communities, members of the Security Council mission
could see for themselves that the situation that existed
in March 2004 — when there was large-scale anti-Serb
violence — has not been overcome, which has
undermined Serbs’ confidence in their future. The
wounds of the 1999 conflict have not healed. The
continuation of these trends in the effort to achieve a
multi-ethnic Kosovo may be seen through the lack of
success achieved in the international community’s
efforts to establish multi-ethnic reconciliation in the
province.
Resolving that situation will require considerable
time and effort. The Security Council mission received
promises from the Pristina authorities that they would
implement the standards. However, as we have stressed
many times in the Council, we must consider the
concrete measures actually being taken to reassure
non-Albanians. The efforts being made are clearly not
sufficient, as shown by the lack of Kosovo Serbs in the
province’s institutions of self-government. Measures
must be taken to ensure that there are no obstacles to

4

the return of refugees and that the multi-ethnic fabric
of Kosovo society is restored.
We believe it is extremely important that the
Security Council received confirmations from NATO
authorities, the international presence in Kosovo and
the provincial authorities that no ethnically motivated
violence would be tolerated and that violence would
not be allowed to define the political process.
We note that the international presence is
prepared to continue providing reliable protection for
Kosovo religious sites. With regard to Serbian
Orthodox churches in Kosovo, we must express our
regret that, during our meeting with Bishop Artemije,
we noted that no progress has been made in rebuilding
the churches destroyed during the anti-Serb
demonstrations in 2004.
The Russian Federation continues to believe that
imposing any decision on the status of Kosovo would
be counterproductive. We noted a consensus regarding
that point not only among the authorities in Serbia and
Belgrade, but also among the representatives of Serb
communities with whom the mission was unable to
meet. In accordance with norms and principles that are
internationally recognized, including in Europe,
concerning the rights and status of minorities, any
decision on status must be supported by all the major
ethnic communities in Kosovo, including, of course,
Kosovo Serbs. The Security Council has emphasized
on many occasions that any future decision on status
must be acceptable to the entire population of the
province.
The Council has clearly established that political
progress in defining Kosovo’s future status requires
continued implementation of the standards. Those two
tracks,
of
course,
are
closely
interlinked.
Unfortunately, the talks on status were hastily and
prematurely suspended, and, as the Security Council
has seen, standards implementation is far from
attaining its intended objectives. Both factors confirm
the need to give both parties the time needed to achieve
a negotiated settlement.
Once again, we reiterate our view that the
proposal by the Special Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari, cannot
provide the basis for a final settlement on Kosovo from
the Security Council. Adopting a plan based on that
proposal would not only clearly set a negative
precedent for international practice, but would also
have dangerous consequences for regional and

07-33839

S/PV.5673

international stability: by rewarding separatism it
would encourage that phenomenon in other regions,
and could spark a chain reaction that would eventually
affect regions throughout the world.
We have a constructive alternative to the ideas set
out in Mr. Ahtisaari’s proposal. It includes continued
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), taking the
ongoing talks into account. But the elements in the
Special Envoy’s proposal that can be considered as
enjoying the support of both parties should be
implemented without waiting for the negotiating
process to conclude. The status situation must be
resolved on the basis of a compromise between both
parties. We must patiently continue the negotiation
process while the standards are being implemented.
We note in particular that, as the Security
Council’s visit to Belgrade showed, the Serbian party is
open to continued dialogue with Pristina and is
prepared to demonstrate flexibility in the future
negotiation process. We hope that the Kosovo Albanian
side will also find a way to make compromises and
continue this process.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Verbeke
for his successful leadership in heading the Security
Council mission to Belgrade and Pristina. Both at the
organizational stage and as it was being carried out, the
mission benefited from his great diplomatic skill,
which made it possible to fully attain the objectives
set. All of that is reflected in the report (S/2007/256),
whose balanced content duly attests to the work
accomplished.
From the very moment that the mission was
proposed, Peru joined those who considered it
favourably. We are pleased that it took place, because it
enabled our delegation to gain greater clarity with
respect to various elements, among which we wish to
highlight the following.
First, the wounds of the 1999 conflict are still
very visible. That is why reconciliation among
communities and the integration of minorities —
particularly Serbs — into a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo will require a significant amount of time and
sustained international follow-up.
Secondly, the current situation in Kosovo is the
result not only of political developments since 1999,
but also, and in particular, of events that occurred

07-33839

before that year in the former Yugoslavia in general
and in Serbia in particular. In that connection, a
decision on Kosovo’s future status will have to be
taken from a broad political and historical perspective,
beginning with the process of disintegration of the
former Yugoslavia and the degree of autonomy that
Kosovo enjoyed there — autonomy that was later
snatched away.
Thirdly, recognizing that tradition of autonomy
makes it possible to better understand the profound and
irreparable impact of the 1999 conflict on Kosovo
society, as well as the progress noted in preparing
Kosovo’s provisional authorities to be in a position to
take charge of their own destiny as soon as possible.
Fourthly, the combination of elements I have just
described leads to the conclusion that returning Kosovo
to Serbian sovereignty is not a realistic solution for this
situation.
Fifthly, we were also able to note the European
Union’s heightened level of commitment to the Balkan
situation, including its readiness to assist Kosovo in
future institution-building.
In that context, the Ahtisaari proposal brings
together the requisite components to ensure peace and
stability in the region. That is because, first of all, it
establishes a model for the political organization of an
independent Kosovo; secondly, it sets out a series of
guarantees for minority communities in Kosovo, in
particular the Serbian ethnic minority; and, thirdly, the
commitment of the countries of the European Union
serves as a guarantee of stability, not only with regard
to Kosovo but also with respect to other Balkan
countries, including Serbia. That is a central element,
as Peru has always favoured solutions promoted by
countries of the region in which a conflict is taking
place.
My delegation will therefore be in a position to
support a draft Security Council resolution endorsing
the proposal of the Special Envoy.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank our Belgian colleague
Ambassador Verbeke for the manner in which he led
our mission, during which he once again displayed the
great diplomatic skill for which he is well known.
I believe that the Security Council mission
achieved the objectives we had set for it. We sought to
gather direct and precise information about the

5

S/PV.5673

situation on the ground and about the positions of the
various protagonists. I believe it was also important to
demonstrate to the people concerned the importance
that the Security Council attaches to the issue of
Kosovo.
I would first like to refer to the regrettable fact
that the positions of the parties are irreconcilable. That
was clear during the entire mission. Unfortunately, that
inescapable fact will not change with time.
During the visit we were also able to take note of
the progress made since 1999, in terms of security, the
establishment of institutions and the protection of
minorities. That progress must necessarily be followed
up. Our goal is to promote Kosovo’s development
towards a fully multi-ethnic community. That requires
a long-term commitment on the part of both the
Kosovo authorities and the international community. It
also requires further efforts to encourage the return of
refugees and displaced persons.
We are more convinced than ever that the only
way to achieve that is by leaving behind the transition
period that Kosovo has lived through since 1999 and
by giving Kosovo a new status. That was in fact the
conclusion reached by the Council in its presidential
statement (S/PRST/2005/51) of 24 October 2005.
Maintaining the status quo would be a destabilizing
factor.
The process of negotiations on future status is
now entering its final phase. I believe that the Security
Council now has at its disposal detailed and realistic
proposals, which have the support of the SecretaryGeneral, to ensure the future of Kosovo while
maintaining regional
stability and
protecting
minorities. We believe that it is now up to the Security
Council to take up its responsibility to guarantee the
success of a process that it itself began.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by welcoming you, Mr. President, as the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America. We are pleased to see you presiding over the
work of the Security Council for the first time. I wish
you every success. We are confident that, thanks to
your wisdom and diplomatic expertise, you will be able
to successfully lead our deliberations.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Verbeke,
Permanent Representative of Belgium and head of the
Security Council mission on the Kosovo issue, for his

6

outstanding role in the mission’s success. I would also
like to thank him for the report (S/2007/256) he
presented today on the activities and outcome of the
Council’s mission to Kosovo.
There is no doubt that the Kosovo issue is among
the most important questions before the Council this
year. The Council has been seized of this matter for
more than eight years. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has achieved many
positive results. In that regard, it may be advisable to
look seriously into Kosovo’s future status, especially in
the light of recent developments.
In that connection, the Council mission to
Pristina, Belgrade and Brussels was extremely
important and timely. Its purpose was to provide more
information to the Council on the situation in Kosovo
through first-hand knowledge of developments not
easily acquired otherwise. I believe that when the
Council adopts further measures on the future status of
Kosovo it will understand the situation and its socioeconomic dimensions and will be able to adopt
decisions wisely.
The mission reached a conclusion of which we
were already aware, namely, that there is a gap
between the positions of the two sides and that in the
present situation it has been impossible to bridge that
gap. Nevertheless, we know that it will be useful to use
as a starting point the positions expressed by both sides
concerning a permanent settlement of the situation —
including the future status of Kosovo. That must be
done through various means, including by utilizing the
modalities set out by Ambassador Ahtisaari in his
report to the Council (S/2007/168 and Add.1).
In order to deal with this situation successfully,
we should take into consideration the genesis of the
crisis, the circumstances in Kosovo and the need to
address political and security issues there. The
situation requires careful consideration by the Council.
We must work sincerely and continue to focus on our
ultimate objective: stability in Kosovo and throughout
the Balkans.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
take this opportunity to express its highest appreciation
to the head of the mission, Ambassador Verbeke, for
his very able stewardship and finesse in guiding our
mission.

07-33839

S/PV.5673

We would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretariat for organizing the mission, as well as to
all parties that facilitated the work of our mission to
Kosovo.
Being a newly-elected member of this body, the
delegation of Indonesia has amply benefited from the
visit. For that reason, we would like to thank the
Russian delegation for proposing the visit at a time
when the Security Council has to decide on the future
of Kosovo.
The visit has given us detailed information and
valuable inputs on the issue under discussion. Meetings
with various political, religious and community
leaders, as well as field visits, enhanced and refined
our understanding of the various dimensions of the
issue at hand. We can comfortably and confidently
assert that we now have a better and clearer view of the
issue.
The mission confirmed our perception that the
issue of Kosovo is a sensitive and delicate matter, and
that it may be difficult to find a good solution that can
satisfy both sides. However, we are determined to take
steps to assist the region in moving forward in a
peaceful and just manner. To that end, the legitimate
concerns of all sides have to be taken into account.
Geographically, Indonesia is located far from
Kosovo. In its political considerations, however, the
issue of Kosovo is close to all of us. This is an issue of
human tragedy; it is an issue of protecting civilians;
and it is also an issue that has consequences far beyond
Kosovo’s natural borders. For those reasons, my
Government is following the issue with great caution.
During the visit, we could vividly sense the deep
animosity among communities that hinders cooperation
and dialogue. While the issue of internally displaced
persons and refugees fleeing by the hundreds of
thousands has yet to be resolved, the most important
need is the creation of a suitable environment for
reconciliation. The region can come to terms with the
past and build an enduring peace only if the
communities are ready to accept and work out their
differences. It is a moving experience to see families
torn apart by violence and taken away from their
familiar roots. The Security Council has a moral
obligation to heal the wounds of those communities so
that they can embrace today and plan for the future.

07-33839

Reconciliation has never been easy or smooth
sailing for any society torn apart. It is a long and
difficult journey. Unfortunately, there is no quick fix or
shortcut. There is only a long and difficult route, but it
is a journey worth taking. Without reconciliation, those
societies will forever live in a world filled with hatred
and bigotry, no matter what the change of status may
be. Violence will recur no matter how we try to prevent
it. It is a matter only of when and where, and not of
why.
The visit and today’s meeting are overtures for
more constructive discussion and consultations among
members of the Security Council. Indonesia, for its
part, is ready to continue extensive consultations with
all relevant parties, in particular members of the
Security Council, to find a way of dealing with the
matter in a just, balanced and comprehensive manner.
The weeks and months ahead will be difficult for all of
us, but the success of our visit is a good omen for the
Council.
Finally, let me once again reiterate our
appreciation to the head of the mission, Ambassador
Verbeke.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I, too, would like to
thank Ambassador Verbeke for his statement at this
meeting and for his exemplary leadership of the
Security Council mission to Kosovo.
We also acknowledge the commendable role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the staff of the Secretariat in
New York, which to a large measure contributed to the
success of the mission.
The meetings in Brussels, Belgrade and Pristina,
as well as the field trip undertaken to Kosovo at the
latter end of the mission’s visit, brought home vividly
the issues involved in determining Kosovo’s future,
including the prospects for a negotiated settlement and
the implementation of the agreed standards, especially
those relating to the protection of the rights of
minorities and the return of internally displaced
persons. We commend the Special Envoy for his efforts
aimed at resolving those issues by coming up with a
comprehensive proposal for the settlement of the future
status of Kosovo.
In Brussels, the Secretary General of NATO,
apart from expressing his support for Kosovo’s
independence, asserted his organization’s readiness to

7

S/PV.5673

respond to security challenges and to lead the
international military presence in Kosovo, as envisaged
in the settlement proposal. Further, he defined NATO’s
responsibilities, which include the supervision and
training of the future Kosovo Security Force. The
Special Envoy of the European Union for Kosovo was
also unequivocal in his support for President
Ahtisaari’s recommendations and settlement proposals.
The impression gathered at the end of the visit to
Brussels was of the readiness of the two institutions to
live up to their responsibilities if they were entrusted
with any functions in an independent Kosovo, should
the Security Council so decide.
It was apparent that, even though Serbia
recognized the need for a change in the status of
Kosovo, it was not in favour of President Ahtisaari’s
proposals and would prefer direct talks between
Belgrade and Pristine. In the opinion of the Serbian
Government and the representatives of political parties
to the National Assembly, the problem can be resolved
through supervised autonomy.
The visit to Kosovo, among other things,
informed me further of what UNMIK had been able to
achieve in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). As far as the security environment in Kosovo
was concerned, the Kosovo Force’s effectiveness and
readiness to deal with any threat to the peace and
security of Kosovo were evident.
The leaders of Kosovo invariably asserted their
support for the settlement proposal and status
recommendation, and were enthusiastic about
independence. They stated in no uncertain terms that
any further delay in the status process would be
detrimental to Kosovo and that they were ready to
assume
the
responsibilities
associated
with
independence. On the other hand, Kosovo Serb
representatives indicated that the settlement plan was
generally unacceptable because the mechanisms
envisaged in the settlement proposal for the protection
and promotion of minority rights were insufficient and
would not be implemented. It is worth mentioning,
however, that the Turkish, Bosniak and Roma
communities supported the Special Envoy’s proposal,
despite what they perceived as shortcomings, and
believed that it offered a good basis for Kosovo’s
future.
It was obvious that the number of Kosovo Serb
returnees was much lower than expected — a situation

8

that can be attributed to mistrust, lack of reconciliation,
and the poor economic situation in the areas of return.
The return of internally displaced persons remains a
critical element in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), and only a safe and secure Kosovo would
facilitate the return process.
We recognize the need to resolve the issue of the
future status of Kosovo as soon as practicable, and
support in principle the adoption of a resolution
following the submission by the Special Envoy of the
comprehensive proposal on the Security Council
mission. We hope that the Security Council will work
assiduously towards the realization of that objective.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting.
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador
Johan Verbeke, for his leading role as head of the
mission and in drafting the mission’s report. China
endorses the information and recommendations
contained in the report.
Through this mission, the Security Council has
obtained first-hand information on the Kosovo issue
and direct experience of the achievements, difficulties
and expectations of the people of Kosovo, of all
communities, in the process of reconciliation and
reconstruction. We noted the remarkable progress in
implementing the agreed standards between the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
UNMIK.
In addition, the different sides are also aware that
there is still room for continued improvement insofar
as the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
the agreed standards are concerned, especially the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees, as
well as the protection of rights of ethnic minorities.
Comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the agreed standards has a bearing on the
well-being of all the communities of Kosovo, which
should not be compromised because of the political
divergences.
We are deeply concerned at the continued
segregation and the lack of interaction between the
Albanian and Serbian communities in Kosovo. We
hope that the political leaders there will abide by their
commitment to build a Kosovo for all its communities
and will try their best to take all necessary measures to

07-33839

S/PV.5673

create a favourable basis for the ultimate settlement of
the future status of Kosovo.
Ever since the submission of the comprehensive
settlement proposal by the Special Envoy Marti
Ahtisaari, the future status of Kosovo has drawn
increasing attention from different sides. Indeed, one of
the focal tasks of this mission was to listen to different
sides in order to get to know their concerns. As stated
in the report of the mission, the positions of the sides
on the settlement proposal remain far apart. We are
always of the view that the best option is to encourage
both Serbia and Kosovo to continue their negotiations
in order to gradually narrow their differences in an
effort to achieve a settlement acceptable to all sides.
We believe that it is normal to have differences, and
these differences accentuate the need for further
negotiations, rather than constitute a reason for the
international community to give up efforts to promote
talks.
The Kosovo issue is quite involved and
convoluted. It also has extensive implications for other
issues. Maintaining the status quo is not a solution.
Furthermore, the status quo will be difficult to sustain.
How to handle this issue properly will be a major
challenge for the Council. All sides need to reflect on
the ways and means to promote reconciliation and
common development between the communities to the
greatest possible extent, maintain lasting peace and
security in the Balkan region and preserve the integrity
and authority of international law. On this major issue,
adequate patience, flexibility and caution are necessary
and worthwhile. China is ready to work with other
members of the Council in a constructive manner to
find an appropriate solution.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, for taking
up your functions as President of the Security Council
and assure you of the support and cooperation of the
mission of Panama. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Verbeke for having led our mission to
Kosovo in the transparent and efficient way he did. I
also thank him for the report, which thoroughly reflects
our experiences during the mission. I cannot fail to
thank Ambassador Churkin for having had the
excellent idea of a visit to Kosovo. I think it enabled
us — some of us, at least — to have a much clearer
vision of the realities in that region.

07-33839

Since taking up this post in the Security Council,
I have constantly been impressed by the power and
authority that the Security Council of the United
Nations has. We sit here, discuss and decide on the fate
of territories and of human beings. The decision we
have to take today is particularly significant because it
is about just that — a matter of discussing the political
integrity and identity of a people and a territory. In
voicing opinions on this topic, we are doing so with the
respect and deep reflection that this reality requires of
us.
Everyone is well familiar with the political
process that took place over the past five years — the
situation of conflict and genocide in Kosovo — which
we called catastrophic at certain times. We are also
familiar with the efforts by the European Union and
NATO to create institutions of government and to
pacify the region, in accordance with the instructions
of the United Nations.
Nevertheless, today we are at a complex, difficult
crossroads. Everyone agrees or affirms that the status
quo is Kosovo is not sustainable. Some think that it is
up to the Security Council to take action immediately
and adopt a position in this respect, and they believe
that the way to do so is to support to the programme
presented by President Ahtisaari. Others feel that the
negotiations have not run their course, that there has
not yet been enough discussion of the status issue, and
that a more expansive process of discussion will be
required. But everyone agrees that an agreement
between the parties — forgive me for being
redundant — would be preferable to any other solution.
Faced with this reality, I ask that we take into
consideration the possibility that this Council adopt,
now, President Ahtisaari’s government programme for
Kosovo, but I propose as well that this decision not
come into force right away — in other words, that
there be a six-month waiting period, and that during
those six months we resume negotiations to ensure that
both Serbia and Kosovo can come to an agreement,
which in my opinion can be far better than what we
have in hand today.
If I were asked what interest the Kosovar
Albanian authorities could have in reaching an
agreement if they know that they can ultimately attain
independence, my sole answer would be that, in my
view, they — as well as the European Union and the
rest of the world, I should think — understand that an

9

S/PV.5673

agreement between the parties would be better than an
imposed solution. And if I were asked what interest the
Serbs could have in a negotiating process if they know
that the outcome has been predetermined, I would
respond in a similar way: In my opinion, it is
preferable for the Serbs — as well as for the entire
region and for the Kosovars — to put an end to the
problem through an agreement between the parties than
through an imposed solution.
It would be regrettable if the Council were
divided when it took a final decision. It would be
regrettable too if the Council, even though possessing
the necessary majority, were unable to adopt a decision
owing to the veto power of one or more permanent
members. I call upon my fellow members to rethink
this process, to consider all the available options and to
take every reasonable — and I stress “reasonable” —
opportunity to ensure that Serbs and Kosovars alike
can reach an agreement on their future, an agreement
that has not been imposed from on high.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): In taking the floor for the
first time this month in a public meeting, Sir, I
sincerely wish you all success as you discharge your
responsibilities as President of the Security Council. I
also thank your predecessor, Ambassador Jones Parry,
for the wisdom and effectiveness with which he
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
April.
I wish also to express my most sincere
appreciation and gratitude to Ambassador Verbeke for
his extremely able leadership during the Security
Council mission. Nor can I fail to express our most
sincere appreciation to the Secretariat: in a mission that
was very complex logistically, its members provided us
with precious assistance. Here, I thank Ms. Norma
Chan of the Council secretariat.
As has been said by others, our mission to the
region was indeed a fruitful and extremely interesting
opportunity to obtain first-hand information on the
ground. The report (S/2007/256) drafted by
Ambassador Verbeke accurately depicts the meetings
and the visits that took place during our trip.
After eight years of administration through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the situation in Kosovo remains
complex. Progress has been achieved, but more
remains to be done, particularly in standards
implementation. Our challenge is that of achieving

10

progress without slowing down the status process,
which needs to be brought to a conclusion.
Indeed, the “overall security situation in Kosovo
remains calm but tense”, as the report rightly states
(para. 55). We must be aware that in this context it is
of paramount importance to establish a momentum that
will bring about future status. Special Envoy
Ahtisaari’s comprehensive proposal provides us with
an accurate and detailed set of principles, rules,
regulations and procedures that should allow the new
status framework to operate.
Within that framework, the European Union will
be involved in managing particularly critical aspects of
Kosovo’s administration, such as the police and the
justice system. We must ensure that the European
Union — together with NATO, which must be
confirmed as a vital element of the international
security setup in Kosovo, and with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe — will be able to
carry out its tasks effectively, with the utmost legal and
international backing.
The European Union is committed to establishing
a large-scale operation in Kosovo — indeed, as others
have recalled, the largest it has ever undertaken,
entailing the deployment of highly qualified personnel
and large financial expenditure. The operation has been
planned this way because stability in the Balkans is
viewed as a strategic issue directly affecting European
security. I might add that this is a particularly relevant
issue for Italy, considering our close links as a country
neighbouring the region. We therefore remain of the
conviction that the long-term solution to all pending
Balkan issues lies in the European perspective of all
the countries of the region. Kosovo’s future status must
give impetus to that perspective, not only for Kosovo
itself but also for Serbia and the region as a whole.
We must now endeavour to reach our objective of
finalizing our work here in New York. At the same
time, the dialogue among the parties must remain
intense so that progress can be made in reaching a
mutually satisfactory result. Our attention and our
work must focus on drafting a resolution, which should
achieve the widest possible consensus. I am convinced
that success is possible. We must approach this
problem with maximum goodwill and make an effort to
bridge the existing gaps. I look forward to working
together with all other Security Council members with

07-33839

S/PV.5673

a view to reaching the necessary consensus for a
manageable and long-lasting solution for Kosovo.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking the head of the Council
mission, Ambassador Verbeke, and his team for all
their hard work and for their skilful leadership of the
mission, as well as for the excellent manner in which
they handled the preparation of the report
(S/2007/356).
My delegation shares the observations and
conclusions contained in the report. We consider the
report to be an important element paving the way for
further informed discussion within the Security
Council and an integral part of the background
information on the Kosovo issue provided in all the
relevant official Council documents and reports.
The activities and outcome of the mission have
strengthened our belief that the issue of Kosovo
requires urgent attention and action by the Council. We
believe it is time for the Council to assume its
responsibility by taking an appropriate decision
concerning the future status of Kosovo, thus
strengthening the security and stability of the region. In
that context, I would like to reiterate our position,
stated during consultations held on 3 April, in
particular regarding the necessity of moving fairly
swiftly towards the start of negotiations on a new, fully
fledged draft resolution.
As we have already pointed out several times
before, we believe that our commonly desired objective
is the preservation and strengthening of the multiethnic nature of Kosovo. In practice, this will be
measured by, among other things, the number of
returns of Serb refugees and internally displaced
persons. We believe that, to ensure the success of this
endeavour, it is crucial to make further improvements
in the complex conditions on the ground. In our view,
this should be facilitated by the international presence
in Kosovo for a further period. We are pleased to note
that this is also one of the most important conclusions
based on the outcome of the Council mission. In that
connection, we would like to express our readiness to
consider additional measures that could help us ensure
better conditions for the return of internally displaced
persons and for their lives.
In conclusion, let me say again that Slovakia
supports the main European Union (EU) approach to
Kosovo status determination. In our view, this should

07-33839

naturally be embodied in the wider prospects of a
European future for the whole region, in line with the
conclusions reached at the EU-Western Balkans
Summit of Thessaloniki.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
join other representatives in welcoming you, Sir, to the
presidency of the Council for this month. I should also
like to join those representatives who found the
mission worthwhile and to thank the Russian
Federation for its proposal.
It was very good for those of us who have spent a
while visiting the Balkans over several years to see the
prospects in Kosovo. I think that the prospects, the
sense of hope and the sense of a European future came
across very clearly. We thank Ambassador Verbeke for
his leadership and for having produced the report.
Through you, Mr. President, I would also like to thank
the men and women of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), NATO,
European Union (EU) and Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) missions there,
who have done so much to advance normalization on
the ground in Kosovo.
Kosovo, like the rest of the Balkans, is wholly
surrounded by the European Union. This is not only a
question of the future of Kosovo; it is also a question
of the future of Serbia, and, by extension, of the whole
region. We were saddened to hear in Belgrade so little
about Serbia’s own European future, and I would like
to use this occasion to make clear that, as far as the
European Union goes, that future is very much on
offer, as it is for the whole of the Balkans region.
We believe that the report that has been produced
is balanced. I should just like to say that we do not
think that there is any equivalence between the events
of 1999 and those of 2004 — the former having been
the result of brutal repression by Government forces —
but we do acknowledge that wrongs were done in 2004
and that those wounds will take a while to heal.
We share the concerns of other colleagues about
the slow rate of returns. We would be very happy to
find a vehicle for discussing how that might be
accelerated. But I should like to say that it is not in our,
or Kosovo’s, gift to force people back to their homes,
however much we might want them to go there. We do
not believe, therefore, that that in itself is a determiner
of the rate of progress on the status process or of the
outcome itself. Even if all Kosovo Serbs currently

11

S/PV.5673

outside Kosovo were to return, they would still be a
minority within Kosovo, no more than 10 or 12 per
cent of the total population. But, as I have said, we
would like to look for ways, along with other
representatives and other international organizations, to
accelerate that rate of return. But I think that, overall,
we share Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Rücker’s assessment that obstacles to
Kosovo’s further development are status-related.
We have heard much wisdom today about the fate
of a people and the Council’s responsibilities in that
respect. We have a status process that has not come out
of the blue. Since 1999 and the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999), the international community has been
working very hard on the Kosovo issue. In 2003 there
were direct Kosovo Serb talks on technical issues. The
Security Council has long backed a role for the
international Contact Group in the Balkans, including
in Kosovo just as in Bosnia. The Contact Group has
been working since 2003 with the United Nations as
well as with the EU and NATO. In 2004 there was
widespread agreement to move to a comprehensive
review of standards to see if the status process could be
launched. In 2005 Ambassador Kai Eide concluded that
it should, and that, once the status process was
launched, it needed to come to a timely conclusion.
Also in 2005, the Contact Group published some
guiding principles for the status Envoy’s work, and
President Ahtisaari was appointed. All of those moves
were backed by the Council. Mr. Ahtisaari has
discharged his mandate to lead the status process and
to produce an outcome, and it is that that we are
considering.
I agree with the representative of China and also
with the representatives of Peru and of Panama that
status quo is not a way out and that there has been
remarkable progress on standards. But I think that we
all need to bear in mind that there is no prospect of an
agreement between Belgrade and Pristina, as the
mission demonstrated. Thus each of those parties must
take its own decision, and we have heard from the
Kosovo side its declaration to implement the Ahtisaari
proposals. The Council’s role is to take up its
responsibilities and to back the only viable vision for
the future of Kosovo, and to authorize the EU and
NATO to support that transition as they have supported
normalization in Kosovo to date.
The United Kingdom supports the Ahtisaari
conclusion that independence for Kosovo, under

12

international supervision, is the best outcome for
Kosovo and also the best outcome to advance regional
stability and, by advancing regional stability, to
accelerate the integration of the whole Balkans region
into Euro-Atlantic structures. We also support the
details of Mr. Ahtisaari’s plan in that they provide for
the best functional government that Kosovo can have
while protecting minorities and cultural and other
heritage. I believe that it is well known that
Mr. Ahtisaari’s provisions are the most far-reaching for
minority protection that have yet been seen in Europe.
I think that it is also worth noting another feature
of the proposals, which is the very important way that
they give a role to Serbia in helping, in a pastoral
sense, Kosovo’s Serb communities in Kosovo and
thereby give Serbia reassurance that its important role
in the region is not overlooked. As part of this, Serbia
and Kosovo will form some sort of joint council to
consider minority issues. We think that that is a
far-reaching provision and one that is extremely useful
in the Kosovo context.
I should like also to state that in our view, as we
heard from President Ahtisaari in Vienna, the package
does indeed represent a compromise between the
Kosovo and the Serb sides, and we commend it to the
Council. We do not believe that other ways, such as
supervised autonomy, can actually be made to work in
practice. We do not believe that it would be right to ask
organizations such as the EU and NATO to implement
something that we believe will not work in practice,
and I think we heard that very eloquently from the EU
and also from the NATO Secretary-General.
I should like to conclude by saying that the
Contact Group began this venture together after 1999,
and we would very much like to cooperate with all
partners, including those on the Council, to bring it to a
successful conclusion. We did set ourselves last year a
deadline of the end of 2006. That deadline was not met,
largely because of negotiations on a new Government
in Serbia, but we do not believe that there is anything
now to be gained by delay. We believe that Kosovo is a
sui generic case. We pledge to work constructively
with colleagues. We are happy to look at ways of
supplementing the Ahtisaari package, particularly to
deal with minorities and internally displaced persons,
but outside the framework of that package, so that we
can indeed make more progress on the ground in
building a truly ethnic space in the Balkans and
bringing it into European-Atlantic integration.

07-33839

S/PV.5673

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.
I came to New York as the United States
Permanent Representative to the United Nations on
23 April. On 24 April I left to go on the mission to
Kosovo that we are discussing today. I mention this to
convey to the Council the very high priority that my
Government and I personally give to the resolution of
the Kosovo issue.
I would like at the outset to thank the Russian
Permanent Representative, Mr. Churkin, for having
proposed the Security Council mission, and our chief,
Belgian Permanent Representative Ambassador
Verbeke, for his skilful leadership of the mission.
The trip, as the Council is aware, consisted of
stops in Brussels, Belgrade, Kosovo and Vienna.
In Brussels, I was impressed by three points that I
heard. The first point was that resolving the status of
Kosovo was important for the European Union (EU),
that the continuation of the current situation was not
sustainable, and that the current situation poses a
potential threat to the peace and stability of the
Balkans and of Europe as a whole.
The second point I heard was that EU
membership is the ultimate goal of both Kosovo and
Serbia, but that clarifying the status of Kosovo was
important for making progress towards that goal.
The third point was that the European Union is
ready to shoulder their heavy responsibilities, as
spelled out in Special Envoy Ahtisaari’s proposal for
Kosovo’s final political status.
I am grateful that the EU has stepped forward to
play a leading role in guiding a multi-ethnic Kosovo to
a future in the European Union.
In Belgrade, I heard Serbia’s political leaders
reject the Ahtisaari plan. But their proposal did not
take into account the history of the area and the
polarization that has grown between Kosovo and
Serbia due to the policy of ethnic cleansing during the
Milosevic era.
In Pristina, we saw and heard that Kosovo’s
government, police and courts have taken more and
more responsibility from the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), to the
point where Kosovo is today virtually functioning as
an autonomous State. As we toured Kosovo, we saw

07-33839

the vestiges of violence and ethnic animosity, but we
also saw signs of progress and the potential for ethnic
coexistence.
When I reflect on the political views I heard in
Belgrade and Pristina, I understand that there is no
potential for compromise on the independence
question. Nothing further can come about from these
talks, and there is no potential for the passage of time
to change the polarization in the foreseeable future.
Therefore, delay, I believe, has no potential to help the
situation. I think, on the other hand, that delay has
great potential to destabilize Kosovo and the Balkans.
The balance of international resources that sustain
Kosovo today cannot remain in place indefinitely.
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force are the pillars of an
interim administration and security forces — not
occupiers. Delay, leading to more delay, is not a policy;
it is a prescription for rising resentment and economic
stagnation — and unsupervised independence.
We should surely recognize that much remains to
be done in Kosovo to implement fully the standards we
have pronounced. But UNMIK tells us — and our trip
made this clear — that we have made about all the
progress we can make with the Provisional Institutions.
As I reflect on our stop in Vienna, I appreciate
the work performed by Special Envoy Ahtisaari over
the past 18 months. I am convinced that he has
considered all relevant issues. He has proposed a
compromise solution that offers far-reaching
decentralization of government and elaborate
protection for religious sites. The United States
supports Mr. Ahtisaari’s plan for Kosovo.
Kosovo is an entity administered by the United
Nations that used to be part of Yugoslavia, a country
that no longer exists. The set of circumstances that
brought us to this point exists nowhere else in the
world. Recognizing this unique problem, Mr. Ahtisaari
and, I know, the Secretary-General have proposed a
unique solution; and the EU has stepped forward to
become
Kosovo’s
implementing
partner
for
independence. The United States does not find this path
forward to be perfect or easy. But what Mr. Ahtisaari
has proposed is the best option for bringing to an end
the last chapter in the dissolution of former Yugoslavia.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to
help assure the success of this plan.

13

S/PV.5673

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

14

07-33839
