S/PV.7817

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7817

th meeting
Monday, 21 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/962)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-39409 (E)
*1639409*

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258
(2015) (S/2016/962)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Ms. Elizabeth Hoff, World Health Organization
representative in Syria.
Ms. Hoff is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Damascus.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/962, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: As we meet again this month, the
suffering of civilians in Aleppo and across Syria
rages on unabated. Horror is now usual; it is a level
of violence and destruction that the world appears to
consider normal for Syria and for the Syrian people.
Month after month, I have reported to the Council that
the level of depravity inflicted upon the Syrian people
cannot sink lower, only to return the following month,
in shocked disbelief, with hideous new reports of everworsening human suffering.
I am more or less at my wits’ end as a human being,
but I am here, like my colleagues, to be professional
and objective. I had hoped to say today that last month
I put it all on the table, and, frankly, it is still just as
2/25

21/11/2016

terrible. Let us leave it at that. Shame on us all for not
acting to stop the annihilation of eastern Aleppo and its
people and much of the rest of Syria, as well. Of all the
facts and reports that I gave last month (see S/PV.7795),
not one of them has been changed, qualified, denied or
proven wrong by anyone in or outside of this Chamber.
My statement then detailed the objective reality of
what was taking place in Aleppo. It was hoped that
the advocacy undertaken by me and others demand
that sanity and humanity prevail and reporting based
on clear and undisputable facts — although it is
sometimes unpleasant to hear and even an inconvenient
truth — might have an impact. There was a glimmer
of hope. A unilateral Russian and Syrian pause on
aerial bombardment over eastern Aleppo instituted
on 18 October for an initial 72 hours was maintained
beyond the stated end. We last met on 26 October (see
S/PV.7795), when I welcomed the then ongoing pause
in air strikes from the Russian Federation and the
Government of Syria, although members will recall
that my welcome was not heard that day in all quarters
of the Council.
Daily and even weekly, the pause held over eastern
Aleppo. The same was not the case for western Aleppo,
as non-State armed groups launched hundreds of
mortars into civilian areas in the western part of the
city. Had all parties had the fortitude to cease all attacks
over Aleppo, today’s might have been a different
briefing. But I cannot leave it at that because — one can
hardly believe it — it is even worse now. Regrettably,
over the past week we have seen an intense unleashing
of military aggression in Aleppo and the surrounding
rural area with truly devastating consequences for
civilians. The pause over eastern Aleppo was shattered,
thereby returning the city and its inhabitants to death
and destruction once again. Reports of a high tempo
of air strikes and shelling across areas of Aleppo city,
held by non-State armed groups, reportedly by Syrian
Government forces began again on 15 November. For
the sake of accuracy and completeness, let me report
here that the Russian Federation has repeatedly asserted
that its air force and air strikes have resumed only in
Idlib and Homs and not over eastern Aleppo.
Since last Tuesday, the bombing of eastern Aleppo
has not stopped. Over the past days, reports have
indicate that hundreds of civilians have been killed,
injured or otherwise affected by the relentless attacks
on eastern Aleppo. Entire families were reported
to have been buried under rubble in the Al-Sukkari
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

district as first responders searched for survivors. Fires
raged from incendiaries and household gas breaches in
residential buildings following the attacks that stretched
throughout eastern Aleppo. Deaths were reported in
at least 10 neighbourhoods. As of yesterday, there are
barely any functional hospitals left in eastern Aleppo
able to treat those who have escaped death, as all the
hospitals are being bombed into oblivion.
In parallel, more than 350 mortars and rockets
have been reportedly launched by non-State armed
groups indiscriminately into western Aleppo since
1 November, killing over 60 people, including women
and children, and injuring more than 350 others. Over
the weekend, an attack on a school in the Al-Furqan
district in western Aleppo with mortar shells and rocket
projectiles by non-State armed groups reportedly killed
eight children and injured several others, while the local
university was also hit. Overall, some 25,000 people
have been displaced in western Aleppo in the last few
weeks as a result of shelling by non-State armed groups.
Let me be clear. We are not just seeing a resumption of
violence in Aleppo. It is not business as usual. What
has been unleashed on civilians this past week is yet
another low in an unrelenting inhuman onslaught, and
it is as heart-breaking as it is not inevitable. The parties
to the conflict are — all of them — choosing to do this.
It is civilians who pay the price.
Since July, 275,000 civilians have been trapped
in eastern Aleppo owing to the siege tactics placed on
them by the Syrian Government and its allies. Russia
and Syria have opened corridors for civilians to leave,
but they are reportedly unsafe or perceived as unsafe
to traverse. There have also been reports that non-State
armed groups inside eastern Aleppo prevented those
wishing to leave the city from doing so. Humanitarian
conditions in eastern Aleppo have gone from terrible to
terrifying and now barely survivable by human beings.
On 13 November, the last of the available food rations
from the World Food Programme were distributed.
Pre-positioned before United Nations access was cut
off in July, rations were drawn out as long as possible,
but now they are gone. Only a handful of rations from
local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) remain,
food in markets is scarce and prices have skyrocketed.
Fuel and gas to cook food are reportedly unavailable
in most neighbourhoods. That is resulting in negative
coping strategies, reducing meals and restricting diets
to feed children.

S/PV.7817

And along with limited food and medicine, there
has been growing discontent with protests against
corruption and a monopoly on goods reported last
week, some of which turned violent, indicating the
extreme desperation of the trapped citizens. And to
add to the humanitarian crisis, they will shortly face
a harsh winter without heating or the bare essentials
for life. The United Nations has employed significant
and tireless efforts to deliver life-saving aid. I yield to
no one in saluting the undiluted, selfless bravery of all
humanitarian aid workers across the United Nations,
including the international NGOs, the local NGOs,
first responders and people in their communities and
families. They do that time and again, if they do not
fall victim themselves at the time that they venture out,
even risking a cynical second follow-on air strike, shell
or sniper’s bullet deliberately aimed at them, searching
for life and saving lives. Let us repeat — they are
not a target. And I urge the Government of Syria to
give the Secretary General’s internal board of inquiry
into the attack on the humanitarian convoy, which
resulted in the death of aid workers on 19 September
at Oram Al-Kubra, full access in Syria to conduct
its investigations.
Our teams in Damascus and Gaziantep have
presented successive plans to all sides, working to
ensure delivery of medical supplies and evacuation
of the most urgent medical cases. We stand ready to
move the moment that security guarantees by all
parties are granted. The United Nations four-point
plan presented last week to all parties includes critical
medical evacuations and delivery of medical supplies.
It includes the provision of food and other essential
relief items. Finally, it includes the rotation of doctors
to provide assistance to those in need. The 30 medical
doctors left in eastern Aleppo city, exhausted from their
heroic efforts and non-stop work from July continue to
serve in unrelentingly traumatic circumstances.
All parties have the plan, and we have been
engaging in unremitting discussions to obtain their
agreement to proceed. But the restart of intense
fighting is a clear setback to our goal of reaching
agreement and delivering to those in need. Yet we are
not deterred. Despite the bombing and whatever the
difficulty, we are determined to follow through. The
United Nations humanitarians and our partners will not
give up on the people of Aleppo. We will continue to
insist on the parties’ obligations to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law and see to

16-394093/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

sustained humanitarian assistance delivered to those
in eastern Aleppo and all who are in need throughout
Syria. I call on all with influence — that is the phrase
I am diplomatically required to use, but those around
this table and beyond knows who they are — to do their
part to end the senseless cycles of violence once and for
all and put an end to the slaughterhouse that is Aleppo.
All sides, and those with influence over them, must
immediately provide the necessary guarantees for the
humanitarian four-point plan to move ahead.
While it defies comprehension, the citizens of
eastern Aleppo are not alone in the depths of horrors
being faced by civilians in Syria today. I remain
seriously concerned about the fate of all those living
in besieged locations. Aid deliveries and medical
evacuations to the towns under the Four Towns
ceasefire agreement covering Zabadani, Madaya, Fu’ah
and Kafraya and surrounding areas, known as the Four
Towns Agreement, have been unable to deploy owing to
the tit-for-tat nature of the agreement.
The gruesome deaths by starvation in Madaya
shocked the world in January and dragged the parties
to the conflict to allow the delivery of aid. February,
March and April this year all saw aid deliveries to
the four towns. However, since then, the situation has
deteriorated. Only one convoy has reached the four
towns in over six months and that was on 25 September.
In addition to no supplies getting in, those in need of
medical attention are dying because they are not being
allowed to leave. Since I last reported to the Council
(see S/PV.7795), at least three people have died due to
the denial by parties to the Four Towns Agreement to
enable the evacuation of people who could have been
saved but for that punitive application of the tit-fortat approach. More will die soon in each of the four
towns if that travesty is not resolved. I urge those with
influence over the parties to the Agreement, notably
Jaish Al-Fatah and Iran, must do all they can to see that
aid is delivered immediately and that those requiring
medical care are able to evacuate.
I have long called for the lifting of all sieges, which
have become one of the most prevalent and insidious
aspects of this merciless conflict. Yet, this past year,
we have seen the opposite — a massive increase in the
use of besiegement and of the overwhelming numbers
of people, particularly by the Government of Syria.
This time last year, the number of besieged people
stood at 393,700. Six months ago, it stood at 486,700.
Today, I have to report to the Council that, following a
4/25

21/11/2016

comprehensive review, we estimate that tonight a total
of 974,080 people — nearly 1 million Syrians — are
living under siege. New locations include Jubar in
Damascus and Hajjar Al-Aswad, Khan Al-Shih and
multiple areas in the enclave of eastern Ghouta in
rural Damascus.
There is nothing subtle or complicated about the
practice of besiegement. Civilians are being isolated,
starved, bombed and denied medical attention and
humanitarian assistance in order to force them to submit
or flee. It is a deliberate tactic of cruelty to compound
the people’s suffering for political, military and, in some
cases, economic gain to destroy and defeat a civilian
population, who cannot fight back, and perpetrated
monstrously by the one party, above all, who should be
defending and protecting its own citizens — all of them,
even those who do not like and disagree with the State
and its leader and his Government. Those maintaining
the sieges know by now that the Council is apparently
unable or unwilling to enforce its will or agree now
on steps to stop them. The procedures give us crumbs;
an occasional convoy here and there around the time
of Council briefings, to tick the box that we are all
trying our best. But the near 1 million Syrians trapped
in besieged locations cannot live on crumbs. The real
question is — how can we prevent now nearly 1 million
people from being subject to a cruel form of collective
punishment that gets more severe and intense, month
after month, across the country? If the Council cannot
come together to bring an end to sieges, then it and we
must all ask ourselves why we are having this meeting
here this morning.
Attacks on civilian infrastructure, most notably
hospitals and schools, have become so commonplace,
it takes one’s breath away. Such attacks are violations
of international humanitarian law. Some have been
called out as war crimes by the Secretary-General,
including again yesterday and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights has indicated that some may even
amount to crimes against humanity. They are senseless,
unconscionable acts with no purpose other than to
punish civilians, including women, children and the
infirm, and deny those left behind the means to survive
or rebuild. Millions of Syrian children have had their
childhoods ripped away by calculated and reckless
attacks on schools. In the last two weeks of October
alone, the lives and dreams of 30 children were stolen
during attacks on five schools. On 26 October, the
very day of my most recent briefing when denials were
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

screeching through the air, 22 children and six of their
teachers were killed, when their school compound was
repeatedly attacked in Hass, Idlib governorate. But the
facts are that the children and their teachers are dead.
Death, a dead body, warm to cold blood — however
hard anyone may try, death is an undeniable fact and
there is always a cause of death.
Let us imagine the terror of those children; imagine
those who may have survived the first strike, some
hysterical, some frozen in fear, only to see another
round coming in. This year, UNICEF has documented
84 attacks on schools, killing at least 69 children and
injuring many more. And what of those who survived
such attacks — those children who dream of becoming
doctors? To become a health-care worker in Syria is
to take on a dangerous profession and to even go to
a medical facility is to risk one’s life. The Council
adopted resolution 2286 (2016), protecting health-care
professionals and facilities, but that has resulted in
scant protection to those in Syria.
From 1 November to 18 November, 13 attacks were
verified, and there are reports of many more attacks.
Hospitals, health centres, blood banks and ambulances
have all been hit. The fact is, since resolution 2286
(2016) was adopted on 3 May, over 130 attacks
on medical facilities have been documented. The
Syrian war has already killed more than 750 medical
personnel. It is a disgusting and blatant disregard for
the special protected status of health-care facilities
under international humanitarian law and a clear spit
in the face of the Council’s resolution, as my World
Health Organization colleague will expand on after
my briefing. Despite the challenges and hardships, the
United Nations and our partners continue regularly
to reach nearly 6 million Syrians in need across the
country per month. That assistance is delivered through
regular programming and cross-line activities from
Damascus, and cross-border assistance from Turkey
and Jordan.
Let me touch briefly on cross-border activities,
which have become a vital part of the response.
Since cross-border operations began over two years
ago, the United Nations has conducted 420 crossborder convoys, or nearly four a week on average,
delivering health assistance sufficient for 9 million
people, including vaccinations for 2 million people;
food for 3 million people, many on a monthly basis;
non-food items for almost 3 million people; and water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies for over 2.5 million

S/PV.7817

people. Assistance has been delivered to various parts
of Aleppo, Idlib, Latakiya and Hama governorates
from Turkey, and Dar’a and Al-Quneitra governorates
from Jordan. Our efforts complement the critical role
played by international and Syrian non-governmental
organizations who provide assistance and services to
millions more from neighbouring countries. We also
continue to reach people via air. Since operations
started several months ago, the World Food Programme
has completed 153 airdrop rotations, dispatching
2,815 metric tons of food, nutrition, health and water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies over Deir ez-Zor city.
The United Nations has also completed 159 airlifts to
Qamishli, delivering 5,660 metric tons of food, water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies, nutrition, education,
shelter and non-food-item assistance on behalf of
humanitarian actors, including 61,500 full food rations.
At the berm along the Syrian-Jordanian border,
which I visited in early September, the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners have worked ceaselessly,
together with the Jordanian authorities, to ensure the
resumption of sustained aid operations to the many tens
of thousands of women, men and children amassed at
the border and in need of urgent lifesaving assistance.
I am pleased to announce today that security and other
arrangements have been finalized, and aid operations
are set to commence tomorrow. I pay tribute to the
cooperation I have personally had with the Jordanian
State at the most senior levels to help enable the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in the most
challenging circumstances.
Unfortunately, I must report to the Council that,
since the last reporting period, none — not one — of
our inter-agency convoys was able to deliver aid across
lines. Cross-line access requires detailed access
negotiations with all sides to ensure security and allow
aid to be delivered. Though our main interlocutor is, of
course, the Syrian Government, we also work with the
other parties to the conflict and the Member States that
have influence over them — through the Humanitarian
Task Force as well as bilaterally — but our efforts
are increasingly met with delays, blockages and
rejections. Every month we encounter new bureaucratic
challenges that need to be navigated. We have dealt
with late approvals, approvals with restrictions on the
number of beneficiaries, delays in clearing trucks at the
warehouse, negotiations over routes, medical supplies
removed or not approved, and additional clearances
beyond the agreed two-step process.

16-394095/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

So far this month, we have three times navigated
these hurdles, three times deployed convoys to reach
those who are in need. Two of these convoys, both to
Wadi Barada on 9 November and en route, in Rural
Damascus, to Duma on 17 November, reached the final
Government of Syria checkpoint before being forced
to turn back when Syrian security forces, believed
to be the Syrian Republican Guard, demanded the
cleared containers be opened and searched. This is in
clear breach of agreed protocol and a possible security
threat for our convoys and aid workers. An earlier third
convoy to Harbnafseh, in Rural Hama, scheduled for
1 November, was blocked by pro-Government armed
elements while under way and also forced to turn back.
Just yesterday, on 20 November, an inter-agency convoy
to Rastan in northern rural Homs could not proceed
owing to delays at the checkpoint in terms of approval
to proceed, as well as shelling in the area once approval
had finally been received.
As a result, as I said earlier, no inter-agency
cross-line convoys have been able to deliver aid yet
this month. We have now gone four months without
delivering aid to anyone via an inter-agency cross-line
convoy before 19 November. The result is that we are
once again unlikely to reach more than a small portion
of those whom we do receive formal approval to access.
Syrians have also been impacted by a series
of anti-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
operations. This has resulted in initial displacement of
8,000 people in the north of Raqqah governorate. We
are foreseeing the need to support over 400,000 people
as operations progress further. In Al-Bab, anti-ISIL
operations are taking place just a kilometre outside
the city, and planning for a more immediate response
for the over 100,000 people estimated to be in the city
and surrounding area is in its final stages. Let me be
clear — when people need our support, we are working
and will continue to work day and night to try to reach
them no matter who or where they are. That is not being
virtuous; that is our job, providing the Council gives us
the funds to do it and we can get safe access.
I have had little positive to report on the
implementation of the resolutions of the Council as
regards the humanitarian situation in Syria. Air strikes
and shelling kill and injure more and more civilians,
and protected civilian infrastructure is destroyed
with implications that will resonate for years to come.
Besiegement is increasing, people are going hungry.
Schools and hospitals are being bombed. The United
6/25

21/11/2016

Nations is increasingly blocked from delivering to
those most in need.
Most frustratingly, this human suffering is all
unnecessary. There is no amount of suffering that will
result in an end to the conflict. There is no amount of
military operations that will see an end to the conflict.
The only solution, as has been said countless times
before, is a political solution. There are people here
at this table and beyond with the influence to tell the
Syrian Government we are not prepared to take no for an
answer. If you are a petrified civilian patient in Aleppo
tonight, you do not need to hear your own Government
pray national sovereignty in aid to justify using that
sovereignty to bomb its own people and that patient.
I am mandated to report to the Security Council
every month on the implementation of Council
resolutions relating to the protection of civilians and
the humanitarian situation in Syria. It is worth, for
the record and at the risk of being accused again of
preaching, reiterating what the Council demanded of
all the parties nearly three years ago in resolution 2139
(2014), including, first, to immediately put an end to
all forms of violence; second, to immediately cease all
attacks against civilians, as well as the indiscriminate
employment of weapons in populated areas; third, to
immediately lift sieges in populated areas; fourth, to
promptly allow rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access for United Nations humanitarian agencies
and their implementing partners, including across
conflict lines; fifth, to respect the principle of medical
neutrality and facilitate free passage to all areas for
medical personnel, equipment, transport and supplies,
including surgical items; sixth, to protect civilians and
desist from attacks directed against civilian objects; and
seventh the immediate end of the practices of arbitrary
detention and torture of civilians.
This is neither a long nor an exceptional list. More
importantly, this is a list of neither unreasonable nor
unattainable demands. These are the basic elements
of how parties to a conflict must operate under
international humanitarian law. They are based on the
most basic concepts of universal decency and humanity
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations to
which the Member States that are parties and proxies
have signed up and international humanitarian law,
which applies to all parties, States and non-State
actors alike, except, it would seem, in Syria. In
Syria — contrary to international humanitarian law and
in blatant rejection and defiance of the resolutions of
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the Council — death, deprivation, violence, starvation,
siege tactics and attacks on civilian-populated areas
and civilian infrastructure continue and they continue
without penalty to the perpetrators.
I have called over and over for strong action from
the Council to back up its resolutions and to take action
when they are ignored day in day out. Without such
backing, words and resolutions have proven to have little
meaning for Syrians. Without strong backing from each
Council member, red lines will be crossed again and
again; international humanitarian law will be trampled
on; war crimes will be committed. And until there is
action by the Council, there will be no accountability.
It is high time to act. The United Nations
humanitarians and our partners will continue to do
our part. The United Nations will push at all angles to
reach those in need. As is my job, I will report the facts,
advocate and give voice to those suffering without
respite and whose lives have been shattered time and
again. I will do so until the Council decides to unite
once again to do its collective part and resolve to bring
this Syrian horror to an end.
I hear the argument that the Council should not
pass a resolution because it would be “premature”. It is
never, never too premature to save a life. It is never too
soon for the Council to find a solution to this conflict
and end the suffering of the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hoff.
Ms. Hoff: I speak to the Council today from the
country office of the World Health Organization
(WHO) in Damascus, from where I have led WHO’s
work in Syria for more than four years.
As the conflict and violence continue unabated,
I have seen the worst of humankind — but more
importantly, I have seen its best. I wish to begin
by paying tribute to WHO’s staff in Syria for their
selflessness and determination and to the health-care
workers, health partners and national non-governmental
organizations working on the front line, who put their
own lives at risk every day when they reach out to
Syrians in need. Observing their dedication and the
sacrifices they make has been the greatest privilege of
my life.

S/PV.7817

It is also a privilege to speak to the Council today
to describe the health situation inside Syria and the
challenges it presents.
Before the conflict began, Syria had one of the
most advanced health-care systems in the Middle
East. As the country reached middle-income status,
non-communicable diseases were becoming the
predominant health concern. National vaccination
coverage rates were 95 per cent. Syria’s thriving
pharmaceutical industry produced over 90 per cent of
the country’s medicines and exported its products to
53 countries.
Now, almost six years later, the picture is starkly
different. According to the United Nations, well over
300,000 people have been killed and over 1.5 million have
been injured since the conflict began. Each month, the
number of people injured in the conflict rises to 30,000.
Almost 5 million people have left the country, and just
over 6 million have been internally displaced. Within
Syria, 13.5 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Almost 5 million people live in besieged or
hard-to-reach locations. These numbers are staggering.
Health-care services have been devastated. Over half
the country’s public hospitals and primary health-care
centres are either closed or only partially functioning.
Almost two-thirds of all health professionals have left
the country. Domestic production of medicines has
dropped by two thirds and vaccination coveragerates
have dropped by half.
What does that mean for the Syrian people? It means
that they no longer have sustainable and reliable access
to medicines for chronic diseases that are manageable
with treatment but life-threatening without. It means
that unvaccinated children are at risk of life-threatening
childhood illnesses such as polio, which re-emerged
in Syria in late 2013 before being eradicated anew,
thanks to the concerted efforts of WHO and UNICEF.
It means that Syrians with traumatic injuries do not
receive timely treatment and die or suffer life-changing
disabilities. It means that pregnant women do not have
access to safe delivery. It means that huge numbers
will suffer lifelong mental health problems related to
prolonged, traumatic stress and displacement.
There have been repeated attacks on health-care
facilities in Syria. Between January and September,
there were 126 such attacks — almost two thirds of
all attacks reported in countries with emergencies. In
November alone, 11 hospitals were attacked in Aleppo,

16-394097/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

Idlib, and Hama governorates, and some were attacked
more than once. The direct targeting of health-care
facilities is the most visible attack on the health-care
system in Syria today, but there are others as well,
including the militarization of health care facilities by
several parties to the conflict, the targeting of healthcare personnel, and the denial of medical and surgical
supplies in many areas. Many patients are simply too
afraid to travel to hospitals or clinics because they fear
attacks, detention or abuse.
Attacks on health-care facilities and workers have
an enormous impact on the communities they serve. For
example, before three hospitals in rural western Aleppo
were attacked last week, they provided more than
10,000 consultations and performed 1,500 surgeries
per month.
First of all, denying ordinary citizens access to
health care is an affront to our common humanity.
Everyone has the right to health; it is inscribed in
many international agreements, including the United
Nations Declaration.
Secondly, those attacks are an unacceptable
violation of international humanitarian law. Even in
war, there are rules against such attacks, inscribed in
the Geneva Conventions relating to the protection of
victims of international armed conflicts. Respect for
the neutrality of health facilities is one of our most
important humanitarian principles and laws.
Thirdly, those attacks also represent something
deeper. We all have a sense that there is something very
special — even sacred — about providing health care
to children, mothers, and the disabled. When healthcare facilities providing care to the most vulnerable
are targeted, something very precious is lost. We have
not only violated a right and a law, we have lost our
collective humanity.
WHO condemns in the strongest terms attacks
on health-care facilities by any party, regardless of
their affiliation. We condemn the inappropriate use of
health facilities for any military or political purpose.
As the global health agency, we take seriously our
responsibility to speak out against these abuses
whenever we can. We do so regularly. Nonetheless, our
repeated calls for protecting health-care facilities and
personnel always fall on deaf ears.
I would like to highlight other challenges that
WHO and its partners face on a daily basis, notably
8/25

21/11/2016

our difficulties accessing hard-to-reach and besieged
locations to deliver life-saving medicines and supplies.
The Government routinely withholds its approval
for the delivery of medical supplies and equipment,
particularly surgical supplies, safe blood and blood
products, to those locations. Moreover, the operating
environment is now so dangerous that many health
partners, especially those managing cross-border
operations, have limited their activities.
Aleppo is the most visible face of Syria’s suffering.
It illustrates our difficulty in accessing besieged and
hard-to-reach locations. Over a quarter of a million
people are trapped in eastern Aleppo. All eight of
its hospitals have either been put out of action or are
only barely functioning. Its few remaining doctors
are exhausted and overwhelmed. Eastern Aleppo
is running out of food, water, and medicine. WHO,
along with humanitarian partners, has painstakingly
prepared detailed plans to evacuate the critically ill and
injured and allow convoys to deliver supplies to eastern
Aleppo. The Organization is awaiting the removal of
all obstacles that would allow it to implement its plans.
Western Aleppo is also under attack by non-State
armed groups in eastern Aleppo. Hospitals in western
Aleppo have been overwhelmed with wounded patients,
following indiscriminate shelling. Scores of children
were killed or injured when a mortar landed on a school
in western Aleppo last Saturday.
Thus far in 2016, WHO has provided over 9 million
medical treatments throughout Syria, through both
cross-line deliveries from Damascus and cross-border
deliveries from Gaziantep and Amman. Over one third
of those supplies were delivered to hard-to-reach and
besieged areas. For the first time in several years,
WHO, along with its United Nations partners and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, was able to reach all
besieged areas as part of United Nations inter-agency
convoys. However, WHO is not able to reach those
areas on a regular basis due to the lack of approval
of several parties to the conflict. The Government
withheld approval for the delivery of 75 tons of medical
supplies — mainly to support surgical, anaesthesiology,
laboratory and mental health services — to those areas.
As a result, around 150,000 people were deprived of
essential health care.
WHO has established a nationwide disease
surveillance system to detect and respond to outbreak
alerts. Fortunately, no major disease outbreaks have
occurred in Syria. The Organization has trained over
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

16,000 health-care workers to help fill the gap left by the
mass exodus of health professionals. WHO and UNICEF
have supported the vaccination of millions of children
against polio, measles and other vaccine-preventable
diseases. We have done all this with the sustained
support of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and our
national non-governmental organization partners.
Lastly, WHO has used its position as the lead agency
of the health sector to consistently advocate for the
sanctity of health care and for sustained access to all
parts of Syria to ensure that people are able to access
the health care they need.
However, the situation is getting worse. WHO
appeals to all members of the Security Council to
use every last ounce of their influence to bring an
immediate end to the suffering in Syria. We ask the
Council to approve the establishment of a system
to ensure that all parties have the coordinates of all
humanitarian convoys and health facilities, and that all
attacks are registered. We ask it to help end the attacks
on health-care facilities and their personnel, regardless
of the attackers’ affiliation. We ask the Council to
support sustained, unconditional access to all besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. We ask the Council to help
allow us to evacuate critically ill and wounded patients
and their families from all areas and to ensure their
safe passage.
I would like to reiterate that the WHO priority
remains the people of Syria. As a humanitarian agency,
we will continue our work to help to ensure that all
people in all parts of the country have access to essential
life-saving health care. We extend our deepest thanks
to the donors that have so generously and steadfastly
funded our operations in Syria during the past five
years. We stand ready to give a more formal, in-depth
briefing on those issues should the Council so desire.
Let me end by thanking you, Mr. President, and
the members of the Security Council for their time and
attention today.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Hoff
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): From
month to month, Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O’Brien brings to our attention the daily horror in Syria,
the daily horror that the civilian population faces — the

S/PV.7817

children, the elderly, the sick. We thank Stephen for his
briefing, a monthly briefing which is always painful
to hear. I would also like to thank Ms. Hoff, the
representative of the World Health Organization in
Syria, for her equally heartfelt briefing.
We continue to bear witness of the worst armed
conflict of the century and the greatest humanitarian
crisis since the Second World War, without being able
to react to such barbarity as the entire world so urgently
requests of us. A few days ago, in the Council, when
referring to other horrific attacks being carried out, that
time in Yemen, we again raised a series of questions,
which I will now paraphrase from that other scenario.
We again return to these questions to ask ourselves:
In the name of what god can one bomb hospitals? In
defence of what principles can one bomb schools? What
cause can be defended by deliberately using snipers to kill
doctors and humanitarian personnel? What overarching
value is being protected by bombing convoys that are
clearly identified as humanitarian convoys? What
morality teaches us that all of them — the hospitals, the
schools, the convoys, the humanitarian personnel — are
terrorists, and therefore legitimate targets for barrel
bombs and so-called bunker-busting, which are so
destructive and that continue causing destruction in
Syria, in Aleppo and across the entire country?
On a similar note, we were horrified by Stephen’s
comments with regard to non-State armed groups
indiscriminately bombing schools and residential
areas. I would like to express the hope that in the next
briefing Stephen could change that terminology on
non-State armed groups. A group that bombs schools
and residential neighbourhoods is not a non-State
armed group, but a terrorist group. And it should be
identified as such, because barbarity does not bear a
distinction worthy of excusing it. Whoever does so is
equally a terrorist.
We can make the point that responsibility for the
crisis must be shared by the entire Security Council,
given our inability to find a path towards a solution.
But certainly by far the majority of the responsibility
is with the members of the Organization and of the
Council that participate directly in the bombings and
that contribute to those attacks by way of an unlimited
supply of weapons.
How long can we honestly tolerate that? For
how much longer must the violence continue in this
way — echoing what Stephen had to say about the

16-394099/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

horror. It is our belief that there must be an immediate
cessation of hostilities in the entire Syrian territory,
particularly in the currently most affected areas. We
reiterate one more time the seven points mentioned
by Stephen in his recent briefing. It is time to end the
violence and the bloodshed and to offer some hope to
the Syrian population.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General O’Brien and the World
Health Organization Country Director Hoff for their
comprehensive and deeply disturbing briefings. I thank
them, as always, for presenting us with the unvarnished
and unbiased facts. Their remarks show once again what
happens when the conflict continues and when Russia
and the Al-Assad regime relentlessly pummel civilian
areas from the air and regularly block deliveries of
humanitarian aid on the ground.
In opposition-held eastern Aleppo, at least 289
people are reported to have been killed since Tuesday.
One Syrian volunteer reported 180 air strikes on
eastern Aleppo on Saturday alone. Think of what you
were doing on Saturday and imagine being subjected to
180 air strikes while doing it. A horrifying video from
eastern Aleppo affirms a shocking inhuman barrage on
civilian neighbourhoods.
Of course, we will hear today from the Syrian
regime and the Russian Federation a very different
narrative. Russia will no doubt talk at length about how
its unilateral pause in air strikes over eastern Aleppo
was some kind of humanitarian gesture. The reality
is that the Al-Assad regime and Russia are continuing
their starve-get-bombed-or-surrender strategy in
eastern Aleppo: bombing the city’s 275,000 residents
and pausing to see if any will surrender to the Al-Assad
regime — a regime that, as both we and the Syrian
people know, has systematically tortured those who
have found themselves under its custodial authority.
Would any of us trust that regime with the lives of our
family members, with our kids, with our parents, with
our siblings?
Consider that when Russia paused its air strikes
over eastern Aleppo they did so unilaterally, meaning
that they never deigned to coordinate their efforts with
the United Nations or any other organization actually
providing aid. That was not a humanitarian gesture.
Consider that during this pause in strikes Russia
and the Al-Assad regime never gave the United
Nations permission to deliver a single parcel of food or
10/25

21/11/2016

medicine to eastern Aleppo — not one. That was not a
humanitarian gesture.
Consider that Russian war regime planes dropped
leaflets warning the people of eastern Aleppo to leave
or be annihilated, as many of us discussed at our
previous briefing (see S/PV.7795).
Consider that residents of eastern Aleppo reportedly
received text messages warning people to flee before a
“strategically planned assault” would happen.
Consider that last month (see S/PV.7785) Russia
vetoed a draft resolution (S/2016/846) in the Security
Council meant to end atrocities in Aleppo.
Those also were not humanitarian gestures.
Remember that eastern Aleppo is not an isolated
case, it is part of a countrywide strategy across Syria.
Russia and the Al-Assad regime are waging a campaign
that includes sieges, the blocking of humanitarian aid,
the indiscriminate bombardment of civilian areas and
the use of barrel bombs.
Therefore, we members of the Council need to
separate fact from fiction today. When we renewed
the Joint Investigative Mechanism for Syria last
week (see S/PV.7815), I and many members spoke of
how we could not uphold the norm against chemical
weapons use if we did not know which party was using
chemical weapons. In that regard again, to uphold the
humanitarian demands of the Council, we need to
speak frankly and very specifically about which parties
are responsible for the suffering of the Syrian people.
That means condemning the atrocities committed by
terrorist organizations like Jabhat Al-Nusra and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) — which the
United States has done and will continue to do — but
it also means telling the truth about Russia and the
Al-Assad regime’s actions. Today I will focus on just
two features of regime and Russian terror.
First, the Al-Assad regime and Russia must
stop the campaign of attacks that has destroyed
countless schools, hospitals, homes and other civilian
infrastructure. Take just some of the recent air strikes.
Between 13 and 15 November, five hospitals in Syria
were struck — five hospitals in two days. After
air strikes hit another hospital in eastern Aleppo
on 18 November, every hospital in that city is now
reportedly out of service due to attacks by Russia and
the Al-Assad regime: every single hospital, serving a
population of 275,000 civilians, is out of commission.
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7817

On 6 November, an attack by the Al-Assad regime on a
Damascus suburb reportedly killed at least six children
in a kindergarten.

violence and inhumane conditions. Here is how a
Syrian journalist named Shiar described his experience
at military intelligence branch No. 235:

The United States recognizes that it is not just the
Al-Assad regime and its allies that are causing civilians
to suffer in Syria. We condemn, in the strongest terms,
all indiscriminate shelling by opposition forces into
the civilian areas of western Aleppo. Those attacks
have reportedly caused more than 60 casualties since
1 November. We agree with Russia that there can
be no justification for such attacks, but I ask: Will
Russia condemn — here in the Chamber today, or any
day — even a single air strike by the Al-Assad regime?
Choose any of the hospitals that the Al-Assad regime
has destroyed, or any of the schools. Will Russia ever
condemn its ally, Bashar Al-Assad, here at the Council
for a single one of those attacks? We have been attending
meetings like this one for more than five years. Despite
all of the carnage inflicted by the regime partners, they
have uttered not one critical, nor even skeptical word.

“They had me stand on a barrel and they tied
rope around my wrists. Then they took away the
barrel. There was nothing below my feet. They
were dangling in the air. They brought three sticks;
they were hitting me everywhere. After they were
done beating me with wooden sticks, they took the
cigarettes. They were putting them out all over
my body. It felt like a knife excavating my body,
cutting me apart.”

Today I would like to specify some of the names
of those involved since 2011 in killing and injuring
civilians by conducting air and ground-based Syrian
Government military assaults on cities, residential
areas and civilian infrastructure. The United States
will not let those who have commanded units involved
in these actions hide anonymously behind the facade
of the Al-Assad regime. We know who some of these
commanders are. They include Major General Adeeb
Salameh, Brigadier General Adnan Aboud Hilweh,
Major General Jawdat Salbi Mawas, Colonel Suheil
Al-Hassan and Major General Tahir Hamid Khalil.
Russia and the Al-Assad regime’s merciless attacks
must end and those behind such attacks must know that
we and the international community are watching their
actions and documenting their abuses, and that one
day they will be held accountable. I know right now
today, with the wind at their backs, these individuals
feel impunity. However, so did Slobodan Milošević,
Charles Taylor and countless war criminals before
them. Today’s atrocities are well-documented, and the
civilized world’s memories are long.
Secondly, the Al-Assad regime must end the
suffering and torture in detention centres throughout
Syria. The regime continues to imprison tens of
thousands of Syrians, including women, children,
doctors, humanitarian workers, human rights defenders
and journalists, subjecting many to torture, sexual

We know where torture has taken place and
where it continues to take place: facilities that include
military intelligence branches numbers 215, 227, 235
and 251; the air force intelligence investigation branch
in Mezzeh military airport; the Sednaya Prison and
the Tishreen and Hharasta military hospitals. The
commanding officers and prison officials who work at
those facilities should know, too, that the international
community is watching and that they, too, will one day
be held accountable. They include Major General Jamil
Hassan, Brigadier General Abdul Salam Fajr Mahmoud,
Brigadier General Ibrahim Ma’ala, Colonel Qusay
Mihoub, Brigadier General Salah Hamad, Brigadier
General Shafik Massa, Major General Rafiq Shehadeh
and Hafez Makhlouf. The United States will not forget
the cases of the many Syrians who have suffered so
much at the hands of individuals like those, and we will
continue fighting to hold them accountable for their
hateful crimes.
I wish to stress that the United States recognizes
that non-State groups have also committed many abuses
against detainees, including torture. We condemn any
group using such tactics in the strongest terms and we
demand that immediate access be granted to monitor
all detention facilities, whether regime, terrorist or
opposition. ISIL atrocities are in a category unto
themselves, which is why the United States leads a
67-member coalition to defeat that terrorist organization.
Let me conclude: in January, the United Nations
and the world raised the alarm that the people in the
community of Madaya, besieged by allies of the
Al-Assad regime, were starving. Today we have
reports of starvation again. Save The Children reported
recently that Madaya is now also seeing an increse in
child suicide attempts, something virtually unheard of
in the town before.

16-3940911/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

One of those kids is a 15-year-old named Omar.
Omar told a reporter recently,
“There is nothing left for me here, and I felt the
easiest thing to do was to kill myself. I tried to
throw myself from the balcony, but it wasn’t
high enough.”
Omar’s father is in jail. His mom had to leave
Madaya but left Omar behind, so he did not get recruited
into the Government’s security forces. Omar says,
“There is nothing to eat. We are being strangled
here. It is like I am in prison”.
Omar has one other thought; one that you might expect
from any teenager:
“I miss my mum waking meup in the morning.”
We — not just members of the Security Council,
but all States Members of the United Nations — must
be clear that the Al-Assad regime, Russia and their
allies are responsible for that destruction, which is
both physical destruction and, for countless children
like Omar, psychological destruction. In the face of
that destruction and overwhelming suffering, the
perpetrators must know that the pursuit of a military
solution is as foolish as it is brutal. Attacks on
civilians fuel terrorism; they do not defeat terrorism.
The perpetrators must also know that, like their
ignominious predecessors throughout history, they will
face judgment for their crimes.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O’Brien for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank
Ms. Elizabeth Hoff, World Health Organization (WHO)
Representative in Syria, for accepting Japan’s proposal
to make a briefing to the Security Council at such short
notice, and through her I thank the dedicated personnel
of the WHO, who have been working hard in such a
difficult environment.
The humanitarian situation in Syria is devastating.
Over the course of the weekend, we continued to hear
news of the terrible attacks and casualties in Aleppo
and elsewhere. Frustration is building over the inability
to address the humanitarian crisis, but we must not
abandon our efforts. We appreciate that some members
of the Security Council have taken the initiative to
advance discussions on the humanitarian situation.
We are also aware of efforts by the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) co-Chairs and regional
12/25

21/11/2016

stakeholders after the Lausanne meeting in October.
However, what we need now are actual improvements
on the ground. We need an agreement either from the
Security Council or the ISSG that will truly change the
situation in Syria.
Mr. O’Brien’s briefing presented us with a picture of
the desperate situation in Syria. Even during the pause
in aerial attacks by the Syrian Government and Russia,
the United Nations could not deliver any assistance
to the people of eastern Aleppo. As Mr. O’Brien
explained, even single attempts at humanitarian access
face countless obstacles on the ground. Today is not the
first time that we have heard that discouraging story.
However, the situation is now so severe that not a single
convoy has achieved access to Aleppo.
I have one simple question: If those States that
have influence, especially ISSG members, exert the
utmost influence on the parties on the ground, might
we be able to overcome some of the impediments to
humanitarian access? If not, what can be done to ensure
that the necessary actions are achieved on the ground?
That is a question that needs to be answered.
I am sure I speak for all of my colleagues when I say
that the Security Council was grateful to receive such
an extensive briefing from Ms. Hoff, who is following
the situation in Damascus closely. We highly commend
WHO efforts in delivering lifesaving treatments to
the Syrian people and strengthening health services,
including measures to counter children’s diseases.
Today’s briefing described a truly devastating situation
and made it absolutely clear that Syria’s medical sector
is in huge and imminent need of major rehabilitation.
We are shocked by the sheer number of medical
facilities that have been attacked in 2016. Japan reiterates
its position that the parties to the armed conflict have
the obligation to respect international humanitarian
law in all circumstances, and violators of international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. The
Permanent representative of the United States has just
mentioned specific names. If the lack of clarity on
the attackers is making it difficult to take measures
to effectively protect medical facilities, the Security
Council should request a Secretariat investigation and
other necessary measures.
This monthly meeting on the humanitarian situation
in Syria must not simply be a venue for us to express
our deep concern about civilians and medical personnel
who are facing devastating situations. We need to take
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

action and achieve concrete results. There is no time to
spare. I look forward to a constructive discussion in the
informal consultations that are to follow.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Stephen O’Brien and Ms. Elizabeth Hoff for their
briefings, which once again give cause for indignation.
I would like to pay tribute to the work that they and
their teams are carrying out. Their briefings depict a
relentless spiral of violence that makes it impossible
for humanitarian actors to carry out their work and
condemns hundreds of thousands of people to hunger
and death. I would like to underscore three points today.
First, simple words cannot describe the seriousness
of the humanitarian situation in Aleppo today. Eastern
Aleppo is the double victim of a barrage of fire and
a siege that is fitting of the Middle Ages. Both target
civilians and constitute war crimes. According to
the information available to us, hundreds of people,
including many children, have been killed since last
Tuesday as a result of bombings and uninterrupted
shelling, which means that rescue teams are unable to
intervene to rescue the wounded from the rubble. Those
conditions make it impossible for humanitarian workers
to carry out their work by delivering humanitarian
aid and carrying out medical evacuations. No convoy
has been able to reach eastern Aleppo since July. The
humanitarian aid reserves in warehouses in western
Aleppo have now been exhausted. Today, more than
275,000 civilians in eastern Aleppo are besieged as a
result of the incessant bombing of the regime and its
supporters. They have no food, medical equipment
or access to essential services. The Special Envoy
unequivocally stated that the fall of eastern Aleppo will
trigger an unprecedented humanitarian crisis and could
force more than 200,000 people to flee to Turkey.
Secondly, the people of Aleppo are not the only
population suffering in Syria. The regime is besieging
civilians across the country and is refusing to abide
by the necessary monthly humanitarian aid convoy
authorizations, as part of a deliberate obstructive
policy to force the population to flee and its opponents
to submit. In November, the United Nations submitted
18 requests to access 900,000 people in 25 besieged
or hard-to-reach areas. One third of those requests
were rejected without any valid justification citing
humanitarian aid principles. In Duma, as Mr. O’Brien
pointed out to us, a major convoy that was to deliver
humanitarian aid to 70,000 people has been held up at
the last check point maintained by the regime. Syrian

S/PV.7817

authorities have demanded convoys to unload their
cargo, despite the fact that they are affixed with the
necessary clearance. Medical and health supplies are
still deliberately removed from convoys, and 45,000
medical supplies were removed and destroyed in
October. Aid continues to be hindered and destroyed and
the population continues to go hungry and untreated;
and all the while the regime continues to impose its
demands on the United Nations and its partners. I recall
that the Syrian authorities are expressly bound to abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian
law, an obligation that includes ensuring swift, safe and
unhindered access to the entire population in Syria, in
line with Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, the regime and its allies continue their
illegal deliberate attacks on hospitals and medical staff,
actions that constitute war crimes. Five hospitals were
attacked between 3 to 15 November, leading to at least
two deaths and 19 injuries, including six medical staff.
As the Secretary-General pointed out yesterday, there
is no longer a single hospital functioning in eastern
Aleppo today. The WHO has reported 126 attacks of that
nature in Syria since the beginning of the year. Daily
action of that kind in Syria cannot go unpunished, and
full light must be shed on all violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that undermine the
claims of the regime that it is seeking to provide for the
Syrian people and the future of country.
Over the past two months, France has unceasingly
sought to hammer home a message that I repeat again
today. The regime and its supporters must immediately
and definitively cease their bombings of Aleppo and
allow humanitarian actors to swiftly deliver emergency
aid to the entire population that stands in need today.
That call is shared by a very large majority of members
of this Council.
France calls once again on those members of the
Council that are involved in the combat and have
influence on the regime to break the ongoing downward
course in that devasted land, which will only usher in
decades instability, violence and terrorism. Let us not
deceive ourselves. It is not just a total war-strategy
that has been triggered in Aleppo. It is not only a
humanitarian catastrophe, but also a strategic error.
That strategy will mechanically lead to the partition of
Syria. It will exacerbate the pace towards radicalization
and it will strengthen Da’esh and terrorism in general.
In Aleppo, horror and terror are two sides of the same
coin.

16-3940913/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

On behalf of France, I would like to underscore
once more the absolute urgency of immediately ending
the bombardments and the war, to seek together a
political solution. That is the only possible way out of
the tragedy, and it is the responsibility of the Security
Council, whose credibility is heavily involved.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Stephen
O’Brien and Elizabeth Hoff for their powerful briefings.
The United Nations is working tirelessly to help
millions of men, women and children in desperate need
in Syria. The Syrian regime and Russia, in contrast,
seem to be determined to increase that number, make
their suffering even worse and prolong the barbaric
conflict. As Stephen has spelled out, that is most clearly
seen in Aleppo. Hundreds of thousands of people are
enduring hell, living without the most basic supplies,
living — if it can be called that — in fear of barrel
bombs, shelling or worse. They have gone months
without receiving a single delivery of aid or a single
box of medical supplies. And yet, thanks to the United
Nations there are trucks full of supplies ready and
waiting to go, ready and waiting to save lives.
The Syrian regime, which Russia chooses to back,
is deliberately preventing the food and medicine from
reaching those in need. Russia has the power to allow
the aid, so desperately needed, into the city. If it does
not, the world will hold it to account for the barbarous
result. I urge the Russian Federation to persuade the
Syrian regime to let the United Nations do its job and
get aid into Aleppo.
But the tragedy is that even that will not be enough.
Not content with starving thousands of innocent
civilians, the Assad regime is pummelling them with
sortie after sortie of devastating air strikes. As we have
heard, dozens have been killed and injured in the past
few days alone, including through two vile attacks on the
same children’s hospital. Elizabeth has confirmed that
there are no more functioning hospitals left in eastern
Aleppo. That is the result of deliberate aerial attacks
on those hospitals and is part of a systematic campaign
to remove even the most basic of services left in the
city. And yet, Russia has said: “The allegedly bombed
hospitals in Aleppo exist only in the imagination”.
Please. We all know what needs to happen. I will repeat
it in the Chamber again, and I will keep doing so until I
am blue in the face if it means shifting the policy of the
Russian Federation.
14/25

21/11/2016

First, stop the war crimes. Attacks on hospitals,
civilians, schools and vital infrastructure are attacks
that serve no military purpose. How can the bombing of
the school, like the one in Idlib, be justified? How can
the killing of 20 children and 3 teachers be justified?
As Elbio Rosselli said, there is no god and no principle
that can possibly justify such an attack. We all want to
counter terrorism in Syria, but attacks on schools and
hospitals are not counter-terrorist operations. So we
support Staffan de Mistura’s request to send a United
Nations verification team to investigate the attacks on
hospitals in Aleppo.
Secondly, aid needs to get in. We commend the
United Nations on its humanitarian response plan for
Aleppo. All parties need to implement it fully and
immediately. But the issue goes far beyond Aleppo. As
Staffan said, the United Nations now puts the number
of those livining in besieged areas at almost one million
people. Aid must reach those people. Unless we see an
improvement, November will be the worst month yet
for effots to deliver aid to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas across Syria. Not one single humantarian convoy
has reached any of those areas on the United Nations
plan this month.
Those are two simple steps, and they must be taken
if we are to have a chance of that most elusive third
step — political talks that will bring an end to this
horrorific conflict. As I have said many times before,
Russia has a unique role to play in all three of those
steps: to persuade the regime to end its destructive
military approach, to allow full humanitarian access to
all beiseged areas and to commit to a political settlement
to end the brutal war.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs O’Brien
and Ms. Hoff for their briefings.
Unfortunately, we have to accommodate the inability
of the Security Council and the international community
to make progress regarding Syria. The ongoing situation
in the city of Aleppo is most distressing. Last month we
witnessed a dramatic deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in that historic city, leaving the vast majority
of the population without access to basic necessities and
life-saving assistance. The horrific fighting has caused
innumerous deaths and injuries among the civilian
population. The destruction of essential infrastructure,
such as hospitals, clinics and ambulances, and the
lack of medical staff have exponentially increased the
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

number of casualties, wounded and displaced persons,
absolutely overwhelming the ability of the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies to carry out
their duties.
Meanwhile, the Security Council remains unable
to reach any semblance of unity to express a common
position on the issue, while witnessing, on a daily
basis, the current violations of the most basic tenets of
international human rights and humanitarian law. The
latest escalation of fighting in Eastern Aleppo is most
regrettable. It is urgent that we consider ways to set aside
political differences and reset our focus on a new round
of political talks. While we understand the geopolitical
implications for the major stakeholders in the region
and beyond, we cannot accept the continuous suffering
of innocent civilians. We therefore support the draft
resolution submitted by Egypt, New Zealand and Spain
calling on all the parties to cease fighting for at least
10 days in order to allow and facilitate immediate, safe,
sustained and unhindered humanitarian access to all
of Aleppo by the United Nations and its implementing
partners. In our view, that would constitute an important
first step towards a resumption of negotiations, which in
the long term represents the most appropriate solution
to the conflict.
We would like to once again call on the members
of the Security Council to set aside their political
differences and rivalries and act in the interests of
international peace and security. The Middle East has
been affected by conflict and humanitarian crises for
too long, and the repercussions of our inability to help
solve the problems there are being felt all over the
world. The real influence of certain regional Powers,
as well as that which some members of the Council
are able to exert on the parties concerned, should be
used to advance a political solution to the conflict
instead of supplying weapons and lethal equipment to
the sides in the conflict in the search for an impossible
military outcome.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We appreciate both
of today’s briefings, which only add to the extremely
gloomy picture we have all been seeing for many
months now. The situation in Syria is a cause of
continuing concern. After six years of conflict there,
we are still not seeing any viable progress towards a
political solution. The forces of the regime and its allies
continue to pursue their goal of changing the military
balance and creating new realities on the ground. If the

S/PV.7817

recent history of the conflict is any guide, the fragile
logic is doomed to failure.
In the past three months we have seen four
offensives and counter-offensives, with the sides in
the conflict taking, losing and retaking the ground.
There is no winner in this game, but the losers are
obvious — they are the civilians, who continue to
suffer from the warmongering of hawks. We agree
with condemnation by the World Health Organization
(WHO) on 16 November stating that between 13 and
16 November six hospitals in Syria were attacked in
aerial bombardments. Those numbers will increase,
given the additional firepower of the reinforcements
employed by the Russian Federation and the active
participation of the Admiral Kuznetsov naval battle
group in the bombing of Aleppo, Idlib and Homs.
It may sound like a joke, but yesterday the Twitter
feed of the Russian Embassy in the United Arab
Emirates stated that “The allegedly destroyed hospitals
in #Aleppo exist only in the mind of the Department
of State’s spokesman John Kirby.” We are also deeply
concerned about recent information from WHO that all
the hospitals in the besieged rebel-held areas of eastern
Aleppo are now incapacitated after days of heavy
air strikes.
President Al-Assad has recently been very vocal in
the media. In an interview on 16 November with Rádio
e Televisão de Portugal, he made it very clear that he
continues to view all the forces in Aleppo and other
embattled provinces as terrorists. Unfortunately, we are
seeing some attempts to reconsider the role of the Syrian
President in the future of the country. The changing of
the great Powers’ policies towards a political transition
in Syria could provoke yet more instability throughout
the Middle East.
We underscore the urgent need for accountability
in Syria. We welcome the fact that the United Nations
Board of Inquiry has begun its investigation of the
attack on 19 September on the United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent relief operation to Urum al-Kubra,
and we look forward to its conclusions. We also call for
an immediate inquiry into the killing on 26 October of
children and other civilians in a school complex in the
village of Haas in Idlib province. The perpetrators of
such horrific crimes appear to act in the confidence that
there will be no accountability and justice. They must
be proved wrong.

16-3940915/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): To begin with, I would like to say that we
greatly appreciate the work of the United Nations
humanitarian personnel in Syria, and we actively
support them. There is no need to convince us of
the importance of assisting the United Nations, and
Ambassador Rycroft’s suggestion to that effect is
dishonest. What is he talking about?
First of all, we should look at what is really going on
in a professional manner. Thanks to the continued efforts
of Russian experts, the number of residential areas in
Syria covered by the truce has risen to 961. Seventy
armed opposition groups have officially joined the
ceasefire regime. Talks with armed-group commanders
are going on in a number of provinces. Russia continues
to provide the people of the Syrian Arab Republic with
substantive humanitarian assistance.
We continue our persistent quest to find ways to
improve the situation in Aleppo. As we all know, the
eastern districts of that strategically important city are
held by armed groups led by the terrorist organization
Jabhat Al-Nusra. The long-promised separation of the
moderate opposition from adherents of Al-Nusra has
yet to happen. We continue to be showered with data
showing shrinking numbers for Al-Nusra, based on
information from the press and even from opposition
social networks. What kind of sources are those? That
helps to maintain an intolerable situation in which
thousands of peaceful residents are held hostage. What
does that represent? The desire to preserve a major
centre of terrorist-led anti-Government resistance at
any cost? There are extremely disturbing reports of
the brutal suppression of demonstrations by peaceful
residents demanding that the radicals leave the city.
Our professional bilateral contacts with the American
side are currently continuing, and we hope they will
enable us to come up with an appropriate solution.
At a Security Council meeting in October (see
S/PV.7785) we had a detailed discussion of the reasons
for the disruption of the humanitarian operation, owing
to sabotage by illegal armed groups and the so-called
local council against a backdrop of — and this is
putting it mildly — inadequate action on the part of
certain United Nations staff, of which they are well
aware and, as I understand it, which they now regret.
We cannot permit any repeat of that kind of scenario.
From now on, let us see the insurgents, including those
of Ahrar al-Sham and Nour al-Din al-Zenki, publicly
affirm — and their sponsors guarantee — their
16/25

21/11/2016

willingness to cooperate with the United Nations
agencies and enable humanitarian operations to be
conducted without obstacles or artificial constraints.
There can be no bartering of the sick and injured for
food and medicines for the insurgents.
We also expect to see similar efforts on the part of
the local council in eastern Aleppo. We have a right to
hope in particular that our English colleagues, or the
French — who have received these people in Paris at
the highest level — will help in that department. That
is what they should be talking about — about their own
efforts, not about what they want from Russia, what
Russia should do, what Russia can do. They should be
talking about their own efforts. We are States, after all.
What can be asked of Russia? What should Russia do?
After all, we have found out that there are two such
councils, existing through infusions from abroad.
One of them is functioning in Gazientep. The other
is in Syria, outside of Aleppo. Neither one of them is
responsible for law and order. It is hardly possible to
consider the councils representative bodies of local
Governments in eastern Aleppo. They are not even in
Aleppo. Formally speaking, their mandates have ended.
Let us not forget that.
We have also noticed that every month we find out
through United Nations reports about an increasing
number of people in besieged areas. Invariably that is
due to the population centres that are under the control
of armed groups. If the purpose of such mathematical
distortions is to present the Syrian Government as
the main party responsible for suffering, then it is
an unacceptable approach. It is not clear how such
calculations are carried out, because United Nations
evaluation missions are not allowed access to besieged
territories. Nonetheless, those missions regularly
provide statistics based on nothing.
At the same time, the number of people who are
in need of humanitarian assistance in territories
under the control of the Government is constantly
underestimated. For example, an interesting instance
of such underrepresentation is from the bulletin for
20 April, which stated the number of people in Deir ezZor — which is besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant — to be 200,000. On 3 May, the number was
110,000. We follow what is happening there very closely
because, unlike what has been hypocritically described
by some as an operation of support, we are conducting a
counter-terrorism operation in the country. Yes, we are
supporting the legitimate Government.
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The most recent information about attacks against
civilian infrastructure is pure propaganda. It is not
objectively verified. According to that information, the
only thing that Syrians do is bomb health facilities and
increase the intensiveness of such attacks right before
Security Council meetings. If we amassed all the Internet
data on attacks against health facilities, we might be
surprised by the number of those facilities — which
pre-war Syria never had. At the same time, it is
continuously stated that there are no functioning health
facilities remaining. That always happens immediately
prior to a Security Council meeting.
As a result of the shelling by the fighters in eastern
Aleppo, the United Nations has left western Aleppo.
Why is that something that we are not talking about
today? Why is it that the attacks against the Embassies
in Damascus are not being condemned? In the absence
of the United Nations in Aleppo, information is gathered
from God knows where — from various countries and
from non-governmental organizations that are outside
of Syria. Data is being intentionally falsified. Let me
point out that information is never provided about the
location of so-called mobile hospitals in areas under the
control of rebel fighters who are supported by Western
partners. When we asked for an honest exchange of
information, that was what we specifically had in mind.
My colleague from the United States, Ms. Power, is
absolutely right. Let me say again that as of 18 October
the Russian Air Force has not conducted airstrikes on
Aleppo or within the 10 kilometres surrounding it. We
are waiting for the moderate opposition to dissociate
themselves from the terrorist groups. That is an
urgent task.
I must say that because of the efforts of our
partners — today’s statements are testimony to
that — the work of the Council on the Syrian settlement
is increasingly moving into the virtual sphere, which
has nothing in common with the realities of the ongoing
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. Let me recall, for
example, the many appeals to the Governments of Syria
and Russia. But who is going to work with those who
were brought into Syria and provided with weapons
and money? Can we imagine what it must be like for a
secular Syria, which has a long tradition of coexistence
of various faiths and cultures, to witness the presence of
foreign fighters? Let us assess that professionally. What
kind of significance does that have for them? Who is
going to be working with those people? It seems that no
one will. First, the conflict was brought into existence.

S/PV.7817

Now there is fear of the conflict and actions are being
dictated by that fear. That is what is happening.
Some want to put the whole world into a tribunal,
Those parties have reached the point where they have
listed the names of Syrian officers and generals.
However, if they claim to be impartial, where are the
names of the terrorists? Who is going to deal with
them? Maybe those parties have become frightened of
them. Let us try to not be hypocritical. Those parties
have forgotten about their own golden standard on the
presumption of innocence by pre-emptively identifying
those responsible, which is something that ought to
only be decided by a legal process. That is elementary,
and yet I find myself saying it in the Security Council.
Let me also say that I have listened very carefully
to my colleagues with whom I work on a daily basis on
various issues. Their harshness tells me that their plans
are not working, that something went wrong and that
they are incapable of removing yet another regime and
destroying another country in the Middle East. They
cannot do that. However, it is never too late to stop
trying. The doors of cooperation remain open.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. O’Brien and Ms. Hoff for their briefings.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expresses
its concern about the humanitarian situation in Syria.
We pay tribute to the efforts of humanitarian agencies
that carry out extraordinary and noble work to assist
millions of Syrians in spite of high levels of risk in
such a raging conflict. We are pleased to hear that
humanitarian agencies were able to send 28 lorries
to the Duma area yesterday. We also welcome the
news that the funds to continue humanitarian aid for
approximately 2.8 million people have been procured.
Humanitarian aid must be balanced, effective
and impartial. Therefore we believe that, although
the humanitarian situation in Aleppo requires the
international community to provide an immediate
response, we also must bear in mind that assistance to
other parts of the country has continued, despite the
difficulties posed by the armed conflict.
Terrorism is the cause of the humanitarian
catastrophe in Syria. The acts caried out by groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
the Al-Nusra Front and their allies are a threat to
international peace and security, which is why they

16-3940917/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

must be combated in strict adherence to international
law. In the case of Aleppo, the humanitarian pauses
offered by the authorities as of 18 October were blocked
by militants of Al-Nusra Front and partner groups.
Those groups prevented civilians from evacuating
the affected areas. Recently we have observed that in
eastern Aleppo people are rising up against the terrorist
groups, which not only use them as human shields but
also deny them the little food there is.
In the light of what is happening, why has the socalled moderate opposition not clearly and tangibly
decoupled itself from those terrorist groups? It seems
they are not so moderate as they present themselves
to the international community. It is evident that
complicity between the terrorist groups in eastern
Aleppo and the so-called moderate opposition is a
serious obstacle to peace in Syria. There is an ongoing
threat of ISIS in Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. Both regions
present a real threat tothe delivery of humanitarian aid.
Denying the civilian population access to humanitarian
aid has become part of the daily practice of ISIS and
the Al-Nusra Front. Those terrorist groups and their
partners have become looming threats to peace and
stability in the region. We must counter their influence
with all available and necessary measures, while strictly
adhering to international law
We would like to raise a similar concern about the
destruction of basic infrastructure and services, such
as hospitals, water distribution services and electricity
substations. As Ms. Elizabeth Hoff of the World Health
Organization pointed out a few minutes ago, before
the war broke out Syria had one of the most advanced
health-care systems in the Middle East. However, owing
to the war, which has raged for six years now and which
has been financed from abroad, the health-care system
lies, unfortunately, in ruins. We therefore call upon the
parties and those who have influence on the parties
to resume political negotiations as swiftly as possible
without attaching preconditions to the aforementioned
resumed negotiations so that we can work towards a
solution to the conflict, which has caused so much
suffering to the people of Syria. The prolongation of
the conflict will only cause more suffering and more
destruction for the Syrian population.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Mr. Stephen O’Brien and Ms.Elizabeth Hoff for their
briefings. I commend them and their staff for their
courage and determination in persevering in such
difficult and dispiriting conditions.
18/25

21/11/2016

Mr. O’Brien asked the question as to why the
Council is holding this meeting. We could have asked
the same question during each of the past 12 months.
The Council has been powerless in dealing with the
essential problem in Syria. Important work has been
done in addressing the particular menace of chemical
weapons, and, as Mr. O’Brien has reminded us,
important humanitarian assistance has been able to get
through under the cross-border arrangements called
for by the Council. But, as we have heard today, crossfront-line access, also called for by the Council, has
been systematically denied, blocked, obstructed and
obfuscated by the Syrian Government or forces allied
with it. And our resolution 2286 (2016) on attacks on
health-care workers or hospitals has been blatantly
ignored, as we have been told today.
Most fundamentally, the Council has been powerless
in dealing with the most serious threat facing the Syrian
people, namely, the besiegement and bombardment
of civilians, most notably in Aleppo, and, as we have
been reminded again today, throughout other parts of
Syria, as well. I am not going to revisit the horrors that
flow from our inaction. They have been described more
than adequately by Mr. O’Brien, Ms. Hoff and others.
Looking around the Chamber today, I felt I can see in
the faces of my colleagues some of the shame that I
feel myself. Instead of responding to the clear breaches
of international peace and security, the Council has
been largely just a witness to the horrors that have been
described to us again today.
The situation in Syria is horrible and complex,
and many players, external and internal, are playing
roles there. A particularly unhelpful role is being
played by the terrorist groups. However, leaving
aside the area occupied and controlled by the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, no amount of diplomatic
diversion can hide the fact that we are witness to the
destruction of a country and its people, led by its own
Government and supported by a permanent member of
the Security Council.
As is well-known, after last month’s vetos (see
S/PV.7785), New Zealand tried to advance a draft
resolution that would have demanded an end to all
attacks that risked death or injury to civilians in Syria,
especially in Aleppo. It was deeply frustrating that
the Council could not unite around a proposition as
simple and basic as that. Nonetheless, New Zealand,
together with Egypt and Spain, is again putting forward
a draft resolution that is similarly modest in ambition.
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Indeed, we consider it to be the bare minimum that
the Council can do. It approaches the conflict through
a humanitarian lens, establishes a 10-day pause in
Aleppo to allow the United Nations and its partners to
get aid in and sick people out, and re-establishes the
cessation of hostilities in the remainder of the country.
It also begins to deal with some very difficult issues,
namely, separation and the political process, but it does
not try to provide all the answers. We are aware that
there are conversations going on elsewhere. The draft
resolution is intended to be complementary to those
conversations. We are committed to taking this draft
resolution forward, and we urge all Council members
to support us in words and in action.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): We thank Mr. Stephen
O’Brien and Ms. Elizabeth Hoff for their briefings.
All too often, the briefings continue to depict a brutal
and terrifying reality arising from our inability to end
the sufferings of Syrians in eastern Aleppo. It pains
us to listen to Mr. O’Brien’s horrifying account of the
miserable plight of the innocent. Just five days ago,
a resumption of the intense blitz on the besieged city
pulverized the brief lull in the aerial bombardment and
the relative calm in Aleppo, and scores of innocent
persons were killed yet again.
We are told that there can be no compromise in
the fight against terrorism. The deliberate bombings
of hospitals make it seem, however, that nothing was
meant to be spared. The fact that all the hospitals in
Aleppo are in ruins is utterly abhorrent. We are appalled
that civilians, especially women and children, had to
be treated in field hospitals set up in homes near the
front lines just to avoid being targeted. The temporary
and makeshift hospitals can never be adequate, and the
desparate situation is only made worse by the acute
shortages and lack of medical supplies and equipment,
as well as by the lack of a medical-evacuation exercise
since the middle of this year.
The resumptions of air strikes and the bombardment
of Aleppo last week meant that any hope for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to civilians has diminished.
We are concerned by what was reported by Mr. O’Brien
earlier that the last remaining food rations are now
being handed out, and that there will be nothing left
to distribute next week without a resupply. We fear
that without a resupply, his next report will contain
accounts of mass deaths owing to starvation, something
that we could have helped to avoid. It is regrettable
that no humanitarian access has been granted to the

S/PV.7817

United Nations in the past four weeks despite the
relative calm in Aleppo. As winter approaches, we
call on all conflicting parties to allow the delivery of
humanitarian aid through a coordinated approach with
the United Nations. It is an exercise that the United
Nations has repeatedly pronounced its readiness to
undertake immediately.
Hostilities in Aleppo aside, my delegation is also
concerned at the military escalations in Idlib and
Homs. While Malaysia shares the notion of eliminating
terrorism and its threat, such a fight must not be at the
expense of innocent civilians. The senseless collective
punishment must be stopped. Several schools have
reportedly been targeted by air strikes in Idlib, more
just yesterday. The targeting of schools only serves
to indicate that the war is about inflicting maximum
sufferings on the vulnerable. Children, some of
whom were leaving their school compounds, were
killed. Those incidents must be investigated, with the
perpetrators being held to account.
Before I conclude, we join other Council members
in calling for actions on the United Nations plan for
eastern Aleppo and Syria as a whole. We have an
obligation to reverse the depressing developments
for the sake of innocent Syrians. We have before us a
proposal by the humanitarian penholders for a Council
response to the situation in Syria, and we must make
this fourth attempt count for something. We urge those
who could make the difference to listen to the voice of
their conscience and to halt the atrocities.
We pay our tributes to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and all humanitarian actors
on the ground for their tireless and brave efforts in
alleviating the sufferings of the men, women and
children of Syria. Our thoughts and condolences also
go to the family of Mr. Husein Muhsen, a humanitarian
staff member of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees inthe Near East, who
was killed in an air strike while assisting Palestinian
refugees in Khan Eshieh refugee camp just a week
ago. The tenacity of our comrades in Syria must at the
very least be rewarded with a signal that the Council
cares. It has a duty to uphold, and it needs to respond
to the deteriorating situation in Syria. It must stop the
senseless killing and destruction.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My thanks go, above all, to Stephen and to Elizabeth
for their respective briefings and for their excellent

16-3940919/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

work. I should like also to thank the Ambassador of
New Zealand, who described very clearly the joint
efforts that Egypt, New Zealand and Spain are making
to ensure the adoption of a series of measures aimed at
halting the fighting in Aleppo so that humanitarian aid
can be distributed inside the city.
Indeed, given the humanitarian disaster depicted
by Stephen O’Brien, no simple message in and of itself
can be enough. We have heard today about deliberate
attacks on doctors and hospitals such as the ones
reported by Médecins Sans Frontières this weekend,
which destroyed the last paediatric clinic in eastern
Aleppo. Violations of international humanitarian law
occur daily.
My delegation is not resigned to this situation. We
must do more than just condemn, though it certainly
seems difficult. We support the efforts of the Special
Envoy, who was in Damascus over the weekend seeking
a solution to the most pressing problems facing Syria.
We trust that the Geneva talks will bear fruit. However,
the Security Council must shoulder its responsibility to
halt the country’s slide into violence and bring about
a new cessation of hostilities. It is also the Council’s
responsibility, as has been said repeatedly, to make a
distinction between terrorists and the opposition.
We are at a turning point in the war in Syria. We
can try to protect the population of Aleppo and restore
the cessation of hostilities across the country, or we can
let the conflict descend into a spiral of violence with
the attendant unpredictable consequences. Spain firmly
supports the first option. As I noted at the outset, we will
continue to work with Egypt and with New Zealand, in
a few minutes’ time in the Consultations Room, and
with our other partners in the Security Council to try to
achieve that outcome.

21/11/2016

humanitarian access so as to ensure the timely and safe
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The international community should also work
jointly to take expeditious action to ease tensions so as
to create conditions conducive to the implementation
of humanitarian assistance and the promotion of a
political settlement of the issue.
In working to mitigate the humanitarian situation,
we should not overlook the need to combat terrorism.
Terrorists and terrorist organizations inside Syria
are launching repeated attacks, gravely hampering
humanitarian efforts. The international community
must strengthen its coordination, follow uniform
standards and resolutely combat all Council-listed
terrorist organizations.
A political settlement is the only viable way
to resolve the Syrian issue, and the international
community should stay the course in that respect. Any
action taken by the Council on the issue of Syria should
truly improve the situation there and be genuinely
beneficial to the promotion of the political process, to
advancing humanitarian relief efforts and to efforts to
combat terrorism. China will continue to support the
mediation efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank Mr. O’Brien and Ms. Hoff for their briefings
this morning.

Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien and Ms. Hoff, the representative of the World
Health Organization, for their briefings.

At the outset, let me stress once again what has
already been agreed on repeatedly by the international
community: that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. A comprehensive settlement is
required in order to bring about a united, sovereign
Syria that responds to the Syrian people’s desire
for a future of security and prosperity that is free of
terrorism, and it must be based on Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2254 (2015), and the
Geneva communiqué. This will require efforts by the
Syrian Government and the opposition to agree on an
interim phase.

The humanitarian situation in some areas of Syria,
including in Aleppo, is very serious, leading to massive
civilian casualties and including attacks on civilian
and health-care facilities. China condemns any attack
against civilians or humanitarian infrastructure. We
truly empathize with the Syrian people’s suffering. We
urge all parties in Syria to assist with the relief efforts
of the international community by providing full

Egypt, in cooperation with our Security Council
partners Spain and New Zealand, is continuing to
seek to alleviate the humanitarian situation in Syria,
particularly in Aleppo, in view of what has befallen
that city. We believe that the Security Council will
not be able to reach a definitive solution so long as a
political settlement hinges on agreement between the
Syrian parties. We have therefore provided the Security

20/25

16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Council, through our draft resolution, with a clear path,
which will be a pivotal step towards helping to reach
this objective. We hope that the Security Council will
be soon able to support this view.
There is a need for a cessation of hostilities in Aleppo
for at least 10 days in order to create a humanitarian
space, as well as for an immediate call for a cessation
of hostilities in Syria in general, in order to reach a
definitive ceasefire in accordance with resolution
2268 (2016), with implementation monitoring. This
vision also includes combating terrorism; an end
to cooperation by any party in Syria with terrorist
groups, which now control large swathes of territory
in the country; and the need to work to initiate serious
negotiations between the Syrian parties on the interim
period, in accordance with the Geneva communiqué
and resolution 2254 (2015).
Let me reiterate our hope that the Security Council
will be able to adopt this view as soon as possible. I would
also call once again on all parties within and outside
Syria to overcome their political differences in order to
end this humanitarian tragedy, whose consequences are
being borne by the Syrian people alone.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Senegal.
The Senegalese delegation, like those that spoke
before it, expresses its profound thanks to Mr. Stephen
O’Brien and Ms. Elizabeth Hoff for their briefings.
Unfortunately, the Security Council is once again
responding to the heartfelt appeals by Mr. O’Brien and
Ms. Hoff to our humanity with a public showing of
its lack of unity, its divisiveness, its lack of political
will and, in short, its powerlessness to take concrete
action on any one dimension of the tragedy in Syria,
including the political, humanitarian and security
dimensions. As we saw last Thursday (see S/PV.7815),
the Council cannot even agree on the non-proliferation
dimension. At the same time, the downward spiral
into the depths of suffering and horror in that country
continues. At the same time, the risk of that large
and beautiful country’s fragmentation is increasing.
Terrorists from everywhere continue to take root and
exert their influence. Syria’s rich cultural heritage is in
the process of being destroyed and trafficked. In order
to prevent all of that, the Senegalese delegation calls on
the Council to leap to action and help the Syrian people
undergoing a national crisis.

S/PV.7817

We welcome the courageous initiative undertaken
by the penholders — Malaysia, Spain and New
Zealand — in calling for the adoption of a new draft
resolution to end the violence in Syria, in particular in
Aleppo. We must support that initiative, because we owe
it to the suffering population of Syria and the valiant
humanitarian workers from all over whose calling it
is to tirelessly offer relief to civilians in Syria. In that
spirit, I call on the members of the Council, during
our meeting in the closed consultations following this
meeting, to find reason for a glimmer of hope. We must
do that, because we are all in agreement that there can
be no military solution to the conflict. Let us therefore
work towards finding a political solution. And in
doing so, we will send a message of hope to the talks
in Lausanne and Geneva, and renew our support for
the International Syria Support Group, in particular to
the co-Chairs, so as to give a new breath of life to the
cessation of hostilities regime.
I now resume my functions as President.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I simply want to state for the record that
we are witnessing, within the Security Council, the
normalization of a culture of unacceptable behaviour.
When the Permanent Representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic took the floor, other Permanent
Representatives purposefully stood up and left the
Chamber. We believe that such conduct points to their
lack of courage to listen to a statement made by a
professional colleague. That is unacceptable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
French): I join my colleague, the representative of the
Russian Federation, in what he has just stated in such
a dignified matter with regard to behaviour by certain
Council members towards me. Having said that, since
the three musketeers, the advocates of a system aimed
at sowing moral confusion, have left the Chamber and
are thereby no longer in a position to undermine and
poison our important discussion on my country, Syria,
I can now deliver my statement in peace.
(spoke in Arabic)
At the outset, I welcome Ms. Hoff, who joins
us from Damascus, the world’s oldest capital. I bid

16-3940921/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

welcome to the United Nations personnel in my country.
They are on-the-ground witnesses who can effectively
inform the Security Council with far more accurate
information than the United Nations bureaucrats in
New York can muster.
Allow me first to share a piece of information
with my colleagues with regard to a fresh massacre
committed by war planes of the so-called international
coalition led by the United States against Syrian
civilians. More than 10 civilians lost their lives in a raid
conducted by those United States aeroplanes against
the village of Al-Salhiya in rural northern Al-Raqqa.
Other war planes of the same coalition targeted a cotton
mill in the same village, resulting in the martyrdom of
three workers and an entire family, composed of six
civilians, that had been displaced from another area.
Those are today’s developments, which have resulted
from the actions of United States war planes.
Naturally, I will not respond to the statements made
by certain colleagues. I would like, however, to respond
to the statement delivered by the representative of the
United States to the effect that she was allegedly told
by an eye witness among the terrorists sponsored by the
United States in eastern Aleppo that Syrian and Russian
war planes conducted 180 air raids on Saturday alone.
Being a seasoned and expert diplomat, she naively
believed the eye witness, who is putatively a terrorist
from Jabhat Al-Nusra, which her own Government has
qualified as a terrorist group in the Council. What kind
of hypocrisy is that? What sort of lies are we hearing
in these unnecessary meetings on the humanitarian
situation in my country?
Then she mendaciously Al-Nusra Front falsely
claimed that leaflets were dropped by the Syrian air
force, urging civilians in eastern Aleppo to leave or
they would be killed. That is what was stated by the
representative of the United States. Such talk simply
amounts to lies upon lies and, frankly, they are shameful.
The Syrian air force did drop leaflets in eastern Aleppo,
calling on civilians to distance themselves from armed
terrorist groups in the eatern part of the city and to
leave eastern Aleppo. The Syrian Government opened
six humanitarian corridors for civilians and two for the
fighters who wish to leave eastern Aleppo. However,
the terrorists, of course, did not leave and did not
allow the civilians to leave because they use them as
human shields.
22/25

21/11/2016

At any rate, if some Governments are concerned
about the terrorists in eastern Aleppo, why do they not
issue them with passports or visas and take them in? If
the representative of the United States believes that the
arrival of 8,000 armed terrorists from eastern Aleppo
in the United States will help the Syrian people, then
take them, especially given the fact that most of them
are not Syrian. In a special report from the CounterTerrorism Committee, the Council stated that there are
approximately 80,000 foreign terrorists in Syria, who
came to my country from around 100 States Members
of the United Nations. That was stated by the Council.
That seems to have fallen on deaf ears, in the case of the
Ambassadors of the United States, the United Kingdom
and France.
Not once did Mr. O’Brien refer to terrorism in his
briefing. Not once was the word terrorism used, as if
there were no terrorism whatsoever in my country,
Syria, and it is all a mere Tom and Jerry cartoon in
the minds of some. I respect the comments made by
my colleague, the Ambassador of Uruguay. He quite
rightly wondered about which god and what values
compel a terrorist to kill civilians.
It is a valid question. However, the reply can be
found in the hundreds of letters that we have sent to the
Council over a five-year period, stating who is doing
what on Syrian territories. There are hundreds of letters
in which we have explained the presence of terrorists
on the ground. Many resolutions have been adopted,
in particular resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign armed
mercenaries. Yet some in the Council still do not know
which Godand which religion, and who is the takfiri who
brought us Saudi and Qatari Wahhabi’s Fatwas to shed
blood in my country, as if it is a piece of information
not known to some, and as if what the takfiris are doing
is occurring in Somalia and not in Syria.
To my dear friend the Ambassador of Uruguay,
I say — the terrorists are the takfiris. The takfiri
terrorists are influenced by the Saudi Wahhabi way
of thinking. In other words, a takfiri is anyone who
considers you infidel and deserve being killed because
you do not share his extremist views. That is the
meaning of takfiri. The actions of Da’esh and Al-Nusra
are based on the same Wahabi doctrine that prevails
in Saudi Arabia. They have exported that terrorism to
us. They have brought terrorists to us from all over the
world — Australians, Canadians, French, Belgians,
Spaniards, Chinese, Russians. The entire garbage pail
of the world’s terrorism has been heaped on us. Yet some
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

are still wondering what is occurring in Syria? who is
killing whom? Why does humanitarian assistance not
reach eastern Aleppo? Who is hampering humanitarian
assistance to eastern Aleppo? As if such questions need
a key to be answered after five years of criminal acts
being perpetrated against my country.
The kind of terrorism we suffer is the same that
prevails everywhere — in Iraq, Libya, Egypt, Kenya,
Somalia, Tanzania, the Niger, Chad and Nigeria. It is
the same terrorism; its roots are the same. Why do we
all, without exception, support the fight being waged
by the Iraqi Government and the popular mobilization
forces against Da’esh terrorism in Mosul? We do so
because it is a valid right. The Iraqi Government is
fighting terrorism. We are combating the very same
terrorism in Syria. Terrorism in Aleppo is the same
kind of terrorism carried out in Mosul, so why then
are we being condemned while the very same people
who criticize us support those who are fighting the
same terrorism in Mosul? Da’esh is there and the same
Da’esh is here, in my country. Why does that double
standard exist?
Let us not forget that United States air raid against
the Syrian Arab Army sites in Deir ez-Zor, allowing
that city to be besieged by ISIL. There are 300,000
people in Deir Ez-Zor receiving food and medical
assistance, air-dropped by helicopters, simply because
the United States air force struck the Syrian Arab army
sites in Deir ez-Zor. Does the representative of the
United States recall the theatrics at the meeting that
immediately followed that attack, and the claims that a
mistake had been made? Two days later, every civilian
bridge on the Euphrates was also struck. Is this fighting
Da’esh? Is it the goal of the United States air force to
target Syrian infrastructure? There were 200 victims
when Manbij was struck by the French air force, and the
same number after it was struck by the United Kingdom
air force. What is all this absurdity.
The statements made by the representatives of some
States and the briefing given by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for humanitarian affairs met our expectations
for the thirty-third time with their same negative,
erroneous approach of distorting facts and making
light of the suffering of the Syrian people. It reveals
the politicization of the humanitarian situation in order
to demonize the Syrian Government with a view to
creating a terrorist entity — a terrorist statelet — in my
country, Syria. That is the plan — to create a terrorist
statelet in Syria. It is a fact — a terrorist entity that

S/PV.7817

obtains support from the Western sponsors of terrorism.
It is further proof that those States and actors have no
will or desire to end the suffering of our people and
continue to deny the root causes of the crisis in Syria.
In that regard, I repeat once again that we reject
the fact that the crisis in my country, Syria, is being
addressed without serious consideration for its root
causes. Those causes are the emergence and spread
of armed terrorist groups, the recruitment of tens
of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters supported
by well-known States, and their deployment in
neighbourhoods, villages, towns and cities where they
use civilians as human shields. Let me repeat again that
certain States that today use the suffering of the Syrian
people as a cheap tool to implement their political
agenda, by claiming to be concerned for their security
and well-being, are the main reason for this suffering,
either through their direct support to armed terrorist
groups or their imposition of unilateral coercive
measures, which affect Syrian citizens directly. Let me
repeat again that no one in the world is more eager than
us, the Government and the people of Syria, to preserve
the lives of Syrian citizens, whether in Aleppo, Dara’a,
Damascus, Raqqa or any other place where civilians
suffer because of the practices of armed terrorist
groups that use them as humans shields, besiege them
in their towns and villages, prevent them from leaving
those areas and obstruct their access to humanitarian
assistance or sell them such assistance at prices they
cannot afford.
Let me repeat yet again that, in the light of this
bitter fact, any Government, including the Syrian
Government, has the moral and legal obligation to save
their citizens from becoming hostages to terrorists.
Yesterday, 20 November, groups that certain parties and
States like to call non-State armed opposition groups
perpetrated a new, horrific and premeditated massacre
when their terrorists stationed in the Bustan Al-Qasr
neighbourhood of eastern Aleppo launched a number
of missiles against the Al-Furqan and Saria Hassoun
schools in the Al-Furqan community of western
Aleppo, killing 10 children between the ages of 7 and
12 and wounding 59 others, including a female teacher
whose leg had to be amputated. These are pictures of
the school that was bombed in Aleppo by the so-called
moderate armed groups — the genetically modified
armed groups. Obviously, some people do not care
about such photographs and will not speak about them.

16-3940923/25

S/PV.7817

The situation in the Middle East

Incidentally, as I mentioned, one of the schools that
was attacked is named Saria Hassoun. Five years ago,
I spoke to the Council (see S/PV.6627) and stated that
armed terrorist groups had killed the son of the Mufti
in Syria, the Public Mufti of the Syrian Arab Republic,
whose name is Saria Hassoun. That school was named
after the martyr Saria Hassoun, son of Syria’s Mufti,
who was killed by terrorists five years ago. Today, they
are attacking the school named after him.
In addition to striking those two schools, the
terrorists from Jabhat Al-Nusra, the Nur al-Din
al-Zenki Movement, which is supported by Turkish
intelligence services, and other terrorist groups
classified as moderate armed groups by Washington,
Paris and London, who pay their mercenaries and
provide them with funding and weapons, part of which
came from Ukraine, Bulgaria and Croatia, also opened
fire on the law school and the Mogambo and Al-Midan
neighbourhoods, killing two individuals and wounding
33 others. Furthermore, missiles launched by terrorist
groups against Al-Ma’damia and Saif Al-Doula
neighbourhoods in western Aleppo killed two people
and wounded seven citizens.
Those attacks by terrorist armed groups
coincided with another truce, the third of its kind
since 9 September, which was declared by the Syrian
Government and its allies in the city of Aleppo in
order to save the lives of innocent citizens and end
their suffering. I repeat that this is the third truce since
9 September, which goes completely counter to what
the American Ambassador said to the effect that an eye
witness told her that the Russian and Syrian air forces
bombed eastern Aleppo 180 times on Saturday. Imagine
such ridiculous talk coming from the representative of
a super-Power and a permanent member of the Security
Council . The truce declared by the Syrian Government
and its allies provides for safe passage to be given to
any armed persons seeking to leave the area, normalize
their situation or take their personal weapons to another
place of their choice; for the evacuation and medical
care for the wounded, in order to restore normal life to
the eastern part of Aleppo — and I am talking about the
eastern side of Aleppo, not the east side of Manhattan,
California, Glasgow or Marseille; the eastern part
of Aleppo, a Syrian city — and for the resumption
of the State institutions’ tasks to to provide services
and meet the needs of citizens who wish to remain in
eastern Aleppo.
24/25

21/11/2016

Regrettably, well-known States and parties have
hampered all such initiatives by instructing the armed
terrorist groups to reject any initiative, target civilians
inside their schools and homes in western Aleppo,
entrench themselves in civilian neighbourhoods in
eastern Aleppo, use civilians as human shields and
kill any civilian trying to reach the safe exit points, as
was the case on 17 November when 17 civilians were
executed for protesting the practices of terrorist groups
in eastern Aleppo. That fact demonstrates that these
armed terrorist groups are a tool for a heinous blackmail
by certain States to achieve a tawdry political agenda
at the expense of the suffering of the Syrian people and
their blood.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
rejects the selective approach of certain States and
United Nations bodies to the humanitarian crisis
in Syria. It stresses that the main reason for the
non-delivery of humanitarian assistance in many
regions are the following. First, terrorist groups are
besieging entire areas and rejecting the delivery of
any assistance. Secondly, armed terrorist groups are
targeting and stealing from humanitarian convoys.
Thirdly, insecurity in the regions where armed terrorist
groups are active, including highway robberies,
targeting of civilian aircraft and aircraft carrying
assistance, attacking humanitarian and medical workers
and selling humanitarian assistance material. Fourthly,
politicizing the humanitarian question in Syria and
a double standard maintained by certain States and
organizations that focus on the humanitarian situation
in some areas exclusively for political aims, while fully
ignoring other regions. Fifthly, a lack of cooperation
and coordination with the Syrian Government,
and the use of agreements with non-governmental
organizations that are not accredited by Syria, or
organizations working from Gaziantep in Turkey
without coordination with the Syrian Government.
That is something we will not tolerate. Sixthly, there
is a lack of funding for humanitarian response plans
as a result of the failure by some States to fulfil their
pledges. The funding for the response plan for 2016 did
not exceed 33 per cent. Lastly, there is the delay in the
implementation of projects and programmes under the
response plan.
In conclusion, the Syrian people have grown sick
and tired of mendacious statements and hypocritical
initiatives, as well as the misleading reports that have
flooded the work of the Security Council and United
16-39409

21/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Nations bodies almost on a daily basis over the past five
years, but have brought about no humanitarian benefit to
the Syrian people. Indeed, their suffering has increased
in an unprecedented manner because some within, and
outside, the Council have been involved in fuelling and
perpetuating the crisis. As for the assistance that has
arrived — and Ms. Hoff did say that millions of Syrians
benefitted from that assistance — that was done in
coordination with the Syrian Government — 70 to
75 per cent of the assistance was provided by the Syrian

S/PV.7817

Government itself — not the United Nations, despite
the siege imposed on us by the States sponsoring
terrorism and the economic sanctions that have been
levelled against us for years.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

16-3940925/25
