A/66/PV.41

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

41

st plenary meeting
Tuesday, 25 October 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 41
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/114)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.4)
Mr. Limeres (Argentina): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China on agenda item 41, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against
Cuba”.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla.
Last year, the announcements made by the
Government of the United States related to a relaxation
of certain restrictions on travel and the transfer of
remittances had given many of us hope that steps were
starting to be taken in the right direction. Nevertheless,
one year has since passed and it is clear that those
measures have had a very limited effect and that the
embargo is still in place.
In fact, the embargo remains largely unchanged
and continues to impose severe economic and financial
restrictions on Cuba. The embargo has caused, and
continues to cause, a high degree of economic and

financial damage, which has a negative impact on the
well-being of the people of Cuba.
Furthermore, the deepening impact of the
ongoing global economic and financial crisis and the
continued embargo by the Government of the United
States will contribute to further aggravating the
hardships of the people of Cuba. Moreover, the
embargo frustrates efforts towards the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals and negatively
affects regional cooperation in that area.
The Group of 77 and China states once again, as
it has on many previous occasions, that the embargo
against Cuba contravenes the fundamental norms of
international law, international humanitarian law, the
United Nations Charter and the rules and principles
governing peaceful relations among States. Its
continued imposition violates the principles of the
sovereign equality of States and of non-intervention
and non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs.
The Group of 77 and China has always been
firmly against the embargo. At the second South
Summit, held in Doha from 12 to 16 June 2005, heads
of State and Government of the Group of 77 and China
firmly rejected the imposition of laws and regulations
with extraterritorial impact and all other forms of
coercive economic measures, including unilateral
sanctions against developing countries. They called
upon the Government of the United States to put an
end to the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, which, in addition to being
unilateral and contrary to the United Nations Charter

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-56249 (E)

*1156249*

A/66/PV.41

and international law — and to the principle of goodneighbourliness — causes huge material loses and
economic damage to the people of Cuba.
Today, the Group of 77 and China would like to
reiterate once again its long-standing position on this
important matter by quoting the ministerial declaration
of the thirty-fifth annual meeting of our Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, held here at Headquarters on
23 September:
“The Ministers firmly reject the imposition
of laws and regulations with extraterritorial
impact and all other forms of coercive economic
measures, including unilateral sanctions against
developing countries, and reiterate the urgent
need to eliminate them immediately. They
emphasize that such actions not only undermine
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, but also
severely threaten the freedom of trade and
investment. They therefore called on the
international community neither to recognize
these measures nor apply them.” (A/66/388,
annex, para. 39)
We recall that last year 187 Member States voted
in favour of the draft resolution introduced by Cuba
(resolution 65/6). That number represented a large
majority of the international community demanding the
end to the five-decades-old embargo and to fully
adhere to the principles of mutual respect and
non-interference in the internal affairs of a sisterly
country.
The Group of 77 and China is committed to
working towards a better world for all in which
nations, large or small, can coexist peacefully. The
achievement of such peaceful coexistence among
nations requires adherence by all nations to the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
peaceful conduct of relations among nations. The
achievement of such peaceful coexistence among
nations requires adherence by all nations to the rule of
law, including international law.
The Group of 77 and China will again fully
support draft resolution A/66/L.4 against the embargo
and urges all Member States to do so as well.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to the next speaker, given the long list of
speakers inscribed on my list, I should like to propose

2

that the list of speakers for the debate on this item now
be closed. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it
that the Assembly agrees to this proposal.
It was so decided.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the General Assembly today on behalf of the
120 Members of the United Nations that are members
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I would like first to extend our deep condolences
to the Government and people of Turkey for the tragic
loss of life as a result of the devastating earthquake
that struck the eastern part of Turkey two days ago. We
extend our condolences also to the Government and
people of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the passing
away of His Royal Highness Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
Allow me now to extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, and to express to him the Movement’s
full support and solidarity.
It has been 12 months since we last gathered here
in the Hall to consider and debate the important agenda
item “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. Those 12 extraordinary
months have witnessed unexpected and profound
changes in many parts of the world, all sparked by an
entrenched longing for justice that has been for too
long unduly denied. It is the Movement’s deep
conviction that the application of the principle of
justice should not be confined to the national level but
should also be extended to the international arena. It
should not only govern relations between individuals
but also between Member States.
Did the peoples of the United Nations not declare
in its Charter’s preamble their determination to
“establish conditions under which justice … can be
maintained”? It is for that reason that the Non-Aligned
Movement finds it utterly troubling that to this day the
screws of an unfair and unwarranted blockade, which
has been in force for over half a century, are still being
tightened against one of the Movement’s members, and
that unilateral measures and coercive laws are still
being adopted and implemented against it.
The Movement unequivocally rejects such blatant
violations of multilateralism, which run counter to the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the norms

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

of international law, respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, good neighbourliness and mutual
trust — and the Movement calls for their immediate
end. We appeal to all States to continue to refrain from
recognizing such measures or laws and to support the
claim of affected countries to compensation for any
damage incurred as a result of this breach of
internationally agreed norms of conduct.
The Non-Aligned Movement once again
reiterates its call for full respect by all Member States
of the crucial principle of justice in international
relations. The Movement also reaffirms its steadfast
commitment to uphold, preserve and promote all
purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, as well as to ensure the continued
viability of all the provisions of international law,
which together form the core of our multilateral work
and inspire our collective efforts to maintain peace and
security, achieve inclusive economic growth and
sustainable development and ensure full respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms.

which we consider an added argument in favour of the
prompt elimination of those unfounded sanctions.
The Non-Aligned Movement is astounded as to
why such an unjust and unfounded embargo is still
maintained when 187 Member States of the United
Nations voted last year in favour of resolution 65/6,
calling for its immediate lifting — the nineteenth such
resolution to be adopted by the Assembly on the issue.
Why are such punitive measures maintained when
evidence indicates that they hinder Cuba’s efforts to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and
sustainable development? Why should the Cuban
people continue to suffer when the international
community is almost unanimous in its conviction that
the cause of their anguish is unjustified and illegal?

The United States Administration has in the past
claimed that it would reach out to the Cuban people
and engage with them. Yet those once-encouraging
words have regrettably not been translated into
concrete actions. The punitive measures imposed
against the whole Cuban nation persist, and with them
the enduring suffering of its brave people.

In reality, there are no credible answers to these
questions, because the embargo imposed against Cuba
is simply politically and economically untenable and,
above all, morally indefensible. It is for those reasons
that the Non-Aligned Movement once again urges the
United States of America to immediately and fully
comply with all General Assembly resolutions calling
for an immediate end to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed against Cuba and, once and
for all, to listen to the will of the overwhelming
majority of the international community, which will
today vote in favour of the of the draft resolution on
the necessity of ending the embargo against Cuba.

The direct and indirect damage caused by the
embargo against Cuba are enormous. They affect all
crucial sectors of the economy, including those most
vital for the well-being of the Cuban people
themselves, such as public health, nutrition and
agriculture, as well as banking, trade, investment and
tourism. It is true that Cuba has made significant
progress in many areas, especially in education, health
care and gender equality — and we salute the Cubans
for what they have achieved so far despite the huge
difficulties they encounter — yet we stress once again
that the embargo imposed continues to impede
socio-economic advances and creates unnecessary
economic hardship.

During his Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech
in Norway in December 2009, President Barack Obama
asserted that “Our actions matter, and can bend history
in the direction of justice.” The President of the United
States had also declared a few months earlier, during a
trip to Latin America in April 2009, that “the United
States seeks a new beginning with Cuba”. Today, the
Movement once again urges the United Sates to match
those words with action by swiftly lifting the unjust
embargo it is imposing against Cuba, thereby allowing
the arc of history to bend towards justice in
international relations and enabling the valiant people
of Cuba to fully prosper and enjoy their sovereignty,
independence and right to self-determination.

Moreover, this unilateral blockade has an
extended negative effect on companies and citizens
from third countries, thereby violating their sovereign
rights. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its deep
concern at the harmful impact on other countries of
widening the extra-territorial nature of the embargo,

Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the African Group, which aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China and of the Non-Aligned Movement. We wish to
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. Bruno

11-56249

3

A/66/PV.41

Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba.

speaks to the high global ideals of the international
community in the twenty-first century.

At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the agenda item entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba” (A/66/114). Over the years, the
General Assembly, while deliberating on this agenda
item, has categorically and overwhelmingly rejected
the imposition of laws and regulations with
extraterritorial impact. Africa shares the views
expressed by the international community in its
continued opposition to the sanctions and embargo
against Cuba.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Africa’s
opposition to unilateral measures that impinge on the
sovereignty of another country, including attempts to
extend the application of a country’s laws
extraterritorially to other sovereign nations. The heads
of State and Government of the African Union (AU), at
their meeting in July in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea,
reiterated the AU Summit’s earlier call on the
Government of the United States of America to lift the
long-standing and unjustifiable economic and trade
embargo imposed on Cuba, and thereby enable it to
enjoy all the legitimate prospects for its sustained
development.

The General Assembly has also called upon all
States, in conformity with their obligations under the
United Nations Charter and international law, to refrain
from promulgating and applying, as well as to repeal or
invalidate, laws and measures that have extraterritorial
effects affecting the sovereignty of other States, the
legitimate interests of entities or persons under their
jurisdiction and the freedom of trade and navigation.
Repeated calls by the international community to that
effect remain unheeded. The sad, tragic and decadesold United States embargo on Cuba, including its
extraterritorial aspects, continues to remain in force.
In the report of the Secretary-General of
16 August, the majority of United Nations Members,
including from the African continent and various
United Nations entities, categorically rejected the
imposition of the embargo on Cuba and called for its
lifting.
Given their proximity, Cuba and the United States
of America should be natural partners in trade,
commerce and investment. Given the large number of
Americans of Cuban extraction, Cuba and the United
States should also enjoy warm and fraternal relations in
social and cultural affairs between their populations.
The potential for those economic, commercial and
cultural ties between the two nations has, however,
sadly remained unrealized.
Whatever
the
historical
roots
of
this
intergenerational embargo imposed on Cuba, surely the
time has come when, in a globalized, interdependent
world, nations ought to find the courage, the foresight
and the sense of global citizenry and leadership that
would help to drive the resolve to overcome
differences and nurture coexistence in a manner that

4

Once again, Africa calls for the complete and
unequivocal lifting of sanctions and the embargo
against Cuba.
Mrs. Coye-Felson (Belize): I have the honour to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), which also aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, and the Non-Aligned Movement.
CARICOM member States continue to reiterate
their unequivocal opposition to the United States’
imposition of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, an embargo that the
overwhelming majority of the international community
has consistently opposed for the past 19 years. The
unilateral imposition of extraterritorial laws on third
States is contrary to both the letter and the spirit of the
United Nations Charter, and the embargo itself runs
counter to the principles that the United Nations and all
Member States have traditionally championed: the
principles of multilateralism, international law,
sovereignty and free trade.
The stubborn persistence of the embargo is
apparently impervious to the sustained chorus of
international criticism and to the logic of a world that
has changed immeasurably over the five decades since
the imposition of the blockade. The embargo has now
outlived the cold war by 20 years. It has outlasted the
terms of eight Presidents of the United States of
America and even that of Cuban President Fidel
Castro. More than 70 per cent of Cubans alive today
were born under the embargo. CARICOM considers
the embargo an anachronism that has succeeded only in

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

contributing to the suffering of generations of ordinary
Cubans and in unnecessarily increasing tensions
between the United States and Cuba. It serves no
justifiable legal, political or moral purpose in the
twenty-first century.
The punitive embargo is of particular concern to
CARICOM, which shares a history, culture, solidarity
and kinship with the people of Cuba. Cuba is the most
populous State of the Caribbean region and an integral
part of the pan-Caribbean process. Caribbean ties with
Cuba have historical significance, cemented by years
of active cooperation at various levels. CARICOM
member States continue to maintain close relations
with Cuba through a wide range of programmes of
cooperation in areas including trade, health care,
infrastructure and human resource development. In
many ways, our future regional development is reliant
upon our collective advancement and progress. In that
context, the embargo is not just a punitive act against
Cuba, but an impediment to our shared regional
development in the wider Caribbean.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/66/114) on the implementation of the resolution on
this issue, like previous reports on this matter, outlines
responses from the vast majority of Member States,
which share a common perspective on the continued
unilateral embargo against Cuba. Indeed, the report
makes clear that the embargo even affects the manner
in which organs and agencies of the United Nations
system carry out their work in Cuba.
CARICOM member States therefore, in
reaffirming the positions of the Group of 77 and China
as well as the Non-Aligned Movement, maintain that
constructive engagement and peaceful negotiations are
the only acceptable means of advancing long-term
peace and stability.
There is probably no single issue upon which the
United Nations has made such sustained, strong and
unambiguous pronouncements as with the resolutions
condemning the embargo against Cuba. Yet the
embargo continues, in the face of overwhelming
international reproach. The continued disregard of
these resolutions represents a blot on the credibility
and efficacy of the United Nations. CARICOM
member States thus reiterate the view that additional
mechanisms could be explored to operationalize the
words of the resolution and facilitate the process that

11-56249

will end this continued indifference to the will of the
international community.
The significance of the embargo for the Cuban
economy continues to be of great concern to
CARICOM, and the humanitarian impact on the people
of Cuba, especially in the area of health care and food,
is especially saddening. The inability of Cuba to
acquire necessary medical equipment, spare parts and
latest-generation medications, because of the embargo,
continues to affect the health-care system, where
treatment remains free of charge to the Cuban people.
With the strengthening and more frequent storms and
hurricanes wrought by climate change, and Cuba’s
geographic susceptibility to such natural disasters, the
humanitarian impact of the embargo becomes even
more acute.
Additionally, construction materials and heavy
equipment are becoming increasingly inaccessible to
Cuba because of stringent rules of origin and
restrictions against corporations based outside of the
United States. The negative effects on the Cuban
economy and its growth are tangible. The embargo has
now cost Cuba over $100 billion since its 1962
imposition. In the wake of the ongoing global
economic meltdown, the unilateral measures against
the Cuban people are now even more harsh and
indefensible.
It is remarkable that, even as Cuba struggles with
a recent unfortunate string of natural disasters and the
continuing impacts of the global economic crisis, it
continues to assist other nations in the developing
world, starting with its immediate Caribbean
neighbours. Thousands of Caribbean students have
attended Cuban universities without charge; thousands
more have received free surgeries and medical
assistance in Cuba; and thousands have been treated in
their home countries by Cuban doctors and nurses. We
have benefited from technical expertise, capacitybuilding programmes and infrastructural assistance,
and from the selfless generosity of the Cuban people.
The people of Cuba have threatened no one, and
neither the embargo nor its deleterious side-effects has
prevented them from continually extending a hand of
friendship and solidarity, even across ideological
divides. On behalf of CARICOM member States, we
also take this opportunity to thank the people of Cuba
for their tremendous and selfless assistance in the wake
of last year’s devastating earthquake in Haiti.

5

A/66/PV.41

Given Cuba’s peaceful, generous and cooperative
international stance, CARICOM reiterates its support
for the right of the Cuban people to self-determination,
in a manner beneficial to their social and economic
development.

Let me also convey our shared sorrow to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in connection with the
demise of His Royal Highness Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Crown Prince, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Defence and Aviation.

CARICOM member States continue to enjoy
friendly relations with both Cuba and the United
States. Those two neighbours — a mere 90 miles
apart — have produced great scholars, scientists and
global leaders. The two countries possess proud and
noble histories, and are populated by friendly, open and
loving peoples. As such, in spite of a long history of
dashed hopes, CARICOM remains guardedly
optimistic that a new beginning is possible in the
relationship between the Governments of Cuba and the
United States. However, we consider the lifting of the
embargo to be a prerequisite for any meaningful
rapprochement between the two countries, not a
negotiated end-result. While there have been some
recent positive indications of flexibility, there have
also been reminders of unilateral rigidity.

I should like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba” (A/66/114).

We remain hopeful that the United States’ recent
recommitment to multilateralism will result an in
increased willingness to consider the opinions and
concerns of its global friends and partners. On this
issue, global opinion could hardly be conveyed in a
more convincing or consistent manner. As such, our
faith in the recent pronouncements of the United States
Government carries with it an expectation that these
few remaining historical and unilateral wrongs will be
righted expeditiously.
It is within this context that CARICOM member
States unstintingly support draft resolution A/66/L.4 on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo by the United States of America
against Cuba.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the pleasure
of delivering the following statement on behalf of the
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), in my country’s capacity as Chair of the OIC
Group.
At the outset, I should like to express to Turkey
our sympathy and deepest condolences in connection
with the devastating earthquake that struck the country
last Sunday, causing a number of deaths and
widespread damage.

6

As all are aware, although the United Nations,
various international forums and non-governmental
organizations have for a long time tirelessly and
repeatedly expressed the rejection by the international
community of the unilateral sanctions, this issue
remains a critical one on the United Nations agenda.
Bearing that in mind, I should like to address this
issue once again on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation Group in New York.
OIC activities are guided by the principles of
international law, and we support the right of every
nation to follow its own unique way of development. In
this regard, the OIC group condemns any unilateral
acts that affect the sovereignty and interests of another
State and its people. We do not agree with any external
regulations that infringe on, impede or retard the
development of any country, including in the
economic, commercial and financial spheres.
The OIC wishes to emphasize that the imposition
of arbitrary, unilateral laws contradicts the regulations
and directions of the World Trade Organization, which
prohibit the adoption of measures likely to hinder free
international trade and shipping so as to allow the
widest possible partnership between the two sides.
Finally, the OIC, like the overwhelming majority
of the international community, calls for lifting the
embargo on Cuba in accordance with the principles and
purposes of the United Nations Charter and the
appropriate General Assembly resolutions.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for the delegation of Uruguay to speak on
behalf of the MERCOSUR States: Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay; the acceding State the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; and the associated
States Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

I would like to welcome among us the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
MERCOSUR was founded on the principles of
solidarity, interdependence and good-neighbourliness.
We believe that tolerance is the basis that has enabled
the historic convergence on our continent of peoples
from all corners of the world. We are linked to our
Latin American neighbours by the desire to live in
peace and to promote mutual understanding, to defend
the independence, the equality and sovereignty of
States, and to promote respect for international law.
Those ideals, which have historically guided relations
among the Latin American States and societies, are
enshrined in the charter of the Organization of
American States.
We regret that the blockade policy against Cuba
remains unchanged. We have even seen increased
restrictions on Cuba’s financial transactions with third
countries. We regret that conditionalities once again
obstruct the path towards a greater openness to direct
dialogue.
The measures announced last year by the
American Government with respect to easing
restrictions on travel and remittances, among other
things, were positively received in this forum, because
they were headed in the right direction. Those
measures, however, have not brought with them a
substantial change in the blockade policy; they are
insufficient and have a limited scope.
MERCOSUR and its associated States understand
that the embargo against Cuba is contrary to the
principles of the United Nations Charter and
contravenes the rules of international law, in particular
the equality of States, non-intervention in domestic
affairs, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
norms of the multilateral trade system, which link the
members of the World Trade Organization.

trade, cause irremediable damage to people’s welfare
and obstruct the processes of regional integration.
Reaffirming once more our unwavering support
for draft resolution A/66/L.4, MERCOSUR and its
associated States reiterate our commitment to
multilateralism as a legitimate instrument for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and as an effective path
in the promotion of international cooperation and
understanding among peoples. The economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed against
Cuba is an example of obsolete policies that have no
place today. By adopting this draft resolution, the
Assembly will provide further proof of its unwavering
political will in defence of the ideals of freedom,
solidarity and respect for sovereignty and international
law.
Mr. Ahamed (India): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to address the General
Assembly.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
We meet yet again to deliberate on the agenda
item entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States against Cuba”. For all these years, the
Assembly has repeatedly rejected the imposition of
laws and regulations with extraterritorial impact and all
other kinds of coercive economic measures that hurt
the progress and prosperity of people the world over.

This embargo, which is contrary to the principle
of justice and human rights, represents collective
punishment that produces shortages and suffering for
the population, limits and delays development and
seriously harms the Cuban economy.

The Assembly has also called upon States to
respect their obligations under the United Nations
Charter and international law, and to repeal and
invalidate laws and measures that have extraterritorial
effects on other States. It is unfortunate that, in spite of
the General Assembly’s yearly rejection of the United
States embargo against Cuba, the embargo remains in
full force. We see such enforcement as a violation of
world opinion and as an act that severely undermines
multilateralism and the credibility of the United
Nations itself.

The MERCOSUR States parties and associated
States reject unilateral and extraterritorial measures as
a matter of principle. We condemn the application of
coercive unilateral measures that are contrary to free

The more than half-century-old United States
embargo on Cuba has brought immense suffering to the
Cuban people. It has severely undermined the progress
and development of the country. The embargo, which

11-56249

7

A/66/PV.41

likely has no parallel in history, is a transgression of
the right of a sovereign State to development and to
enjoy freedom of trade, economy and navigation.
On the one hand, we, the global community,
make tall promises with respect to the Millennium
Development Goals and on striving for human dignity
and achieving equitable growth, but when it comes to
actions, we do the exact opposite of what we promise.
The embargo has denied a life of dignity and basic
standards of living to the people of Cuba. Actions must
speak louder than words.
The
embargo,
particularly
through
its
extraterritorial effects, has adversely affected the
economic prosperity of the Cuban people. The global
economic slowdown, along with spiralling food and
energy prices, has made matters worse. The embargo
has denied Cuba access to United States markets,
investment, technology and financial services, and to
scientific,
educational,
cultural
and
sporting
institutions. Cuba has had to pay enormous extra costs
for sourcing products, technology and services from
third countries located thousands of kilometres away.
The extraterritorial application of the United
States
embargo
has
discouraged
investment,
technology transfer and commercial and other forms of
business collaborations between Cuba and third
countries. The prohibition of technology and related
scientific
support,
particularly
through
the
extraterritorial application of the embargo, has severely
impacted health care, a fundamental part of the
commitments
contained
in
the
Millennium
Development Goals, in Cuba. It has also undermined
Cuba’s ability to provide health assistance to
developing countries as part of South-South
cooperation.
The report of the Secretary General on the agenda
item under consideration (A/66/114) illustrates the
detrimental impact that the embargo has had on
international efforts to undertake socio-economic
progress in Cuba. The United Nations Resident
Coordinator in Havana has noted the high cost and
negative impact of the embargo on the humanitarian
and development cooperation implemented by the
United Nations system in Cuba.
There is a huge potential for strengthening
economic and commercial ties between Cuba and the
United States. Taking advantage of limited openings
under the United States Trade Sanctions Reform and

8

Export Enhancement Act of 2000, the United States has
become the largest exporter of agricultural products to
Cuba. Congressional efforts in the United States to
relax or lift the embargo lend further credence to the
annual United Nations resolutions calling for the lifting
of the United States embargo against Cuba. People-topeople contacts between the two countries remain
severely curtailed.
The steps taken by the United States
Administration in January to reduce restrictions on
travel and remittances to Cuba are positive
developments. However, the United States is far from
making a fundamental change in the complex of laws
and regulations that form the framework of the
embargo against Cuba. Much more needs to be done.
India joins other nations in calling for an
immediate end to the United States embargo against
Cuba. India supports the draft resolution to be
introduced shortly by the representative of Cuba
(A/66/L.4).
Mr. Alurralde Tejada (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by
stating that Bolivia associates itself with the statements
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Group of 77, and the Southern Common Market.
The Cold War came to an end in 1989, and the
fear of a nuclear war that would not only have been the
most devastating ever, but would have been the last
war ever because it would have led to the end of
humankind, vanished. However, now we find ourselves
facing other threats, such as climate change, which
strike equal fear in our hearts.
However, here at the United Nations we are today
discussing a sad aftertaste of the Cold War whose
continued existence we still cannot comprehend. On
26 June 1963, President Kennedy addressed the
citizens of Berlin in order to tell them that they were
living in a fortified island of liberty. That island was
defended with all the resources made possible by a
blockade, which sought to undermine the city’s
resistance and was overcome through the establishment
of an air bridge organized by the Western Powers. We
do not understand how one of the countries that once
condemned that blockade with such force today
perseveres in maintaining a decades-long blockade
against the sisterly Republic of Cuba.

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

We therefore wish today to refashion the words of
President Kennedy for the beloved Cuban people, who
are resisting the United States embargo. The
emblematic phrase of freedom at that time was “I am a
Berliner”. We say to the Cuban people that the
emblematic phrase for the defence of life in the
twentieth century is “I am a Cuban”. Only a heroic
people determined never to surrender its right to
sovereignty and to freely choose its destiny without
foreign interference, such as the Cuban people, can
serve as inspiration and example to future generations.
I am a Cuban. That is for us, the free peoples of
the world, a symbol of pride in our time. Certainly,
since the United States imposed its blockade against
Cuba, all of us in the Hall, with very few exceptions, is
a Cuban. Those who claim that they are defenders of
democracy are unaware of the democracy that exists
here within the United Nations. How many more times
will we have to vote against the blockade for it to be
suspended? How many more times will the world have
to tell the United States what it thinks of the blockade,
with none of our demands being fulfilled? If we truly
believe in democracy, then let us start by heeding the
will of the countries represented here in the Hall.
For all of those reasons, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia thanks the Secretary-General for his report
dated 16 August (A/66/114) and fully supports the draft
resolution contained in document A/66/L.4.
Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First
and foremost, allow me to thank the Secretary-General
for his detailed report on this issue (A/66/114), which
once again highlights the international community’s
broad rejection of the embargo imposed by the United
States of America against Cuba. For the twentieth
consecutive time, the Government of Mexico returns to
this forum to repeat its opposition to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and to
reiterate its opposition to the use of coercive measures
that are in violation of international law, which
therefore have no basis in the Charter of the United
Nations.
The application of unilateral extraterritorial
measures in third countries leads to severe
humanitarian consequences that blatantly contradict the
objectives that supposedly inspire them. They also
represent a rejection of negotiation, diplomacy and
dialogue as the appropriate means to resolve disputes
between States.

11-56249

Various organs and entities in the United Nations
system have documented the negative impact of the
embargo on Cuba’s economic and social development,
as has the Secretary-General’s report. Its damaging
effects are evident in Cuba’s economic, commercial
and financial transactions. It harms sensitive sectors
that directly impact the lives of the people and also has
negative repercussions on third countries, due to the
difficulty of interacting with Cuba in many economic
and social activities.
Mexico has therefore supported all initiatives
against the embargo and related unilateral measures,
both in the General Assembly and in the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
other forums, such as the Organization of American
States, the Latin American Economic System, the
Ibero-American Summit and the Rio Group. We shall
continue to support the inclusion of Cuba in
mechanisms for dialogue and for global economic,
commercial and financial exchanges, in line with the
will and sovereign decisions of that country, in order to
promote cooperation and development.
Our close ties with Cuba and the Cuban people,
as well as our own convictions, make us understand the
urgent need for the blockade to end. We must not
forget that political, economic or military sanctions
imposed on States may emanate only from the
decisions or recommendations of the Security Council
or the General Assembly.
For Mexico, multilateralism remains the best
route for resolving disputes and guaranteeing peaceful
coexistence among States. In the case before us today,
the practically unanimous rejection by the international
community proves us right. For that reason, Mexico
will, as we have always done, support the draft
resolution submitted for our consideration in this
session.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela endorses the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the
representative of Argentina on behalf of the Group of
77 and China, and the Permanent Representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Southern Common Market.
We wish to convey our condolences to the
Government of Saudi Arabia on the passing away of
Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, as well as

9

A/66/PV.41

to the Government of Turkey on the earthquake that
caused such death and destruction.
We would like to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
Member States have issued a nearly universal call
in this forum for an end to the economic, commercial
and financial embargo that for more than 50 years has
sought to restrict the right of the Cuban people to
decide their fate. This is an unequivocal sign that it is
necessary to defend the principles of political
independence that underlie the Organization. It is
shameful that this call has been ignored year after year
by those who frequently violate international law.
We reiterate Venezuela’s strong rejection of the
application of any unilateral measure with
extraterritorial effects that violates the rules and
principles of international law. We support the various
pronouncements made in that regard by numerous
forums around the world.
On this occasion, we cannot forget the Cuban
citizens Gerardo Hernández, Ramón Labatiño, Antonio
Guerrero and Fernando González Llorét, who are still
detained in the United States for defending their
homeland from possible terrorist attacks; likewise,
René González, who was released but forced to remain
in this country under an unjust regime of supervised
release. Just as we demand, in the strongest terms, the
end of the blockade against Cuba, we also request the
release of these four heroes who remain in prison.
Their continued detention contrasts with the freedom
that confessed terrorists such as Luis Posada Carriles
enjoy in the United States. We appeal for René
González to be allowed to return to his homeland and
to be reunited with his family.
Although the United States Administration has
tried to convince international public opinion that it is
promoting a change in its policies towards Cuba, the
embargo against the island remains intact.
Both the Torricelli and the Helms-Burton Acts,
which prevent trade between Cuba and United States
companies and their subsidiaries in third countries,
continue in force. So too does the threat of sanctions
against entrepreneurs who, availing themselves of the
free enterprise policy that the United States
Government so much defends, decide to invest in
Cuba. President Barack Obama has not taken any

10

measures to ease the commercial blockade, some of
which do not require congressional authorization for
implementation.
The blockade against Cuba is not an abstract
device applied against a Government. On the contrary,
it has dramatic impacts on the daily lives of women
and men, children and elderly, and it represents a
massive violation of the human rights of a dignified
and sovereign people.
The blockade negatively affects the quality of life
of sick people who must do without drugs or access to
high-tech equipment whose sale is prohibited on the
island by the United States Administration. The
blockade is also felt in the obstacles the Cuban people
face in enjoying their basic housing rights, since it
prevents the importing of building materials necessary
for replacing and repairing the huge number of
buildings and homes damaged by hurricanes.
Every year the blockade generates losses in the
millions of dollars in Cuba’s basic industry — in the
sugar industry, in iron and steel and machinery, in
tourism. All that affects the quality of life of the Cuban
people. A conservative estimate of the direct economic
damage caused by the embargo, through December
2009, places it at more than $100.154 billion. That
figure would increase to $239.533 billion if it were
recalculated based on retail price inflation in the
United States. In the face of the blockade and its
terrible economic and social consequences, Cuba and
the heroic Cuban people have moved forward with a
generous policy of cooperation with other countries of
the South.
The blockade therefore unquestionably represents
the repeated and unilateral denial by one signatory to
the Charter of the United Nations of the right to
development of another State Member and its people,
without any hostilities directed at the aggressor State
on the part of the State being attacked. In an
international environment characterized by ongoing
threats to the sovereignty of States is constantly
threatened, and where systematic violations of
international law threaten brotherly and cooperative
relations between peoples, it is more necessary than
ever that we demand the end of the shameful blockade
of Cuba.
It is time to end double standards in the
application of international justice. We cannot allow
the vilification of the weak for being so, or any

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

toleration of violations on the part of the imperialists of
the North. These are the demands of the peoples of the
world, echoed by the Bolivarian Government of
Venezuela. It is time that the universal cry demanding
the lifting of the blockade against the heroic Cuban
people be heard. Venezuela therefore supports, in the
most resolute terms, the adoption of draft resolution
A/66/L.4, which affirms the necessity of ending the
blockade imposed by the United States of America on
Cuba.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me begin by welcoming the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this agenda item (A/66/114).
The Chinese delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
For 19 consecutive years, the General Assembly
has adopted by an overwhelming majority resolutions
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America on Cuba, urging all countries to abide by the
United Nations Charter and international law and to
repeal or invalidate any laws or measures with
extraterritorial implications that affect the sovereignty
of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or
persons under their jurisdiction, and their freedom of
trade and navigation.
Regrettably, however, those resolutions have not
been effectively implemented over the years, and the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
on Cuba by the United States has yet to be lifted. Such
practices not only severely violate the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant General Assembly resolutions, they have also
inflicted enormous economic and financial losses on
Cuba. According to figures cited in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, by December 2010 the economic
losses to Cuba resulting directly from the embargo
exceeded $975 billion.
The sanctions and embargo have severely
hindered the Cuban people’s efforts to eradicate
poverty, promote economic and social development
and meet the Millennium Development Goals. They
have violated the Cuban people’s basic human right to
food, health and education, as well as their right to
survival and development, and have affected normal
economic, commercial and financial relations between
Cuba and other countries. The international community

11-56249

is currently dealing with multiple serious challenges,
such as the financial, food and energy crises and
climate change, which make the sanctions and embargo
against Cuba all the more unreasonable. The
international community’s call on the United States
Government to change its policy, lift the embargo and
normalize bilateral relations with Cuba is growing ever
louder.
The Chinese Government has always believed
that countries should develop mutual relations on the
basis of upholding the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and respect for the right of
other countries to independently choose their own
social system and development path. China is opposed
to any unilateral sanctions against other countries by
military, political, economic or other means.
Meanwhile, China has strictly observed and
implemented
the
relevant
General Assembly
resolutions. China and Cuba have maintained normal
economic, trade and people-to-people exchanges.
Friendly and mutually beneficial cooperation in
various areas between our two countries has been
growing. This is not only in accordance with the desire
of both peoples but is also conducive to Cuba’s social
and economic development.
In today’s world, dialogue, exchange and
harmonious coexistence represent the mainstream of
international relations. Exchanges on an equal footing
between countries have become the dominant trend. In
the face of differences, dialogue on an equal footing
and amicable consultation are the best way of settling
disputes. China hopes that the United States will
adhere to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, and end its embargo against Cuba as soon
as possible. China also hopes that relations between the
United States and Cuba will continue to improve in
order to improve stability in the Latin-American and
Caribbean region.
China will once more vote in favour of the draft
resolution (A/66/L.4) submitted by Cuba under this
agenda item.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): Algeria aligns itself
with the statements made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Group of 77 and China, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the African
Group. I would like to welcome and acknowledge the
presence in the Hall of His Excellency Mr. Bruno

11

A/66/PV.41

Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba.
Algeria would once again like to express its deep
concern at the continuation of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo unilaterally
imposed for half a century now by the United States of
America on Cuba. The continuing annual adoption by
an overwhelming majority of General Assembly
Member States of a similar resolution calling for lifting
the embargo against Cuba reflects the profound desire
of the international community to put an end to this
situation, which has lasted far too long.
In accordance with the principles of its foreign
policy, Algeria has always condemned the imposition
of unilateral acts, extraterritorial regulations that
hinder the development of any country, and all
coercive economic and trade measures — such as the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, which is openly contrary to international law and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Every Member State should respect the
principles of the Charter, including in particular the
sovereign equality of States, territorial integrity, nonintervention and non-interference in the internal affairs
of any other State.
It is a well-established fact that the embargo
affects Cuba’s economic growth and impedes its social
and human development. In that regard, it is causing
huge material losses and economic damage to Cuba,
and creating economic hardship, which is exacerbated
by the adverse effects of the current global economic
and financial crisis, as well as the energy and food
crises, which have seriously compromised Cuba’s
efforts to improve its level of development. That has
also affected the food-based safety nets of the Cuban
Government, which are instrumental to household food
security, as the Secretary-General stated in his report.
According to estimates by the Cuban Government
that have been confirmed by the United Nations
Development Programme, cumulative direct and
indirect losses to the Cuban economy over 50 years
have amounted to more than $100 billion.
In accordance with the long-standing position of
the Non-Aligned Movement on this issue, Algeria
rejects the use of economic measures of coercion and
the extraterritorial application of laws on developing
countries, and urges the Government of the United
States of America to put an end to the economic,

12

commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, in
compliance with the General Assembly resolutions
adopted annually on this issue.
Accordingly, Algeria will support the draft
resolution contained in document A/66/L.4, presented
by Cuba.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): At the outset,
South Africa would like to align itself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of
Argentina, Egypt and Kenya on behalf of the Group of
77 and China, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Group of African States, respectively. My delegation
acknowledges the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, at this meeting of the General
Assembly.
The question of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba has been, and continues to be, a
persistent problem for the United Nations despite the
many calls for its elimination. The Assembly’s
recorded vote results (see resolution 65/6) at its
previous session, of 187 in favour and 2 against the
embargo is a clear indication that the time has come for
it to be lifted. The untold economic and social
suffering of the Cuban civilian population, who bear
the brunt of this injustice, must end. My delegation
views the continued blockade as a flagrant violation of
the principle of the sovereign equality of States and
non-intervention and non-interference in their domestic
affairs. Furthermore, the blockade constitutes a
violation of international law and its imposition shows
disregard for the noble and abiding principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
It is therefore against that backdrop that South
Africa has repeatedly joined the majority of countries
in expressing opposition to all aspects of the blockade
and the unilateral action of the United States of
America. South Africa once again reiterates its support
for the lifting of the embargo against Cuba.
The situation is further aggravated by the global
financial and economic crisis, energy crisis and food
crisis, as well as challenges of climate change, which
have affected many countries, including Cuba. The
embargo directly hinders Cuba’s economic recovery
and negatively impacts trade, tourism, foreign direct
investment and currency transfers. The damage caused

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

to the Cuban economy is estimated to exceed
$975 billion in the future.
South Africa is deeply concerned over the
widening of the extra-territorial nature of the embargo
and rejects the reinforcement of the measures aimed at
its tightening, as well as all other recent measures
carried out by the United States of America against the
people of Cuba.
My delegation condemns the seizing by the
United States, in January, of more than $4.2 million of
funding from the Global Fund to fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria, which was earmarked for the
implementation of cooperation projects with Cuba.
We support the content of the press release dated
18 October by the Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Cuba to the United Nations concerning the
intensification of sanctions and extra-territorial
persecution of citizens, institutions and companies in
third countries that establish economic, commercial,
financial, scientific and technical ties with Cuba. My
delegation is strongly opposed to the actions of the
United States with regard to fines levied against
foreign banking institutions for having conducted
operations with Cuba.
The people of South Africa, and Africa in
general, have fond memories of the heroic
contributions of Cuba to the struggles against
colonization, oppression and apartheid. In an attempt to
foster trade with Cuba, South Africa is finalizing its
proposal to offer a credit line of about $10 million to
Cuba. That would be a breakthrough in trade
cooperation relations and would reaffirm South
Africa’s commitment and ongoing support for Cuba.
The international community recognizes Cuba’s
outstanding work in the areas of health, education and
biotechnology in Latin America, the Caribbean, Africa
and the underdeveloped world in particular, and in the
world in general. The embargo stifles those outstanding
contributions to economic and social development and
hinders the betterment of the lives of the poor.
South Africa calls on all Member States to
support the lifting of the United States of America’s
embargo against Cuba and to refrain from recognizing
the unilateral measures and laws of a coercive nature
that defy the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and norms of international law.

11-56249

Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): The General
Assembly has discussed for 20 consecutive years the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. Also for 20 consecutive years,
by the end of today’s meeting the General Assembly
will have overwhelmingly adopted another resolution
on this issue of common concern. In that connection,
my delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Argentina and Egypt on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and the
Non-Aligned Movement, respectively. We have often
heard calls for prompt action by the United Nations
and States on issues that concern the international
community. After 20 consecutive years of the General
Assembly’s demand against the backdrop of the halfcentury embargo, it is obvious that ending the embargo
is one of those issues.
Viet Nam shares the view of the international
community that the United States should end the
embargo against Cuba, a sovereign and peace-loving
nation, based on the existing strong legal, political,
economic and, as is often talked about these days,
humanitarian reasons.
As affirmed in the General Assembly’s
resolutions on the issue, the policies and measures in
pursuit of the embargo against Cuba, including the socalled Helms-Burton Act, are contrary to international
law and the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter. They hinder the development of
friendly relations among nations. The basis of these
policies and measures violates the right of a people to
self-determination, which includes, among other
things, the right to determine their political system and
path of development.
The restrictions on trade, finance and even travel
continue to have serious, illegal extraterritorial effects
on the sovereignty of other States and their legitimate
economic interests relating to persons under their
jurisdiction, freedom of trade and navigation and
efforts towards the equal and just global economic
structure that is necessary for the prosperity of every
nation. The Government of Cuba estimates that the loss
and damage the embargo has caused the Cuban people
amounts to nearly $1 trillion. It is a staggering figure,
but the suffering the embargo has caused the Cuban
people is greater than the mere number, and is
especially profound for women and children.

13

A/66/PV.41

This has also prompted the Ibero-American heads
of State and Government to call for an end to the
embargo. In the Final Document of the fifteenth
Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Egypt
in 2009, the heads of State and Government of the
Movement
“reiterated their call to the Government of the
United States of America to put an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba which, in addition to being
unilateral and contrary to the United Nations
Charter and international law, and to the principle
of neighbourliness, is causing huge material
losses and economic damage to the people of
Cuba.”
The discussions we are engaged in and the action
that the General Assembly is going to take today are
consistent with the desire for cooperation and dialogue
that, at the start of this session, permeated the general
debate and its theme of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. In this regard, we would like to recall the
statement made by His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, in the General Assembly just a month ago (see
A/66/PV.26), in which he reiterated Cuba’s willingness
to move towards normalizing relations with the United
States, as well as its proposal to begin dialogue aimed
at solving bilateral issues, including humanitarian
issues, and its offer of cooperation in numerous areas.
For the reasons to which I have referred, Viet
Nam will support draft resolution A/66/L.4 under
consideration today and strongly urges the United
States to end the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba and begin dialogue with that
country.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): A half-century ago, the world was witness
to the Cuban spring, an indigenous and popular
uprising against a corrupt and brutal dictator. The
Cuban people, unassisted by foreign military forces,
cast off the shackles of rapacious exploitation and
chose for themselves a new and uniquely adapted path
of progress, global citizenship and development that
was measured not by levels of corporate or individual
excess but by its fulfilment of the needs of its citizens,
particularly the poor.
Alas, some States did not greet the Cuban spring
in the spirit of enthusiasm with which they welcomed,

14

assisted or instigated other, subsequent revolutionary
movements. For the past five decades, Cuba has been
subject to an economic, commercial and financial
embargo whose scale and scope have no parallel in the
modern world. For the past 20 years, the international
community has spoken in an increasingly unified voice
against the continued imposition of that blockade.
Today, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines unreservedly
aligns itself with the positions expressed by the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77 and China,
and the Caribbean Community in again calling for an
end to this unjust, immoral and illegal embargo.
By almost any measure, the embargo is an
unmitigated failure. It has served only to visit suffering
on the Cuban people and as a jingoistic backdrop to a
smattering of pandering politicians who value their
individual
electoral
fortunes
above
integrity,
international law and the weight of overwhelming
global condemnation.
Today we must ask ourselves: What place does
this embargo have in our modern world? And in an
interconnected world of open borders and the free
movement of people, goods and capital, how can the
champions and architects of globalization legislate the
isolation of one State, or place extraterritorial
restrictions on commerce, global trade and the
movement of individuals? How can the electorate of
one district, or one constituency, or one country
determine the cargo and path of a ship sailing into and
out of Cuban waters, or the manner in which banks and
corporations of other countries conduct their business
with Cuba?
As a developing country heavily dependent on
remittances and affected by an international economic
meltdown not of our own making, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines finds it inexplicably cruel that any State
would seek to limit the amount of money that one
family member could bring home to another, or the
value of items in a gift parcel, particularly in the midst
of this global recession.
Today, there are countries where United States
soldiers are heroically fighting and shedding blood in
wars, yet United States citizens may travel to those
countries, and foreign banks may transact business in
them. There are countries whose systems of
governance, or whose practices and values, are
diametrically opposed to the American way of life. Yet
the bonds of trade and mutual respect for sovereignty

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

supersede those differences, and no embargo exists to
impose the ideals of one nation upon another. Only the
Cuban embargo remains as the last surviving relic of a
Cold War that otherwise exists only in history books
and museums. Even if every vicious lie, every
unfounded allegation, every spurious and demonstrably
false characterization of the Cuban Government were
accepted as fact, they would not justify the existence of
this embargo in a modern world of interconnection and
multilateral engagement.
No country represented here in Hall has the right
to tell the United States how to conduct its foreign
policy, who its friends should be or how to determine
its national interests. Even if such a right existed, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines would not presume to
exercise it against our cherished friend and neighbour
to the north. But every country in the Hall is obligated
by the United Nations Charter to oppose instances
where national foreign policy decisions morph into
violations of international law, or into sustained
disregard for the Charter principles of sovereign
equality and non-interference in the domestic affairs of
States.
Among the complex and interlocking system of
laws that perpetuate the Cuban embargo is the United
States 1996 Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity
Act, which makes the easing or lifting of the embargo
conditional on a determination that a transitional or
new Government is in power in Cuba. I am unaware of
any other instance where the principle of regime
change is so nakedly codified into the legislation of
another country. The Helms-Burton Act has a stated
policy objective of installing a “democratically elected
Government” in Cuba, and helpfully supplies a
congressional definition of what constitutes a
democratically elected Government. According to the
definition provided, as it appears in section 206 of the
Act, a democratically elected Government is one that
“has made demonstrable progress in returning to
United States citizens (and entities which are
50 per cent or more beneficially owned by United
States citizens) property taken by the Cuban
Government from such citizens and entities on or
after January 1, 1959, or providing full
compensation for such property”.
That is the definition of the democratically
elected Government. Whatever the merits of this
definition of democracy, the continued application of

11-56249

the Act stands in marked contrast to the words uttered
by our esteemed friend and brother President Barack
Obama of the United States in his inaugural address to
the General Assembly in its general debate. In that
address, President Obama rightly stated that
“Democracy cannot be imposed on any
nation from the outside. Each society must search
for its own path, and no path is perfect. Each
country will pursue a path rooted in the culture of
its people and in its past traditions. And I admit
that America has too often been selective in its
promotion of democracy.” (A/64/PV.3, p. 14)
We in St. Vincent and the Grenadines heartily endorse
and support those words, but words without works are
meaningless.
The President of the United States has
considerable discretion to ease the crippling
restrictions imposed on the Cuban people. We
respectfully urge him to consider the full extent of his
powers in light of his indisputable commitment to
multilateralism, his respect for international law and
his well-documented efforts to alleviate the suffering
of peoples worldwide.
St. Vincent and the Grenadines is aware that our
small country, small population and small economy,
not to mention the waning military significance of the
Caribbean region, have allowed our needs and
concerns to be overlooked by those who see the world
only through the prism of their own narrow and
immediate interests. However, Cuba has remained a
staunch and abiding partner in the development of our
country, even in times of global hardship. Cuban
universities have graduated over 250 Vincentian
students and are currently playing host to 150 more,
free of charge. Cuban surgeons have performed
operations on over 3,000 Vincentian patients, without
charging them a penny. Cuban doctors have brought
quality medical care and expertise to the most remote
areas of our country. Even as we speak, Cuban
engineers, architects and workers are labouring
alongside Vincentians in the construction of a modern
hospital and our very first international airport.
While far wealthier nations and institutions have
looked askance at our developmental struggles and
offered only dubious prescriptions, platitudes and trite
clichés, the Cuban people have rolled up their sleeves
and given freely of themselves in a manner that has
touched the hearts of the Vincentian people. No dollar

15

A/66/PV.41

amount can adequately reflect the value of their
support, solidarity and partnership, for which the
Cuban people have asked nothing in return. Our
appreciation cannot be overstated.
Allow me, in closing, to return to the stirring
words of President Obama’s inaugural United Nations
address:
“The world must stand together to demonstrate
that international law is not an empty promise …
(ibid., p. 11)
“No one nation can or should try to dominate
another nation. No world order that elevates one
nation or group of people over another will
succeed … The traditional divisions between
nations of the South and the North make no sense
in an interconnected world, nor do alignments of
nations rooted in the cleavages of a long-gone
Cold War.
“The time has come to realize that the old
habits and the old arguments are irrelevant to the
challenges faced by our peoples.” (ibid., p. 10)
Those words embody a promise of change in
which we can wholeheartedly believe. Recent events
have reminded us that change, like peace, is often hard.
But not all aspects of change are hard. Some simply
require a modicum of political courage and a
willingness to hear not the hackneyed sloganeering of
an increasingly narrow and local political interest, but
to heed instead the insistent, consistent and
overwhelming voice of the international community,
friend and foe alike, and indeed, one’s own conscience,
compassion and common sense.
Mr. Ovsyanko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Belarus is pleased to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, who is participating in today’s
meeting.
For many decades, the overwhelming majority of
States Members of the United Nations have spoken in
the General Assembly to demand an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo of Cuba
imposed by the United States . It is an uncivilized and
unconstructive way to handle international disputes.
We are convinced that the policy of the blockade
against freedom-loving Cuba is contrary to
international law and violates principles and decisions

16

of the United Nations. The unilateral sanctions have a
profoundly negative impact on the living standards of
the Cuban people, as well as on that country’s
economic development, especially given the added
damage of the current financial and economic crisis
and the likelihood of its second wave.
The Republic of Belarus decisively rejects any
application by any State of economic and trade
measures against another. We stress the intrinsic right
of each nation to choose its own model of
development. We consider that any unilateral attempts
by a single State to modify the domestic political
system of another State through economic, political or
other measures is unacceptable.
We are convinced that in the current system of
international economic relations there should be no
place for economic sanctions or other unilateral
coercive measures to put economic pressure on a State
or its citizens. It is time to realize that a strong people
will never relinquish their right to choose. Determining
one’s own path to development has a precious value.
Today we are going to adopt the twentieth
General Assembly resolution that urges the United
States to end its unilateral and obsolete embargo
against Cuba. We sincerely hope that, on this twentieth
attempt, the voice of the General Assembly will finally
be heard.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to associate itself with the
statements made earlier by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
As we enter the twentieth year of debate on this
agenda item in the General Assembly, Indonesia would
like to reiterate its call for the conclusion of the
unilateral economic, commercial, and financial
embargo imposed against Cuba. That unilateral
embargo undermines not only the principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter and international law, but
also the rights of people to life, well-being and
development without distinctions of any kind.
Moreover, although unilaterally imposed, the embargo
has impacted the economic and commercial interests
and relations of third countries.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/66/114), the embargo has severely affected the day-

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

to-day welfare of Cuban citizens. At a time when the
world is facing serious, multifaceted challenges in the
economic, food, energy and other development
spheres, the embargo poses an unnecessary burden
regarding the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals and other development goals.
Much has changed since the initial imposition of
the embargo. Globalization has created the conditions
for true global solidarity and partnership in the
community of nations. We believe that lifting the
embargo would be in keeping with the spirit of the
times. In our view, the time is ripe for relations
between the two main parties to be transformed
through constructive engagement.
As a member of the international community,
Indonesia remains steadfast in its opposition to actions
that undermine the principles of the United Nations
Charter. We call on all countries to adhere to the
principles of equality, mutual respect, peaceful
coexistence, good neighbourliness and respect for
human rights.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I would like to
begin by associating this statement with the statement
issued by Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China on this agenda item.
This is the twentieth consecutive year that we
have gathered in this Hall to urge our friend and
partner the United States to lift its blockade against the
Cuban people. The voices of 187 Members of the
United Nations family last year spoke in lockstep
unison on this issue. We are positive that we will do so
again this year in connection with the draft resolution
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (A/66/L.4).
The theme of last month’s general debate was
“The role of mediation in the settlement of disputes
through peaceful means”. We ask our friend and
partner the United States of America, a Member with
absolute power within our multilateral system, to view
its actions with regard to the people of Cuba through
the lens of humanity, find peace within itself and reach
out to its neighbour Cuba and renew a friendship that
has been put on ice for the last five decades.
The world is changing, and changing fast. We
speak of rights; let us uphold those rights. We speak of
freedom; let us respect other States’ freedom to adopt

11-56249

their own political system. We speak of the rule of law;
let us conduct ourselves in conformity with
international law. We speak of multilateralism; let us
do away with unilateralism.
Solomon Islands, as a small island developing
State, believes in multilateralism; this is all we have.
Solomon Islands commends Cuba for taking the most
peaceful path in seeking the unconditional lifting of the
blockade through the United Nations. This is the only
place where the members of the international
community, large and small, gather to ensure that what
is moral is upheld, what is right is respected and what
must be undone is lifted.
Once again, Solomon Islands will vote in support
of the draft resolution calling for the unconditional
lifting of the blockade, and calls on all members to
support it as well.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
debate of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla.
The Russian delegation would like to express its
gratitude
to
the
Secretary-General
for
his
comprehensive report (A/66/114) presenting the views
of Member States, which have unanimously expressed
disagreement with and rejection of the unilateral and
extraterritorial economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba.
The position of principle taken by Russia with
regard to this draft resolution is well known and
remains unchanged. We express total solidarity with
the overwhelming majority of the members of the
international community, who strongly condemn the
trade and economic embargo against Cuba by the
United States and call for the earliest repeal of this
senseless anti-Cuban practice that runs counter to
current international realities.
The anti-Cuba blockade, which has lasted for
almost half a century, has clearly demonstrated its
inability to influence the sovereign choice of
development model made by the Cuban nation. The
only consequences of the sanctions have been the
deterioration of the living standards of the Cuban
population, the creation of artificial barriers to its
economic growth, and an infringement of the rights
and interests of third countries. Such measures are
counterproductive, as they only complicate the quest

17

A/66/PV.41

for solutions to inter-State disagreements and aggravate
an already overloaded and contentious agenda.
For years now, the unilateral, restrictive United
States actions against Cuba have had effects that are
directly opposite to the outcome sought by the
instigators of that policy during the cold war. President
Obama’s Administration, which raised great and
justified hopes regarding the adjustment of the United
States policy towards Cuba, has taken only minimal
steps in that direction. We hope that the decision of the
United States Administration to discontinue certain
restrictions on visits by United States citizens to their
relatives in Cuba and on the sending of remittances and
money orders will be followed by additional steps
aimed at normalizing United States-Cuban relations
and the final lifting of the embargo.
We strongly believe that this policy, unlike the
discriminatory practice of economic strangulation, will
contribute to the successful implementation of the
progressive social and economic reforms currently
being implemented by the Cuban leadership.
Guided by the fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations on the inadmissibility of
any discriminatory measures relating to or interference
into the domestic affairs of States, we deem it
necessary to vote in favour of the draft resolution
calling for a lifting of the blockade.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to introduce draft
resolution A/66/L.4.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish at the outset to convey our deepest
condolences to our Central American brothers, to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and to the Republic of
Turkey.
On 13 November 1991, the General Assembly
took the decision to include in the agenda of its next
session a discussion of the item entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
That was when the United States, in a cruelly
opportunistic manner, was determined to tighten the
siege against the island, which was struggling alone as
a result of the so-called Torricelli Act, which cut off
our trade in medicines and foodstuffs with the

18

subsidiaries of United States companies based in third
countries. That was the official act that made public the
extraterritorial implementation of the blockade laws
against third States.
At that time, it might have seemed impossible
that 20 years later the Assembly would still be
discussing the same item, which is so closely linked to
the right of peoples to self-determination, to
international law, to the norms of international trade
and to the very reasons for the Organization’s
existence.
This is one of the items that is traditionally
discussed by the General Assembly and gives rise to
the greatest number of reiterated statements. It also
receives categorical and overwhelming support, clearly
demonstrating the uncomfortable isolation of the
aggressor country and the heroic resistance of a people
that refuses to give up its sovereign rights.
For two decades, the international community has
invariably and consistently called for an end to the
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed
by the United States against Cuba. It has done so by
means of the resolutions that are adopted almost
unanimously every year, by the dozens of appeals
issued by heads of State and delegations that have
referred to this item during the high-level general
debate of the Assembly, and by the statements made by
virtually all international agencies and groups of
States, particularly those of Latin America and the
Caribbean.
In 1996, the Helms-Burton Act led to an
unprecedented expansion of the extraterritorial scope
of the blockade and laid the groundwork for a “change
of regime” and subsequent direct intervention in Cuba.
No one seems to have noticed that the 2004 “Bush plan
for Cuba” has been left by the wayside.
The report of the Secretary-General on this item
(A/66/114), which includes the statements of more than
160 countries and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, comprehensively illustrates this
continuing and cruel policy and on its direct effects on
the people and the economy of Cuba. The direct
economic damage caused to the Cuban people as a
result of the blockade exceeds $975 billion, estimated
at the depreciated United States dollar value compared
to that of gold.

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

Article II, subparagraphs (b) and (c), of the 1948
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide defines as acts of genocide
“causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of
the group” and “deliberately inflicting on the group
conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical
destruction in whole or in part”.
According to a United States Government
memorandum of 6 April 1960, the blockade’s
objectives have been to cause
“disenchantment and disaffection based on
economic dissatisfaction and hardship … to
weaken the economic life of Cuba … denying
money and supplies to Cuba, to decrease
monetary and real wages, to bring about hunger,
desperation and overthrow of government.”
The United States has never hidden the fact that
its objective is to overthrow the revolutionary
Government and to destroy the constitutional order that
the Cuban people defend in sovereignty. That is what
former President George W. Bush called “regime
change”, which has now acquired new dimensions.
Despite the false image of flexibility that the
current United States Administration tries to portray,
the blockade and the sanctions remain intact, fully
implemented, and their extraterritorial character has
intensified in recent years. The increased persecution
of Cuban financial transactions across the world, with
complete disregard for the laws of third countries and
the opposition of their Governments, has become a
distinct feature of the Obama Administration.
Cuba is still unable to freely export or import
products and services of any sort to and from the
United States. Cuba cannot use American dollars in its
transactions, not even to pay its contributions to the
United Nations and to other international agencies. Nor
can Cuba hold accounts in that currency in banks in
third countries or have access to credit from banks in
the United States or from any of their subsidiaries in
third countries or from international institutions, such
as the World Bank or the Inter-American Development
Bank.
The ban on trade with American companies’
subsidiaries in third countries still cannot be altered.
Entrepreneurs from other countries who are interested
in investing in my country continue to be sanctioned,
threatened or blacklisted.

11-56249

International organizations and agencies and
programmes of the United Nations system are not
spared from this policy. The United States Government
hinders the cooperation that those entities offer to
Cuba, including that intended for extremely sensitive
areas. Clear evidence of that is the confiscation in
January of $4,207,000 in financing from the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria to
implement projects of cooperation with Cuba, which
was
intended
for
combating
the
acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome and tuberculosis.
As a result of Cuba’s denunciation, the United
States Treasury Department issued a general licence in
May this year to release those funds. That licence will
expire on 30 June 2015. But the very fact that the
resources allocated by that humanitarian organization
require a United States Government licence to reach
Cuba shows — in addition to the intent to use these
sensitive programmes as hostages of that Government’s
aggressive policy against my country — flagrantly
disrespectful behaviour towards the United Nations and
its various agencies. Several cooperation projects
carried out by the International Atomic Energy Agency
have also been victims of the blockade.
In the midst of a supposed relaxation that allows
some groups of Americans to travel to Cuba, the
Treasury Department very recently denied travel
permits to two important United States non-governmental
organizations that for years have been cooperating with
Cuban institutions in the area of health care. That
decision could prevent donations of medicines that are
unavailable in our country because of the blockade
from reaching their destination. The truth is that the
freedom of travel of Americans continues to be
hampered, and Cuba remains the only forbidden
destination.
On
several
occasions,
United
States
representatives have indicated here that the item we are
discussing today is a bilateral issue and therefore
should not be discussed in this forum. They are likely
to reiterate the same fallacious argument here today.
The facts prove the inconsistency. Citizens and
companies from numerous Member States represented
here have been subject to sanctions for establishing
economic relations with Cuba.
What is represented by the fines imposed on
18 August on the subsidiary of the French shipping and
transportation company CMA CGM for offering

19

A/66/PV.41

container services to Cuba, if not the extraterritorial
nature of that policy? How could we describe the
demands imposed by the European subsidiary of
PayPal, which facilitates electronic transactions
through the Internet, on the German firm Rum &
Company to force it to remove Cuban rum and tobacco
from its web page?
There have been countless examples of the
extraterritorial implementation of that policy, as can be
seen in Cuba’s reply contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
President Obama’s most recent statements about
Cuba have left quite a few observers astonished, but
they come as no surprise to us. President Obama’s
response to the Cuban Government’s offer of a
dialogue on all topics of interest on the bilateral agenda
has been, once again, a non-committal refusal, based
on absurd arguments and unacceptable conditions that
have never worked. His position is old, repetitive and
anchored in the past. It is as if, instead the President
elected to bring about change, his predecessors were
speaking for him, including Republican predecessors.
He seemed misinformed, completely unaware of what
is going on in our country, of our history and of our
culture.
Cuba experienced great change in 1959. At the
cost of 20,000 lives, it swept away the dictatorship of
Batista, the United States’ strongman. Since then, Cuba
has continued to change day by day, and thanks to its
capacity for renewal it has been able to resist. Others
did not resist because they did not change, or because
they were inflexible or drifted. Now, Cuba is changing
and will resolutely change everything that should be
changed within the revolution and within socialism:
more revolution and improved socialism. The only
thing that has not changed over the past 50 years is the
blockade and the hostile and aggressive policy of the
United States, despite the fact that it has not worked,
nor will it.
However, what the United States Government
wants to see changed will not change. The Cuban
Government will continue to be the Government of the
people, by the people and for the people. Our elections
will not be auctions. There will be no $4 billion
election campaigns nor a parliament supported by
13 per cent of voters. We will not have corrupt political
elites separate from the people. We will continue being

20

a true democracy, not a plutocracy. We will defend the
right to true and objective information.
We will continue our fight for full justice. We
will protect equal opportunities for every child, and we
will not abandon anyone. We will not renounce our
social policies. Health and education will continue to
be universal and free of charge. We will guarantee the
right to work, decent retirement and social security.
There will continue to be equal pay for equal work. We
will protect pregnant women and the disabled. Human
beings will continue to be the first and most important
thing. We will defend our culture. We will continue to
believe in human values. The exercise of human rights
will be fully guaranteed for all Cubans.
The economy will have to be efficient, but it will
continue to be in the service of the people. People’s
lives are, and will continue to be, far more important
than macroeconomic data. The people will continue to
be consulted on economic policies. The consequences
of the global economic crisis will be shared by all. We
will continue redistributing wealth so that there are
neither rich nor poor. We will not allow corruption or
speculation, nor will we steal money from workers to
bail out banks. We will continue to seek the
participation of foreign companies in our economy
without any exceptions.
It would suffice to review the recent disclosures
made by Wikileaks about the work of the State
Department and American embassies in all countries to
hinder political, diplomatic, economic, commercial and
cooperative relations with Cuba. They are disgraceful
because of their content — the information about the
concern, the interest in and persecution of the
humanitarian work being carried out by Cuban medical
brigades, which nobly and selflessly serve millions of
peoples in dozens of sister nations.
Family ties and the limited cultural, academic and
scientific exchanges between the United States and
Cuba show today what a positive step it would be to
expand those links for the benefit of both peoples,
without the obstacles and conditions imposed by
Washington, D.C. Cuba’s proposal for moving towards
the normalization of relations and expanding bilateral
cooperation in a range of areas still stands. Making
reciprocal efforts to resolve pending humanitarian
issues would likewise be in our common interest.
Why does President Obama’s Administration not
better concern itself with the problems of the United

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

States and leave us Cubans alone to solve ours in
peace?
One of the five Cuban antiterrorist fighters has
just finished serving every minute of his unjust 13-year
prison sentence, yet he is now being prevented from
returning to Cuba and reuniting with his family, while
the other four continue to endure a cruel and unjust
incarceration as political prisoners. The blatant
corruption in the legal proceedings and the
Government’s illegal conduct throughout is widely
known and has been well documented. Why not release
them as an act of justice, or at least as a humanitarian
gesture?
I must convey the profound gratitude of the
people of Cuba to all of the countries that for 20 years
have used their voices and their votes to call for an end
to the most unjust, long-lasting and comprehensive
unilateral sanctions in history, which have caused so
much harm to millions of Cubans.
I speak on behalf of 16-year-old Guillermo
Domínguez Díaz, 18-year-old Ivis Palacio Terry,
17-year-old Randy Barroso Torres, and 12-year-old
Adrián Izquierdo Cabrera, who have undergone
conservative surgeries and spent months confined to
bed, wearing casts, because hospitals have no
paediatric
expandable
prostheses,
which
are
manufactured in the United States or under its patents.
I speak on behalf of María Amelia Alonso Valdés,
2 years of age, Damián Hernández Valdés, 4, and
Dayán Romayena Lorente, 12, who suffer from central
nervous system tumours and who need to be treated
with Temodal, a drug manufactured in the United
States and protected by its patents. On behalf of my
selfless, generous, optimistic and heroic people and for
the good of the community of nations and the
equilibrium of the world, I ask the Assembly to support
draft resolution A/66/L.4, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against
Cuba”.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item. We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/66/L.4.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

11-56249

Mr. Godard (United States of America): For yet
another year, the Assembly is taking up a draft
resolution designed to confuse and obscure. But let
there be no confusion about this: the United States, like
most Member States, reaffirms its strong commitment
to supporting the right and the heartfelt desire of the
Cuban people to freely determine their future. And let
there be no obscuring that the Cuban regime has
deprived them of that right for more than half a
century.
At the same time, the United States strongly
asserts its sovereign right, on the same basis as other
Member States, to determine its bilateral policies,
including its economic relationships with other
countries, in accordance with its own national interests
and values. This includes our economic relationships
with other countries. The United States’ economic
relationship with Cuba is a bilateral issue and is not
appropriately a concern of the Assembly.
The embargo represents just one aspect of United
States policy towards Cuba, whose overarching goal is
to encourage a more open environment in Cuba and
increased respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms — principles to which this Organization is
also dedicated.
This annual exercise attempts to no good end to
obscure some fundamental truths. The Cuban
Government’s own policies, not any action of the
United States Government, are the greatest obstacle to
Cuba’s economic development. Those policies
concentrate political and economic decisions in the
hands of the few, stifling economic growth. They
ignore the basic principles, so effectively demonstrated
in many countries, that policies that allow individual
freedom unleash the creativity of people, foster
innovation and entrepreneurship, and are the best
means to achieve sustainable economic development.
This exercise conceals the fact that the United
States is a leading source of food and humanitarian aid
to Cuba. The United States does not restrict
humanitarian aid to Cuba. Cubans receive food,
medicine, other forms of assistance and remittances
from the United States. In the year 2010, the United
States Government authorized $3.5 billion in total sales
to Cuba of United States goods. In agricultural
products alone, the United States exported
$361.7 million in goods to Cuba in 2010, including

21

A/66/PV.41

poultry, soy bean products, corn, wheat, feed products,
pork and other items.
Indeed, as the Cuban Government itself has
repeatedly indicated, the United States has for years
been one of Cuba’s principal trading partners. The
United States in 2010 also authorized $861 million in
private humanitarian assistance in the form of gift
parcels filled with food and other basic necessities, as
well as non-agricultural and medical donations. Those
figures alone are sufficient to rebut the spurious
allegations of genocide against the Cuban people
contained in previous resolutions recalled in the
current draft (A/66/L.4) and to demonstrate that this
calumny greatly misuses that important term and
insults the true victims of genocide.
This draft resolution and much of the stale
rhetoric surrounding it ignores some basic facts. As
President Obama made clear last month, the United
States is open to a new relationship with Cuba if the
Cuban Government starts taking proper steps to open
up its country and provide the space and the respect for
human rights that would allow the Cuban people to
determine their own destiny. The Cuban Government
also needs to release unconditionally and immediately
the 62-year-old American citizen Alan Gross, whom it
sentenced to 15 years of prison for the crime of trying
to connect Cuba’s Jewish communities to the Internet.
The President in January 2011 implemented
several significant changes to United States policy
towards Cuba, aimed at increasing people-to-people
contact, supporting civil society in Cuba, enhancing the
free flow of information to, from and among the Cuban
people and helping promote their independence from
Cuban authorities. Those changes build upon the
President’s previous actions in April 2009 and
demonstrate the strong commitment of the United
States to the Cuban people, contrary to the picture
painted in the draft resolution.
The United States looks forward to a still greater
broadening of contacts and exchange with Cuba, and is
prepared to do its part to that end. However, improving
the situation requires efforts on the part of the Cuban
Government as well. It must ensure that the Cuban
people enjoy the internationally recognized political
and economic freedoms to which this body is
committed and on which it has insisted with regard to
other countries.

22

Because the draft resolution does not reflect
present realities, my delegation will vote against it. We
strongly believe that this body, instead of engaging in
such meaningless exercises, should dedicate itself to
supporting the efforts of the Cuban people to freely
determine their own future. Only by that course can
this body truly advance the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): For the twentieth year in a row, the General
Assembly will deliver its judgement and demand an
end to the criminal and inhumane blockade against the
heroic, generous people and Government of Cuba. Yet
again, we have heard a representative of the United
States of America attempt to justify that which cannot
be justified in order to force the submission of a people
that will never submit, a people whose resolve is
absolute — a people, as Commandante Fidel recently
remarked, whose will is made of steel.
Nicaragua would like once again to publically
express its commitment to and support for the draft
resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (A/66/L.4),
which was introduced by our colleague Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, to whom we express our unconditional solidarity
and our gratitude for the updated information on the
damage and prejudicial harm that the United States of
America continues to inflict on the Cuban people with
the most criminal blockade in the history of humanity.
Nicaragua expresses its eternal gratitude to the
Cuban people and Government for their unwavering
and unconditional militant solidarity whose primary
goal is to help countries in development. We also wish
to thank Commandante Fidel Castro, who joined forces
with Commandante Chávez to undertake a great project
of solidarity, reciprocity, social justice, fair trade, life
and peace in our Latin America and the Caribbean that
is today embodied in the Bolivarian Alliance for the
Peoples of Our America.
The fruits of that project are palpable and
undeniable in the form of reduced poverty, the near
eradication of illiteracy, the millions of people whose
sight has been restored thanks to Misión Milagros, and
the medical and scientific brigades that have improved
the quality of life in our countries. Those are just a few
of the accomplishments achieved in a short time, and

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

despite the impact of the criminal embargo and of the
international crisis generated and created by the
capitalist economies.
The peoples and Governments of the world
represented here will always stand with Cuba, our
brother country and brother Government. We recognize
its heroism, its solidarity, its humanism, its generosity
and its commitment at those moments when our
peoples have needed the friendly hand of brothers and
sisters. Who else but Cuba has been the first to step
forward when one of our peoples has had a need and
sought unconditional human solidarity, whether in
matters of health or education, or in the face of the
blows of climate change?
It is precisely because of the determination of the
Cuban people and Government always to stand with
the world’s poor that they are being attacked and
blockaded and that their Socialist revolution is
threatened with destruction.
This inhumane policy of the United States
Government, which is continuing to implement this
criminal embargo against the brotherly and beloved
people and Government of Cuba, must end now. It has
been clearly shown that no one supports these
measures, which are aimed at breaking the spirit of
independence, self-determination and international
solidarity that is characteristic of the Cuban people and
Government. It is time to rectify the situation, as these
measures violate international law, human rights,
humanitarian law and the Charter of the United
Nations. It is time that an end be put to the belief that
they will break the steely resolve and the social spirit
of the Cuban revolution.
Even the people of the United States do not
support the embargo. Every day more voices are being
heard from that country demanding that an end be put
to this absurd and inhumane policy. One such United
States voice calling for peace and reconciliation was
that of Reverend Lucius Walker, whom we warmly
remember for his determined humanism dedicated to
putting an end to the blockade against Cuba, along
with the Pastors for Peace and their Peace Caravans.
Latin America and the Caribbean strongly support
Cuba, which is resolutely and firmly, in a spirit of
creativity, resisting the embargo — this outdated policy
of intervention in our region. Our region will go
forward, hand in hand with its sister country Cuba,

11-56249

until the Government of the United States reflects on
and rectifies its historic error.
The United States, by not implementing the
resolutions of the General Assembly, is continuing to
worsen the suffering of the brotherly Cuban people.
The priority sectors most affected by the embargo are
public health, food and education.
There have been other major economic sanctions
and other forms of persecution against Cuban business
and financial transactions. Nothing has changed that
would lighten the burden on the people of Cuba. On
the contrary, there has been a strengthening of the
policy of strangulation against Cuba. The embargo
remains the main obstacle to the economic and social
development of Cuba. It is high time for the United
States to put an end to this criminal embargo and also
to stop helping self-confessed terrorists who continue
to move freely in North American cities and together
plan terrorist acts against the people and the
Government of Cuba.
No longer is anyone fooled by the more than
50 years of terrorist acts against the people and the
Government of Cuba. A gesture would be welcomed by
the people of the world would be the immediate freeing
of the four Cuban heroic patriots imprisoned in the
United States and the immediate return to his homeland
of the heroic René González, who has been on
conditional release but must remain in the United
States for years. This is an offence against justice not
to free these heroes, who have defended their country
with dignity and courage in the face of terrorist attacks
perpetrated from the territory of the United States of
America. We demand the immediate release of these
Cuban anti-terrorist heroes. We convey our Sandinista
greetings to them and to their families, and our
immense respect for these brothers, sons of Martí and
of the unwavering Cuban revolution.
We would like to express once again our
strongest condemnation of the embargo against Cuba
and of all coercive measures of a unilateral nature with
extraterritorial effect, which contravene international
law and the accepted norms of free trade. These are
practices that not only pose a grave threat to peace and
multilateralism and represent an insult to human
values; they are also an obstacle to mutual
understanding among and the well-being of nations.
We thus condemn the use of unilateral coercive
measures such as illegal sanctions against developing

23

A/66/PV.41

countries aimed at preventing them from exercising
their right to determine their own political, economic
and social system.
Once again Nicaragua will vote in favour of draft
resolution A/66/L.4, as will almost the entire
international community represented here. We will be
witnesses once again of the isolation of the
Government of the United States and of its policy of
always being on the opposite side of those who wish
for peace. The international community will thus
reiterate once again its message of peace and its strong
support for Cuba in defence of its sovereignty and selfdetermination and in defence of its heroic revolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.4.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,

24

Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Palau
Draft resolution A/66/L.4 was adopted by 186
votes to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 66/6).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Sweden advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sobków (Poland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova align
themselves with this explanation of vote.

11-56249

A/66/PV.41

Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The United States trade policy towards Cuba is
fundamentally a bilateral issue. However, American
legislation, such as the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992
and the Helms-Burton Act of 1996, has extended the
effects of the United States embargo to third-party
countries. In the framework of its Common
Commercial Policy, the European Union has firmly and
continuously opposed such extraterritorial measures.
While recognizing the decision of the United
States Government to lift restrictions on remittances
and family travel to Cuba, we cannot accept that
unilaterally imposed measures impede our economic
and commercial relations with Cuba. To address this
problem, the European Union Council of Ministers
adopted, in November 1996, a regulation and a joint
action to protect the interests of natural or legal
persons residing in Europe against the consequences of
these Acts. Furthermore, at the May 1998 European
Union-United States summit, held in London, a
package was agreed that also sought to alleviate the
problems with extraterritorial legislation. It covered
waivers to titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton Act, a
commitment by the United States Government to resist
future extraterritorial legislation of that kind, and an
understanding
regarding
disciplines
for
the
strengthening of investment protection. It is urgent that
the United States implement that agreement.
The European Union’s policy towards Cuba was
set out in a common position in 1996. Reaffirming the
validity of that common position, in June 2008 the
European Union lifted the restrictive measures imposed
on Cuba in 2003. The dialogue with the authorities in
Havana was resumed without preconditions and on the
basis of reciprocity and non-discrimination. Five
political dialogue ministerial sessions have been held
with the Cuban Government to address issues of
common interest, including human rights, which is a
question at the core of relations with all third countries,
including Cuba.
We reaffirm our determination to pursue a resultsoriented comprehensive dialogue with the Cuban
authorities, as well as with representatives of civil
society and peaceful pro-democracy opposition, in
accordance with EU policies. We reiterate the right of
Cuban citizens to independently decide their future.

11-56249

We are encouraged by the release of all political
prisoners from the group of 75 who were imprisoned in
2003, together with other political prisoners. We
reiterate our call on the Cuban Government to fully
grant its citizens internationally recognized civil,
political and economic rights and freedoms, including
the freedom of assembly and expression and free
access to information; to ratify the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights; and, following the visit of the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food, to
extend invitations to other rapporteurs to visit Cuba.
The existing restrictions on rights and freedoms
undermine and offset Cuban achievements in health
care and education. Similarly, Cuba’s domestic
economic policy seriously hampers its own economic
development. In that context, we note the adoption by
the Cuban Parliament in August of a package of
economic and social reforms, and expect that these will
be extended and implemented in a manner that will
address the key concerns of the Cuban population.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States contributes to the
economic problems in Cuba, negatively affecting the
living standards of the Cuban people. The European
Union therefore believes that the lifting of the United
States embargo would open the Cuban economy to the
benefit of the Cuban people. Together, we again
express our rejection of all unilateral measures directed
against Cuba that are contrary to the commonly
accepted rules of international trade. We urge the
Cuban authorities to bring about real improvements in
all areas mentioned.
In spite of continued concerns and criticisms
about the human rights situation in Cuba, the States
members of the European Union unanimously voted in
favour of resolution 66/6.
Ms. Nujoma (Namibia): This year marks the
twentieth anniversary since the presentation of the
resolution that we have just adopted (resolution 66/6),
but the blockade against Cuba is still in place. This
stands in stark contrast to the overwhelming appeal by
the international community to end this unjust policy
against the people of Cuba. In fact, this debate would
not have been necessary had the United States lifted
the blockade years ago.

25

A/66/PV.41

My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
under agenda item 41, “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”,
because we believe in the principle of peaceful
coexistence among nations, respect for sovereign
equality, open trade among nations and, above all, the
spirit of good-neighbourliness. The imposition of the
blockade against Cuba is an outdated form of
punishment.
My delegation remains concerned about the
promulgation and application of laws and measures
constituting an economic, commercial or financial
embargo against any friendly and peaceful country. We
believe that the measures imposed against Cuba have
serious negative implications for the overall
development and well-being of the people of Cuba.
For many years, the General Assembly has,
through its resolutions on this item, consistently
rejected those sanctions and called for an end to the
embargo imposed by the United States against the
people of Cuba. The blockade is negatively affecting
the economy and people of Cuba, especially women
and children. It is therefore unfortunate that, today, the
blockade remains intact and that the General Assembly
is still seized of this issue.
My delegation has always maintained the view
that the blockade against Cuba runs counter to the
spirit of the United Nations Charter, international law
and the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2). The
same blockade continues to cause irreparable damage
to the economic, social and cultural development of
Cuba, as it deprives its people of the opportunities and
benefits emanating from free trade.
The Torricelli and Helms-Burton Acts are
extraterritorial in nature and thus interfere with the
sovereign rights of Cuba and violate the principles and
rules of the international trading system. The blockade
cannot be called an exclusive bilateral affair because it
impacts numerous countries. The report of the
Secretary-General highlights those points of concern.
We are convinced that the people of the two
neighbouring countries would both stand to benefit
from the normalization of relations and the removal of

26

restrictions between them. The United States Government
should therefore heed the appeal of the international
community to end the blockade and promote good
relations and neighbourliness with the Government and
the people of Cuba.
In our view, all human rights, whether political,
cultural or economic, are inseparable. They include the
right to food, health and education and, above all, the
right to development. Through the blockade, the people
of Cuba are being denied those fundamental rights, just
because of the political system they have chosen.
Guided by our conviction that the blockade
against Cuba is a denial of the rights I have just
highlighted, Namibia voted in favour of the draft
resolution on ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. We did so to express our
solidarity with the people of Cuba, and we hope that
the United States will listen to the international
community’s appeal to end the blockade against Cuba.
Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): Every time the issue
of lifting the United States sanctions on Cuba comes
up, I am reminded of Humpty Dumpty, who said,
“Words mean only that which I want them to mean”.
When we talk about democracy, what is
democracy, if the universal resolutions of the General
Assembly that call on the United States to lift the
sanctions on Cuba are routinely ignored? When we talk
about the rule of law, what is the rule of law, if General
Assembly resolutions that have declared United States
sanctions illegal continue to be ignored? Is the law a
law only when one decides that it is law? When we talk
about the sovereign equality of States in the United
Nations, is it equality only when it involves those
whom we like? When we talk about freedom, is it
freedom only when the views and political systems of
other countries agree with one’s own?
I thought that true democracy and true freedom
embrace diversity: diversity of opinion, of thought, of
political systems. Indeed, freedom also includes the
right even to be wrong. My delegation has voted in
favour of resolution 66/6 because that is the right thing
to do.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

11-56249
