UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/20
13 July 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3903rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 July 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Letter dated
29 June 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/581); Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/1998/582); Letter dated 25 June 1998 from
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/1998/583)", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council condemns the massacres, other atrocities and
violations of international humanitarian law committed in Zaire/Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and especially its eastern provinces, including
crimes against humanity and those other violations described in the Report
of the Secretary-General’s Investigative Team (S/1998/581). It notes the
responses to the report provided by the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/1998/582) and Rwanda (S/1998/583). It recognizes
the work of the Investigative Team in documenting some of these violations,
in spite of the fact that the Team was not allowed to carry out its mission
fully and without hindrance.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States of the Great Lakes
region.
"The Security Council recognizes the necessity to investigate further
the massacres, other atrocities and violations of international
humanitarian law and to prosecute those responsible. It deplores the delay
in the administration of justice. The Council calls on the Governments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to investigate without
delay, in their respective countries, the allegations contained in the
report of the Investigative Team and to bring to justice any persons found
to have been involved in these or other massacres, atrocities and
violations of international humanitarian law. The Council takes note of
the stated willingness of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to try any of its nationals who are guilty of or were implicated in
the alleged massacres (S/1998/582). Such action is of great importance in
98-20420 (E)

130798

/...

S/PRST/1998/20
English
Page 2

helping to bring an end to impunity and to foster lasting peace and
stability in the region. It urges Member States to cooperate with the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in the
investigation and prosecution of these persons.
"The Council encourages the Governments of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda to seek international assistance, such as technical
assistance, as needed, in this process. It also invites the Governments
concerned to consider the inclusion of international observers, as
appropriate. It requests the Governments concerned to provide an initial
progress report to the Secretary-General by 15 October 1998 on the steps
being taken to investigate and prosecute those responsible.
"The Security Council expresses its readiness to consider, as
necessary in light of actions by the Governments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, additional steps to ensure that the perpetrators
of the massacres, other atrocities and violations of international
humanitarian law are brought to justice.
"The Security Council urges Member States, relevant United Nations
bodies and agencies and other international agencies to provide the
necessary technical and other assistance, as requested, to the Governments
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in the development of
independent and impartial judicial systems.
"The Security Council expresses support for United Nations and other
international activities to reduce ethnic tensions and promote national
reconciliation in the region, and encourages the Governments concerned to
continue to cooperate in these activities to bring about a real improvement
in the situation.
"The Security Council attaches great importance to the role of the
Organization of African Unity and welcomes its decision to establish the
International Panel of Eminent Personalities to Investigate the Genocide in
Rwanda and the Surrounding Events (S/1998/461). It appeals to Member
States to contribute to the Special Trust Fund established to support the
work of the Panel.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
