General Aambly-Thlrty-fourtb Sesllon

202

3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. · Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, in consultation with the freely
elected representatives of the peoples of the Territories
concerned, to continue to take all the necessary steps
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set
forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories;
• 5. Calls upon the administering Power to expand its
programme of budgetary aid and to take all possible
steps, in consultation with the local authorities, as appropriate, to diversify and strengthen further the economies
of the Territories listed above and to work out concrete
programmes of assistance and economic development
for those Territories;
6. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to
safeguard the malienable right of the peoples of those
Territories to the enjoyment of their natural resources by
taking effective measures which guarantee the right of
the peoples to own and dispose of those natural resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
1. Requests the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected authorities and representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to pay
particular attention to the training of qualified local
personnel;
8. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations
visiting missions in the Territories under its administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee
to continue his consultations with a view to the dispatch
of such missions, as appropriate;
9. Welcomes in particular the invitation of the
Government of the United Kingdom to the Special·
Committee to dispatch a visiting mission to the Turks
and Caicos Islands in 1980;
10. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system in
accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life
of those Territories;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the
Turks and Caicos .Islands, including the possible
dispatch of visiting missions in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979

34/35.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to

the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, u
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to American Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in American Samoa, 15
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as a
consequence of previous visiting missions to Non-SelfGoverning Territories and reiterating its conviction that
the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing
adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein
with respect to their future status,
Welcoming the positive attitude of the administering
Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations
visiting missions,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of American
Samoa and stressing the necessity of diversifying the
Territory's economy as a matter of priority in order to
reduce its dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
American Samoa;10
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people of
American Samoa, to continue to take all the necessary
steps to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the
goals set forth in the Declaration with respect to the
Territory;
5. Urges the administering Power to continue its
efforts to ensure that the culture and identity of the
people of the Territory shall continue to be reflected in
the Government and administration of the Territory and
preserved to the fullest extent;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to continue
to take all possible steps to strengthen and diversify the
economy of American Samoa and to work out concrete
programmes of assistance and economic development
for the Territory;
7. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life of
American Samoa;
Ibid., chaps. IV and XIX.
u Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meeting, paras. 17-21.
18 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.I), chap. XIX.
14

VD.

8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the people of American Samoa, to safeguard
the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the
enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures which guarantee the right of the people to own
and dispose of those natural resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue to
foster close relations and co-operation between the
people of the Territory and the neighbouring island
communities;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to American Samoa, including the dispatch of a visiting mission to the Territory
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/36.

103

Resolutlom adopted on tbe reports of the Fourth Committee

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,1 7
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all
other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the United States Virgin Islands, and reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Declaration,
Noting the active co-operation given by the administering Power, both through its participation in the work
of the Special Committee and through its willingness to
receive visiting missions to small Territories under its
administration,
Having heard the . statement of the administering
Power, 18
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the United States Virgin Islands; 19
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right' of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
17 Ibid., chaps. IV; VI, annex III; and XXVI.
18 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meet-

ing, paras. 17-21.

19 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.l), chap. XXVI.

4. Requests the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to continue to take
all necessary measures, in consultation with the freely
elected authorities and representatives of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands, to enable the people of
the Territory to exercise fully their right to selfdetermination in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration;
5. Requests the administering Power to encourage
further and meaningful discussion regarding the political
and constitutional status of the Territory and to take
such additional measures as would ensure preservation
of the identity and cultural heritage of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands;
6. Urges the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives
of the people of the United States Virgin Islands, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the
people to own and dispose of those natural resources and
to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
7. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic development of the United States Virgin
Islands are an important element in the process of selfdetermination and, to this end, calls upon the administering Power, together with the freely elected authorities
and representatives of the people of the Territory, to
take all measures necessary to achieve a viable and stable
economy in the Territory;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the
United States Virgin Islands;
9. Expresses the view that the presence of a United
States naval facility in the Territory should not impede
the progress of the people towards self-determination;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/37.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 20
20 Ibid.,

chap. X.
