THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

31 JANUARY

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. .. . . .. . . ,. . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . .. . . . . .. . ., . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent Representatives
of Gabon,
Mauritius and Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12.536) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2059)

Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV.2059

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2059th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 31 January 1978, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. L. 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

4. Mr. MAKATINI: Mr. President, we congratulate you
most heartily on your assumption of the presidency during
the month that marks the beginning of the International
Anti-Apartheid Year. That this Council meeting takes place
under your guidance is of great importance to the Organization, for it was in your brotherly country, Nigeria, and
under the chairmanship of Mr. Joseph Garba, the Commissioner for External Affairs, that the international
community took far-reaching decisions to further the
advancement of the struggle against apartheid. To ensure
the necessaryfollow-up and endorsementby the General
Assembly of those decisionsdesignedto complementthe
efforts of our people,whosestrugglehasentereda decisive
and irreversible stage, the Commissionerfor External
Affairs joined us here in New York to present those
decisionsto the GeneralAssembly.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2059)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536)

5. This wasnot the first proof of your country’s resolveto
play an active role in the struggle for the total and real
independence of our continent. This commitment was
eloquently proved in 1975 by Nigeria’s act of solidarity
with the People’sRepublic of Angola when, acting in
concert with other nations that love justice and freedom,
Nigeria helped the Angolan people under the leadershipof
the Movimento Popular de Liberta@o de Angola to stave
off apartheid expansionism.It is becauseof this brilliant
record that, despite the highly orchestrated imperialist
campaign, whoseobjective is now crystal clear,we remain
convinced that Nigeria’smusclewill alwaysbeharnessed
to
advance the African objectives in the whole of southern
Africa. And it is for that reasonthat we areconfident that,
under your guidance,the Council’s deliberationswill be
crowned with success
in the form of decisionswhoseeffect
will be to further the isolationof the Pretoria regimeandto
strengthen the striking power of the liberation movement.

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
Z7zeagenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12538);
(6) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 2058th meeting, I invite the
representatives of Sweden and Uganda to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. The African National Congress(ANC) attachesa great
deal of importanceto the resolutionsand decisions
adopted
by the GeneralAssembly at its thirty-second session.The
list also includes those draft resolutions vetoed by three
permanent membersof the Security Council as well as
those unanimously adopted by the Council. Throughout
the long history of our struggle, we have never been so
confident of our victory. We have reached a stagethat is
characterizedby the irreversibleand ever-growingmilitancy
and determination of our people to confront the apartheid
monster gun in hand and not to betray the active solidarity
that progressivemankind the world over is increasingly
lending usin support of our just struggle.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Runborg
(Sweden) and Mr. Mwangaguhunga (Uganda) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before
them the texts of two draft resolutions sponsored by
Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria and contained in documents
S/12547 and S/12548.
3. The first speaker is Mr. Johnnie Makatini, to whom the
Council extended an invitation at its 2056th meeting. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

7. It is now common knowledge to all who follow the
South African situation closely that Umkonto We Sizwe,
1

white community massively renewed Vorster’s mandate to
drown in blood the young and adult blacks who dare to
challenge the status of bondage.

the Spear of the Nation, the military wing of ANC, is not
only present and thriving in the thicket of the angry masses
throughout the country but has begun to deal heavy blows
against selected enemy targets. The Pretoria officials have
been constrained repeatedly to admit this. UK’S politicomilitary organizational capacity continues to grow while
the enemy’s spy network has been considerably incapacitated by the elimination of some key collaborators. This is
coupled with the mounting of sophisticated forms of
communication, such as the periodical leaflet bombs in the
big cities. Such daring action, carried out under the noses of
the Fascist police and troops, has sown widespread panic in
white community circles. The myth of the omnipresence of
the Fascist police and that of the stability of the apartheid
system are beginning to crack, and statements by people
like Jimmy Kruger, the so-called Minister of Justice,
attributing the urban unrest to ANC, which he describes as
a wily snake, serve only to boost tremendously the morale
of the oppressed and to break that of the oppressor white
community and bring it to the lowest ebb. The growing
number of white draft-dodgers who refuse to take up arms
in defence of apartheid and prefer to leave the country
testifies to that. On the other hand, the same can be said of
the massive growth of ANC influence inside the country.
The writing on the wall is becoming menacingly clear to the
average white, including those hitherto blinded and deafened as a result of the profits and comfort drawn from the
sweat and blood of our people.

12. In the fact of all that, as well as of the growing
international isolation of the regime, Vorster and his
henchmen have stepped up the reign of terror. lt is at this
juncture that I wish to draw the Council’s attention to the
imminent danger that scores of freedom fighters are facing
in the prison cells throughout the country where they arc
detained, awaiting or under trial, accused of being members
of ANC. Whilst the killing of detainees in the cells and
torture chambers continues unabated, the rdgime’s hangmen are today poised for a big operation, following the
cold-blooded murder of Steve Biko and the exoneration (of
his assassins.
13. In considering the appeal we are making, it is
important to recall that, according to United Nations
statistics published in the mid-1960s, South Africa was then
responsible for 47 per cent of world executions. The
abundant evidence of frame-ups and the coercion of
witnesses clearly shows how determined the racist police
and prosecutors are to hang all the freedom fighters who
are facing trials. The revelations at Steve Biko’s inquest
serve as sufficient proof of what should be expected.
14. I turn now to the Pretoria trial. At the end of
September 1977, the r&me closed its case against 11 men
and one woman accused of ANC organization and sabotage
activities. The accused are: Mosima Gabriel Sexwale, 24
years; Naledi Tsiki, 21 years; Lele Jacob Motaung, 44 years;
Simon Samuel Mohlanyaneng, 23 years; Elias Tieno
Masinga, 24 years; Martin Mafefo Ramokgadi, 67 years: Joe
Nzingo Ggabi, 48 years, whose 12.year imprisonment oln
Robben Island had recently terminated; Petrus Mampogoane Nchabeleng, 50 years; Nelson Letsaba Diale, 41
years; Michael Mpandeni Ngubeni, 42 years; Jacob
Seatlholo, 47 years; Paulina Mamagotla Mohale, 26 years.

8. The worsening economic crisis resulting from spiralling
inflation and unprecedented white unemployment operates
in favour of the revolutionary situation obtaining in our
country.
9. What of the awareness and unity of purpose at the mass
level? ANC is indeed proud of what it owes to its founding
fathers; of what it has nurtured and consolidated throughout its long and problem-ridden history: that noble idea
and objective of serving as a spearhead of a broad united
front, today emerging as the powerful and invincible force
at the service of our revolution. This will no doubt guide
our people at this crucial period when they have reached
the crossroads, as Gatsha Buthelezi said in The New York
Times of ,yesterday,

15. Widely described as the most important political trial
since Rivonia in 1964, it has been dubbed “the main
machinery trial”. Some of the accused are alleged to have
been part of the central underground structure of ANC at
Johannesburg. After five days of giving evidence, Ian
Rwaxa, the chief State witness, said he had been repeatedly
assaulted by the security police while in detention before
making a statement and that he had given untrue evidence
to the court. He said he had been beaten and kicked until
he bled from his nose and mouth, and that an attempt had
been made to strangle him with a cloth. During that assaullt
he had lost consciousness
twice and, on recovery, hadbeen
threatenedwith death unlesshe co-operated. He had been
shownMosima Sexwale, one of the accused,lying naked,
bound and shivering,in another cell; and had himselfbeen
forced to sleepnaked, without blankets. He told the court
of further assaultsby the police and of seeinganother osf
the accused,Lele Motaung, who could not sit becauseof
Pain in his buttocks. All this can be found in the Rang
Daily Mail of 1 July 1977.Eventually he madea statement:
“I wrote what the lieutenant told me to w&e”-he told the
court. And when he asked the judge to make an order
Protecting him from the police, the latter saidhe had no
powersto do that.

10. The position taken by the so-called Asian and Coloured communities, rejecting the rCgime’s diabolic scheme
of separate parliaments aimed against ANC strategy based
on a broad united front of all blacks as well as white
democrats, clearly demonstrates the level of awareness of
our people and their determination to close ranks and
di&t their combined striking power against the common
enemy. They do so mindful of ANC’s steadily growing
influence and strength inside and outside South Africa.
What is more, they are aware of ANC’s fortitude and
Principles on the basis of the Freedom Charter which sets
out the guidelines for a democratic State based on the will
of all the people, and one that will secure to all their
birthright, without distinction as to colour, race, sex or
belief.
11 a All that, as well as the contradictions emerging in the
bantustans like the Transkei, constitutes the scenario we
find in the wake of the racist general elections at which the
2

of John Vorster during the Second World War-hails these
Draconian measures as “making available to them legislation which did away with hampering restrictions”. He said
that in 1971; the situation has since worsened, to a Point
beyond description.

16. Later, three men-Super Maloi, Matheson Morove and
Billy Masethla-refused to give evidence and were gaoled for
six months. Another witness, Newton Mosime, retracted
the evidence he had given saying his original statement had
been made after assaults in Rustenburg police station. Alec
Nchabeleng refused to give evidence against his father. All
this was published in the Rand Daily Mail.

21. On the statement delivered before the Council by
Mr. Donald Woods we have so much to say, but we prefer
to say little because we would have wished a dialogue with
Mr. Woods.

17. We could go on and on for hours, giving more and
more astounding facts concerning this and dozens of other
trials. Suffice it to say that the same thing happened at the
trial of the Pietermaritzburg 10, who were sentenced on 25
July 1977 to terms ranging from seven years to life
imprisonment, having been found guilty of charges related
to the establishment of an escape route for ANC recruits to
leave the country, the recruiting of 43 persons for military
training abroad, and communication with the ANC exiles.

22. Perhaps it was naive of us to have looked forward to
Mr. Woods’ using the opportunity denied to our movement
by the rCgime to endorse publicly and convey in clear and
unambiguous terms to the South African public the
position of the United Nations, which is committed to the
rEgime’s total isolation and support of the liberation
movement for the overthrow of aparfhcid and the seizure
of power by the people. Instead, Mr. Woods spoke of his
plea to present the real case for the real South Africainsinuating, in a way, that what has been going on all these
years has not been the presentation of the real case for the
real South Africa, the role played by the Iiberation
movement and other forces, all of you here included.

18. By and large, the same goes for the Springs six,
reported as being apparently ANC supporters and charged
with offences arising from sabotage incidents and the
explosion of a “bomb factory” in a Soweto house, the
indictment alleging the discovery of a machine pistol, 10
blocks of TNT, 40 kilograms of explosives, plus hand
grenades and bullets, and an ANC publication.

23. I choose to say little because one risks misinterpreting
Mr. Woods to the point of seeing his so-called real case of
moral force as aimed at negating the position of the United
Nations against apartheid.

19. The list of such trials of ANC groups and individuals is
very long. These gallant freedom fighters, who look to the
Security Council for support, can be saved from hanging
only by prompt action by the Council. They are waging a
just struggle which has been endorsed as legitimate. They
are held by a criminal r&me and face execution for their
part in spearheading the struggle which the Council has
declared the special responsibility of the United Nations.
We plead for a resolution demanding their immediate and
unconditional release. And part of the action during this
International Anti-Apartheid Year should take the form of
campaigning for according prisoner-of-war
status to the
captured freedom fighters, whilst the r8gime’s officials,
emissaries, supporters and apologists should, in our view, be
declared and treated as war criminals.

24. In regard to what Mr. Woods says about the moral
force to bring change, we wish to point out that ANC
cannot be faulted in the use of passive resistance. It gives
Erst place to no one but itself in the pursuit of this method
of struggle, which indeed it pursued up to 1960. It was in
the face of Fascist violence that ANC, which had opted for
this form of struggle as a tactic, came to the painful
decision to close this chapter. Mr. Woods would do well to
recall the role played by Chief Albert Luthuli-a role so
important that he won the Nobel Peace Prize. Mr. Woods
will recall also that the launching of Umkonto We Sizwethe Spear of the Nation-on
16 December I961 was the
result of a unanimous decision by the ANC leadership,
including Luthuli, who had arrived back in South Africa on
15 December, following the 12 December Nobel award
ceremony at Oslo. The following day South Africa vibrated
under the explosion of bombs. That was the ANC reply to
the international community: that the decision it had taken
was irreversible.

20. In considering the action to take in the face of these
brutalities, the Council should take into account the fact
that, whereas violence against the black population has
always been part of the South African way of life, the orgy
of violence now going on in the prison cells is unprecedented, Hundreds of political suspects are systematically
and savagely tortured. And although physical assaults
remain part of the interrogators’ arsenal, long periods of
solitary confinement, deprivation of food and sleep and
various combinations of physical and psychological torture
have become prevalent. Detainees are kept in dark cells for
months, in total isolation and at the mercy of the Security
Branch. At times they are questioned continuously for
several days, denied any rest, threatened with death, forced
to do exhausting exercises, to stand on bricks or crouch on
imaginary chairs, until mind and body become too tired to
distinguish between illusion and reality. And, of course,
nobody has the right of access to detainees or to information, even confirmation of detention. People just disappear.
Such provisions are described by one official, Brigadier J. J.
Swanepoel, as a “mighty weapon”. Van den Bergh, the
head of BOSS, the Bureau of State Security-a co-detainee

25. ANC is at ease in pointing out some of these
reservations concerning the role of Mr. Woods because he is
one of many white democrats who have found a political
home under the umbrella of the liberation movement at
large. But we do not understand some of his positions.
26. On the question of the draft resolutions before the
Council our position is well known. On arriving in New
York, we were expecting that the Council would be
presented with a case that conformed with the expectations
of the international community and the struggling people
of South Africa, that is, that one draft resolution on the oil
embargo against the Pretoria regime and one on economic
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter would be
presented and considered.
3

the massacres
at Soweto on 16 June 1976and the national
uprising which took placethroughout the country following thit event. That concern is reflected in Council,
resolution 392 (1976), adopted unanimouslyon 19 June
1976, and more recently in resolution 417 (1977), also
adopted unanimously on 31 October 1977. Theseresolutions soIemnly call on the South African apartheid r6gime
to haIt the killing of its African opponents and others
strugglingagainstthe r&ime. They alsocall for the release
of political prisoners and for the apartheid re’gimeto stop
persecuting its opponentsthrough detention, torture and
other barbaric methods used by South Africa’s security
forces.

klKtdl~Xkd
its this t1light sound,
We have Row taken
the positiw of welcming
ttiese vetoes because the veto
helps t0 clarify tile position
by
mmaS&&g
the
false
friend
28.

alld

idelItifyillg

llclps

to

countries

tlknt

tigime.

It

ItlasF
t]lOSC
at

Imition

IIW
0f

ridding
pW3SllK

of

tile

tllC

WWld

plCC

arId

the

Wi]]

]>JI~]
t]lc

natural

it

level

[X?otJte,

al]&,

analysis
their

it

leaders

Scourge

itltertl~f.iOild
tllc

cauSe.

maSS

h

alsO
those

protecting
the aparthejd
task
in
mobtizhg
the

OUT

]lC]p
(If

African
the

of

our

[“OplC,
iIt

Wh?

f~~lll

tile
at

a record

bCCUZlSC
COlltltrkS

fhlWttZllS
Stillt

elKlIly

the

facilitates

support

cauntries,

the
clarify

iS

the

play
of
wt~o

all

of
aimed
which

Without
are

32. It is well known that FascistPremierVorster and his
croniesin the neo-Nazi National Party regimehave treated
thesereasonableappealswith their customarycontempt for
the United Nations and world public opinion. Rather than
heed these calls, which area repetition of what the General
Assemblyand the Security Councilhave beendemandingof
South Africa for three decades,the Vorster regime is
escalatingits sanguinaryrepression.

those

peop]e
a ro]e

apart/&d,

security.
those

in

convinced

conas

f0 the urgency of a UlKItl~~ of attitude
are left in a weak
position. We have, huwcver 1 aooepted the proposal that the
fW0 drtift U!SOlUfiOWi1 hVC Inerrtioned
s]louId be presented
SOKIC tixltc
in March ie order
to meet the Western countries
half Way LUldtu give thl
the opportunity
to vote in favour
of limited rcsulutiofls including
one which t&es the form
of a measure culling Ibr tile cwsation
of
new
investments.
In tllis
NStXCt,
t il 11 happy tcl ]lave
received assurance that
the African Group will present
the two draft resolutions
Sony tinlc ill March.

33. As I speakto you, the sequelto the Soweto massacres,
the detention of more than 5,000 peoplesincethat time,
the murder of Steve Biko andscoresof other detaineesand
the banning of 17 black consciousness
organizationsand a
white-led antiapartheid group is the seriesof political trials
to which I have already referred. The biggest of the
Terrorism Act triais, aswasstated by the Rand Daily MaiE
of Johannesburgon 18 January, is a trial of 18 men who
are appearingin a speciallycreatedsupremecourt in Bethal,
a remote country town in the eastern Transvaal.In this
case,the apartheid prosecution,with the acquiescenceof
the judge, is demonstratinga vindictivenessthat surpasses
that of any of the travestiesthat have becomea norm in
South Africa. On 16 January, the prosecution vigorous]y
opposed a desired two-month postponementthat would
have enabled the defenceto prepare its caseproperly. AS
was pointed out by the defence,which is led by a junior
counsel, the charge in the SO-pageindictment covers a
period stretching from 1963to 1977. The locations where
the offences are saidto have takenplace arespreadfar and
wide and include the maximumsecurity prisonon Robben
Island, where a number of the accusedservedtime for other
political “crimes”, and whereit is allegedthey plotted the
reorganization of the PanAfricanist Congressunderground
cells. The prosecutor cynically claimed that it would
“embarrassthe State” to have a two-month adjournment
becausemany of the 165 witnesseshe would be calling
were, like the accused,in detention.

29. TIE PIiliSlDl~N’I’: *]‘he next speaker is David Sibeko,
to whom the C’ouncil cxtetlclcd an invitation
at its 2056th
meeting. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table
Wld

LO IlliikC

il StLtlelllb2ttt.

30. Mr, SIBIXI~: Mr. President,
we are al] familiar with
your country’s deep iovolvernent
and outstanding
contributions in the struggle for the total liberation
of Africa.
Similarly, your own personal collrmitment
to this struggle
during ym tong ml rlistinguistled
career as a representative of the Federal Rcput~lic of Nigeria is we11 known. It is
therefore an lroncrur for ,1fric:l that Nigeria has taken its
place in the Security Cou~lcil
and that we have you guiding
the work of this august body nt tNs time.
31, [luring the 363rd rlieetitlg of the Special Committee
against ~parhitf, 1 ttlt? dclcgntion
of the Pan Africanist
c01tgr~ss give ;L&tailtjd account of a spate of political
trials
under wa)p and dut to t:tkc place
against Azanian Patriots
mewed
under the notorious
Terrorisnl
Act in apartheid
South Africa, Wc poitltctl out ttlat tlzose trials were in gross
vil)Iilti(>n of resolutions of the United Nations, that they
pointed to a rapidly
deteriorating situation in South Africa,
and we C&J
ut~ fltt2 rk2irmnn
of the Special Committee to
seek to COIIVCIIC’
ii ltlcetitlg of the Security Council tolook
appen]
from the Pan Africmist
into the situation. “fllis
h~grcss
WAS rlladc
wit11
time knowledge
that the intermi0l~al comlltunity htid become
im=ashdY
deePlY
conccrncd wit11the situatiuJl in South Africa, especially after

34. So yesterday morning this casebegan, without the
necessarysenior counseland without proper preparation.
Defence lawyers only gainedaccess
to their clientsin prison
late last year. The accusedin this caseare mostly ordinary
workers or students. It is therefore exceedinglydifficult for
their families, for most of whom they were the breadwinners, to raisethe highfeesrequiredfor seniorcounsel.It
hasbeen estimated that this trial, which will be a marathon
one, will cost at least 20,000 rand per month. It may
interest membersof the Council to know that at leasttwo
of the accused’swives are also in detention. They are
Mrs. Ebeniah Mothopeng, wife of Zeph Mothopeng, the
4

number one accused, who was the Secretary for Judicial
Affairs of the Pan Africanist Congress before we were
banned in 1960, and Mrs. Viki Zungu, wife of the number
nine accused, chief photographer of 7Jze World, which, as
the Council knows, has now been banned.

apartheid South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter.
We submit that the same logic that convinced the United
Kingdom, France, the United States and their Western allies
to join at last in supporting this measure holds true for
much more punitive measures at this time.

35. The defence in the BethaI 18 case had also applied for
the case to be moved to a more central place in South
Africa because Bethal is a small place and it is difficult for
Africans to find accommodation. Also, it would facilitate
the work of the lawyers who have to come from offices 400
miles away. Some of the relatives have to come from
outside the Transvaal Province, from Capetown, from East
London, from the Transkei and even from Swaziland, as
one of the accused, Alfred Ntshali-T&Ii, is a Swazi citizen.
The defence application was denied by the judge.

40. We are calling for the immediate imposition of total
economic sanctions, under Chapter VII of the Charter,
against the South African apartheid r&me. Those who do
not agree that the Azanian people and their national
liberation movement must use revolutionary violence to
liquidate the reactionary violence of apartheid colonialism,
however much they agree with the justness of our cause, as
they say, cannot be allowed to hide behind high-sounding
condemnations or impotent embargoes, To refuse to use
the one non-violent tactic-economic sanctions-that
can
have the greatest effect in supporting our just struggle, is to
open themselves to the legitimate charge of hypocrisy and
double talk.

36. The tactics of the prosecution confirm what we have
charged and what most of the world knows about the
so-called judicial system in South Africa: political trials
there are a farce. Most of the accused have been in
detention without trial for more than a year; they have
been the subject of harsh interrogations and torturings;
prosecution witnesses are held incommunicado by the
security police; and the judge dismisses out of hand
reasonable applications front the defence counsel. To avoid
the wide attendance that accompanies political trials in
South Africa, and to prevent effective media coverage, the
case against Zeph Mothopeng and his fellow accused is
being held in an obscure and ultra-conservative Boer town.

41. I want to repeat that political trials in South Africa are
a farce. But they cannot be treated lightly because they are
used for very sinister political motives. Through the trials,
the Vorster regime attempts to advertise the efficiency of
its gestapo police in order to intimidate the Azanian people.
Even worse, the trials are used in a genocidal fashion to
exterminate uncompromising Azanian leaders and other
patriots, so that bantustan puppets can be imposed on the
people. These trials are an integral part of the ruthless drive
to make apartheid colonialism work.
42. The heroic resistance of our students and the broad
masses of the people since 16 June 1976 has been a mighty
blow against the upurtheid scheme of things. The massacres,
detentions, tortures, banishment and trials are Vorster’s
retaliation, Our people’s sacrifices have included thousands
dead, thousands incarcerated, thousands banned and thousands exiled. A whole generation has been without schooling for two years at Soweto because the regime denies these
children the universal education they seek. Little children
have had to flee abroad to save their lives, creating an exiled
community composed of some of the youngest people to
flee their fatherland in living memory.

37. In a unique display of callousness and a spirit of
vendetta, amongst the 86 people named as co-conspirators
in this case, the prosecution has placed four who were
obviously tortured to death whilst under detention. These
are Dr. Naboth Ntshuntsha, Aaron Khoza, Samuel Malinga
and Bonaventura Malaza, who was only 18 years of age
when he was killed. Mangaliso Sobukwe, mentioned in the
charge sheet as “the general leader of the Pan Africanist
Congress”, and Potlako K. Leballo, mentioned as “Sobukwe’s second-in-command”,
top the list of 86 coconspirators who are not appearing in court.
38. Other cases against people charged with furthering the
Pan Africanist Congress’ aim of wanting to overthrow the
South African apartheid regime through violence are either
under way or coming up at Pietermaritzburg, Durban,
Johannesburg, East London and Umtata. From among the
thousands who are detained we are informed that more will
be charged. Those charged and now appearing could face the
death sentence when convicted under the Terrorism Act.
From the experience of the famous SAS0 nine trial, we
know
that, even if defence lawyers fight the case successfully, the security police can re-detain their clients and
bring them back to court using the same evidence.

43. Writing in The Times of London, on 24 January,
about those on trial who may escape the death sentence
and get life imprisonment, Jon BIair reminds us that “Iife
imprisonment” means “life” in South Africa, and he
continues:
“With the enormous rise in the prison population in the
last 18 months . . . several hundred young black militant
students of secondary school or university Ievel . . . will
never see freedom again if the South Africans have their
way.”
We are asking the Security Council to help us to ensure that
the South Africans will not have it their way. This is our
fervent appeal.

39. We submit that our argument proving that these
political trials are a farce and a travesty is well substantiated. Considering the countless warnings South Africa has
been given by the Security Council and by the General
Assembly, we contend that it would be futile to crown this
debate with routine condemnations. Last year the Council
finally came around to what had been called for 14 years
before. A mandatory arms embargo was imposed on

44. Finally, Mr. President, 1 want to quote something that
you wrote, in your capacity as Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, ta the International University Exchange Fund at Geneva:
5

“The Special Committee is anxious that the movement
of international solidarity with the struggling pel>pie of
South Africa must develop urgently to match the courage
and sacrifice of the freedom fighters and the needs of the
present situation,”

providing for death sentences, the proclamation of the
so-called independence of another bantustan and the
over-all threat to international peace and security arising
from such policies of that regime.
48. Consequently, we are requesting the Council to adopt
this draft resolution containing seven operative paragraphs
at an appropriate time, as soon as possible. In paragr#aph 1,
the Council would merely reaffirm
its resolutions
417 (1977) and 418 (1977), and in paragraphs 2,3 and 4 it
would merely refer to matters already enunciated .in the
preambular paragraphs. Noting that the subject matter of
those preambular paragraphs is already contained in the
preambular paragraphs of the two resolutions adopted most
recently on the question by the Council, the sponsors
believe that no delegation could possibly find great difficulty with the operative paragraphs based on them.
Paragraph 5 contains a restatement of some of the demands
contained in paragraph 3 of resolution 417 (1977), but WC
feel that the Council should also demand the termination of
all political trials in the country. We also believe that the
Council should meet at an early date to reconsider the
whole question, and the date of 21 March 1978 suggested
in paragraph 6 appears to us to offer a reasonable amount
of time for the regime in South Africa to respond to the
demands and requests that are being addressed to it, ias well
as for those engaged in a dialogue with the rdgime to
conclude their present d&marches or manoeuvres with the
leaders of that rigime. Paragraph 7 is clear and selfexplanatory.

45. The courage of our compatriots cannot be overemphasized, and I have spelled out the needs of the present
situation in so far as concerns the Council. I want to
conclude by informing members of the Council and the
world at large that we are sustaining severe and deep
wounds as a result of apartheid oppression and imperialist
exploitation. The pain we suffer from the oppression and
exploitation is bound to last beyond the inevitable date of
liberation in Azania. At that time we shall not forget who
armed our enemy to inflict the wounds on us, just as we
shall never forget those who armed us so that we could stop
the assaults of apartheid colonialism.
46. Mr, RAMPHUL (Mauritius): On behalf of the African
members of the Council, I should like to introduce for the
Council’s consideration two draft resolutions sponsored
jointly by the three African members-Gabon, Mauritius
and Nigeria-and circulated in documents S/12547 and
S/ 12548. In submitting these draft resolutions, the sponsors
are fully cognizant of some uneasiness on the part of
certain delegations here over the fact that the present series
of debates on the subject on our agenda perhaps do not
offer the most propitious moment for putting these drafts
to the vote. In view of the deteriorating situation in South
Africa and of the intransigence of the minority racist
rdgime in that country, my delegation feels nothing but
sorrowful
disappointment at yet another exhibition of
hesitancy to take decisive, albeit belated, action on the
matter. In the circumstances, the sponsors, after consultations with the non-aligned members of the Council, will, in
a spirit of co-operation and in a hopeful search for
unanimity, consider accommodating those delegations at
the present time.

49. In draft resolution S/12548, we are requesting the
Council to take decisive measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter. There is nothing new or alarming in this. The
Council has already so acted in adopting resolution
418 (1977) and the situation in South Africa has not
changed for the better since then; indeed, it ha:s only
deteriorated. But the provisions of this draft resolution will
give the Council an opportunity to strike at the sensitive
centre that encourages the racist regime in South Africa to
ignore the decisions of the Council, to flout international
public opinion and to frustrate the aspirations of the
majority of that country-namely,
the economic bastion
that is increasing by virtue of the foreign loans, foreign
investments and foreign trade upon which it feeds. We are
calling for a prohibition of the various aspects of that
economic co-operation. In operative paragraph 2, the Council would merely urge all States to reconsider all their
existing economic and other relations with South .Africa.
The aim here is to give such countries an opportunity to
take stock of their economic involvement in South Africa
and prepare alternative channels, so that, if the occasion
should come to respond to a total severance of that
involvement-which
some of us hope that the leaders of
South Africa will be sensible enough not to let happen-no
time would be lost in making the necessary adjustments.
Operative paragraph 3 is, again, clear and straightforward.

47. Nevertheless, for reasons that will become clear in due
course, I shall proceed to explain the main provisions of the
draft resolutions-an
exercise which is hardly necessary,
when we remember that a little over 10 months ago I had
the duty of introducing four similar draft resolutions in the
Council and that since then the Council has adopted two
resolutions on the question of South Africa. Can anyone in
all conscience claim thereafter that the provisions of the
present draft resolutions are ambiguous, unclear or unrelsonable? However, in the two draft resolutions before
the Council, the sponsors are requesting the Council to
recall its resolutions 417 (1977) and 418 (1977) and to
take note of resolution 32/105 adopted by the General
Assembly on 14 and 16 December 1977. In draft resolution
S/12.547, we are also asking the Council to take into
consideration the letter dated 19 January 1978 addressed
to the Secretary-General by the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid and circulated in document
S/ 12536. In the same draft resolution, it is only proper that
the Council should express its grave concern at the
continued violence and brutal repression exercised by the
minority racist rdgime of South Africa against black people
and all opponents of apartheid, the intensified series of
arbitrary trials under the rigime’s racist and repressive laws

50. Those, then, are the major provisions of the twia draft
resolutions which the African members have put before the
Council for consideration, But lest any pedantic observer
should wonder why, if we are not pressing them to a vote
today, we should go through the exercise of introducing
them formally, I wish to stress that in so doing we arc
6

announcing beforehand what we have in mind for another
occasion in the near future. The intervening period should
give an ample OPPortunitY to all thosecurrently engagedin
some dCmarcheor a dialogue of one kind or another to
Completetheir exercise. We do not wish to be accusedof
any rashactions and we sincerelytrust that wein turn shall
have no occasion to impute delaying tactics to them. In
introducing the draft resolutions now, we are also giving
advance reassuranceto the nationalist leadersof South
Africa and to the deprivedmajority in that country that we
are not complacent about the non-fulfilment of their
aspirations.In due course,if nothing of valuecomesout of
the presentexercises,our courseof action wiI1be clear, for
there must be a limit to how long the people of South
Africa can remainsubjugatedin their own country, to how
long the basic demandsof the international community
under the Charter can be flouted by a MemberState andto
how long the Powers primarily responsiblefor the maintenance of international peace and security under the
Charter can sit by when the object of their chargeis so
clearly threatened.

of strong resistanceby the African peopleand in defiance
of the world. It is proceedingwith so-calledconstitutional
proposals,despite the unanimousopposition of all the
black people,with a view to deprivingtheAfrican majority
for eternity of any political rights. It is enacting laws to
makeit impossibleevento provide humanitarianassistance
to the families of political prisoners and victims of
apartheid. In the face of this open defiance by the
apartheid regime and the further aggravation of the
situation, the Security Councilhasthe inescapableduty to
act.
57. In aI] three territories in southern Africa that have
comeunder the shacklesof the Pretoria regime,the racists
have frantically attempted to imposeso-calledsolutions
that would preserveracist domination and deprive the
strugglingpeoplesof those countries of their inalienable
right to dismantlethe structuresof apartheid, racismand
colonialism and to build new societies based on the
principlesof humanequality.
58. In Rhodesia,there is the farce of a so-calledinternal
settlementsponsored
by the illegalregimewhich continues
to survive thanksto the equivocationof the administering
Power and the inability of the Council to take further
action.

51. With those few words I wish,on behalfof the African
members,to request the Council to take note of the draft
resolutionsnow before it for the purposeof appropriate
action on them in the nearfuture.
52. The PRESIDENT: As it appearsthat this will be the
Iast meeting of the Security Council that will take place
during my presidency for the month of January, I should
like to say a few words in my capacity asthe representative
of NIGERIA.
53. In his statement of 26 January/2056th meeting/, the
Commissionerfor External Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Joseph
Garba, dealt fully with the challengeposedto the United
Nations by the situation in South Africa, Namibia and
Rhodesia, and expounded the position of the Federal
Governmentof Nigeria.
54. We listened to Donald Woodsin this chamber(ibid../
and we heard him say that the Pretoria regimeconsidered
the deliberationsof the Security Council asajoke, and the
representativeof India posed the question: Who are the
jokers?
5.5, I believe that there were diminishingreturns in the
armsmarket in South Africa, so we got to the stageof
having a resolution calling for a mandatory armsembargo.
An inability to take action againstthe transnationalsin
their greed for profit at whatever cost to humanity and at
whatever level of degradationof humanvaluesobviously is
the obstaclethat we are faced with in going further in our
task of pressuringthe regimein South Africa to change.

59. In Namibia, the illegal occupying Power seeksto
determinethe processof self-determination.
60. In South Africa, the apartheid regime seeks to
consolidateracist dominationby the imposition of bantu.
stanizationand to exclude the African majority from any
semblance
of power.
61. In the past year, the African Stateshave showntheir
preferencefor peacefulandjust solutionsby welcomingthe
initiatives taken by WesternPowers to find negotiated
solutions. We have said many times that the Western
Powers,which have reinforcedracist domination in southern Africa, have the capacity to prevent a wider conflict if
they are willing to take effective measures
againstthe racist
regimes.One memberof the Council did c&l yesterday for
someinitiative in this matter. But any negotiatedsolutions
must be entirely within the framework of the relevant
resolutionsof the UnitedNations.
62. Africa, which hassufferedoccupationasa result of a
combinationof chicaneryand military power, will remain
vigilant to seethat the strugglingpeoplesof southernAfrica
are not deprivedeternally of the fruits of their struggleby
racist manoeuvres,There can be no peaceand no lasting
settlementunlessthe peopleattain their right to genuine
self-determination
in accordancewith United Nationsresolutions, and Africa will not back any movethat is not based
on this premise.

56. We should like to warn that a continuation of the
killings in South Africa and of the hangingsof patriots will
not only aggravate the situation but will lead to a very
serioustrain of repercussions.Meanwhile, the apartheid
regimehas defiantly refused to abolishthe “Bantu education” system; many schoolsin African locationsare empty
as the result of resignationsby the teachersand a boycott
by the pupils. The apartheid rdgime has proclaimed the
so-calledindependenceof yet anotherbantustanin the face

63. The African Stateshave requestedthe Security Council to consideragainthe questionof South Africa because
of the defianceby the apartheidregimeof the resolutions
adopted unanimously on 31 October and 4 November
1977. The facts are very clear. The apartheid regimehas
further increasedrepressionand killed many peacefuI
demonstratorsagainstapartheid.It haskilled morepolitical
7

international community. It is time for the Security
Council to proceed from mere condemnationsor token
measuresto effective action. We callon the WesternPowers
which have so far resistedsuch action to reassess
their
policies and to act in accordancewith the basicvaluesthey
profess. If they fail to act, they will bear a grave
responsibility for the escalationof violencein South Africa
andits repercussions.

detainees. It has instituted a series of trials under the
notorious Terrorism Act, which lays down a minimum
sentence of five years’ imprisonment and includes the
possibility of death sentences. It seeks to resort to “judicial
murders” in a vain effort to arrest the growing struggle
against apartheid.
64. The Council cannot go on with the practice of merely
condemning the crimes of that r&me, thereby giving it
time to continue committing those crimes and to proceed
with its diabolical plans for bantustanization, which we
observed only a few weeks ago.
65. The African
States indicated that resolution
418 (1977) calling for an arms embargo would be significant only as a first step in a programme of sanctions.In the
draft resolutionsintroduced today by the representativeof
Mauritius (S/12.547 and S/12548], the African Stateshave
proposed that, as a further step, the Security Council
shodd take mandatory action to stop further investments
in South Africa. In its resolution 32/105 0 of 16 December
1977, the General Assembly decided, without a negative
vote and with the abstentionsof only the five Western
membersof the Council, that foreign investmentsin South
Africa “abet and encourage the apartheid policies” of
South Africa. It declaredits conviction that a cessationof
new foreign investments would constitute an important
stepin the strugg’leagainstapartheid.
66. My delegation would like to emphasizethat foreign
investment and loans finance the military, repressiveapparatusin South Africa and facilitate the armsbuild-up by
the apartheid dgime. We all know that to be the truth.
There is a clear correlation between the escalatingmilitary
budget of the Pretoria regime and the flow of funds to
South Africa. I do not want to go into statistics;we have
heard this againand again.

70. The WesternPowershave not hestitated to impose
economic sanctionsagainstother countries.Wetalk about
chicanery whenit comesto others.We do not evenconsider
the economic sanctionsthat have been imposedand some
being consideredby the United StatesCongress
for imposition against certain African countries--becauseof one
leader. The samevaluesare not being extended to South
Africa, where there is a systemiuld where only the whites
benefit from that system.For the WesternPowers1:o find
excuses constantly to resist economic sanctionsagainst
South Africa would hardly be honest or consistentwith
their professions.Think of coffee. Think of Uganda.
71. We are therefore very disappointedthat the Western
Powers,except for Canada,which has taken sontefl3rward
steps-obviously I meanthe four WesternPowers-haveso
far even refrainedfrom participatingin this debate.
72. The initiatives of the Western Powers have been
dangledin our facestime and again.Weare told about the
strategy of tile carrot and the stick. The “carrot” hasbeen
used too often and for too long, but the “stick” hasbeen
forgotten. I amin duty bound to strike a note of warning.
73. One peacetalk or another should not be allowed to
delay meaningfulinternational action againstracistrtigimes,
for that is the “stick”. We are told of pressuresto bring
down Ian Smith, but nobody hasmentioned that in the
context of these talks. We are trying to bring do’wn the
Rhodesian military operation. Peacetalks should not be
used to provide more time to the racist r6gimes to
consolidatetheir positions.

67. The very minimum that the Security Council should
do is to stop all investmentsin and loans to South Africa
which abet and encourage the apartheid regime in its
criminal policiesand provide it with weaponsfor murder in
both South Africa and neighbouring African countries, as
well as in the hostagecountries of Rhodesiaand Namibia.
68. We note that there has been some removal of
investments from South Africa in 1977, but several
transnational corporations continue to increasetheir involvement in that country. The Ford Motor Company is
one example. I do not want to go into details about the
shock that that gaveus a few days ago.No wonder that the
JohannesburgRadio boasted on 19 January that South
Africa had learnt to disregard world opinion, because
American and other businessmenwere expanding their
operations in South Africa. They meant Ford and some
other transnationals-examplesof recent developmentsand
promises of further deveropmentsfor reinforcing investmentsin South Africa.
69. During this debate,we heardan appealby Mr. Donald
Woods for effective economic sanctions against South
Africa. Reports from that country indicate that even the
black leadersin the apartheid institutions have found it
imperative to appeal for economic sanctions by the
8

74. I have been most reluctant to appear to be taking
advantageof being in the Chair, I could have spokenas a
member from the other end of the horse-shoetable. None
the less, I crave representatives’indulgenceto make Sony
observations in respect of Rhodesia,which is directly
linked, as we all know, with the questionof South Africa.
75. It is now commonknowledgethat the racistr6gimeat
Pretoria has,more than any other element,constituted the
channel for the biggestleak in the mandatory sanctions
imposed by this body on Rhodesia.Worsestill, i;t is the
racistswho haveprovided the oil for Smith’sMirageaircraft
and fighter bombers which barely a month ago caused
widespreaddestruction of human lives and property deep
inside Mozambique, an independentsovereignState Member of the United Nations, in flagrant violation of the
sacred principles of the Charter. That is not an IIsolated
incident; there have been continuing incidents of harassment and bombardmentof a poor, independentcountry.
To that extent we therefore feel terribly depressedthat,
even in the face of such atrocities, the Western Powers
should appear to be stalling on the question of taking

simple measures, including legitimate economic sanctions
which would
make continued support for the illegal
minority regime in Rhodesia a painful liability to the South
African Government.

therefore be taken by this augustbody to stem the slide
into a racial confrontation into which both Smith and
Vorster appearto be steeringthe affairsof southernAfrica.
If the West choosesto assistthe Councilin attaining that
objective, posterity will vindicate its position; and if not,
history, as the unbiasedrecorderof events,will alsoprint
that in black and white for future generationsto seeand
judge-just like the enslavementof the African people,like
colonial oppressionand exploitation and like the neocolonialismthat we are experiencingtoday. That will be
another item on the list of the decades,nay, centuriesof
oppressionof the blackpeople.

76. In Rhodesia itself, after more than one full decade of
British inaction and because Zimbabwean patriots, frustrated by years of deceit, decided to take up arms and
secure on the battlefield what had eluded them about eight
times at the conference table, we are suddenly confronted
by an interesting twist which is directly at variance with the
political realities of the Rhodesian scene. We are rather
puzzled by the fact that those who took up arms to fight
for freedom, equality and human dignity for the generality 78. I shouldlike to concludeby reiteratingthat Nigeria,in
of their people should be askedto surrendertheir armsand accordancewith its responsibilitiesas a memberof the
submit to the very authority which, for closeto 13 years, Security Council, will continue to pressfor international
has remained basically insensitiveto the ruthlessoppression action underthe aegisof the Council.
they have patiently endured under a person with a
notorious record of broken promises,deceit, callousness 79. I now resumemy role asPRESIDENTof the Council.
and harassment against the majority of the African
population.
80. The next meeting of the Council to continue its
considerationof the questionof South Africa will be fixed
77. It is high time to put a stop to this charade,and I
by the Presidentfor the monthof Februaryin consultation
personally call on the West to assistand co-operatewith the
Council in one last attempt to salvagethe credibility and with the other membersof the Council.
image of the Council as mankind’s true custodian of
international peace and security. Concerted steps must

Themeetingroseat 12.50p.m.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Nations
publications
throughout
the world,
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
United

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations.Unies
sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Lnformez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies. Section ties ventes, New York au Geneve.
KAIC

JIOJWUNTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

JiS~AHIISl

PUBLICACIONES

OPrAHM3AI~HH

DE

OJS’LEAMHEHHMX

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

NACIONES

HAl&JiR

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.06 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-7000%January

1980--2,200
