A/60/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

60th plenary meeting
Thursday, 1 December 2005,10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hamidon
(Malaysia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/60/L.28, A/60/L.29,
A/60/L.30 and A/60/L.31)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on this item at
its 57th through 59th plenary meetings, on 29 and
30 November 2005.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
make a few additional comments on this item on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and a number of countries
that align themselves with this statement: Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania,
Serbia and Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and Ukraine.
The European Union welcomes the recent
positive developments in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and parts of
the northern West Bank, the Agreement on Movement
and Access and the subsequent opening of the Rafah
border on 25 November 2005, and the forthcoming
multiparty elections for the Palestinian Legislative
Council foreseen for 25 January 2006 all represent

(Sweden)

significant steps towards implementation of the road
map. While recognizing that more remains to be done,
the European Union believes that such developments
should be taken into account when considering the role
of existing United Nations structures.
Equally, the European Union has consistently
supported the objective of streamlining in the General
Assembly as part of the overall process of
revitalization of the Assembly. In that respect, the
European Union was pleased that in the Third
Committee this year, the Palestinian observer
delegation was willing to withdraw its resolution on
Palestinian children incorporating relevant elements
into another existing resolution.
The European Union also supports the updating
and re-examination of existing United Nations
structures, such as the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
better take into account political developments and
realities on the ground. The EU looks forward to
further discussions on this issue. The European Union
has, in the past, had some reservations about the terms
of reference of that United Nations body, as it felt that
it does not sufficiently reflect the spirit of the peace
process. Nevertheless, since the EU now has two
Member States that have historically held a different
view, our voting pattern will respect that position and
reflect it accordingly.
The EU remains committed to the two-State
solution as laid out in the road map and agreed
between the parties, which would result in a viable,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

05-62615 (E)

*0562615*

A/60/PV.60

contiguous, sovereign and independent Palestinian
State existing side by side in peace with Israel, both
living within recognized and secure borders.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolutions A/60/L.28,
A/60/L.29, A/60/L.30 and A/60/L.31.
We turn first to draft resolution A/60/L.28,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Zimbabwe have joined the
list of sponsors.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.

2

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/60/L.28 was adopted by 106
votes to 8, with 59 abstentions (resolution 60/36).
[Subsequently the delegation of Tonga informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution A/60/L.29, entitled “Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat”. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Zimbabwe have joined the list of
sponsors.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,

A/60/PV.60

Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/60/L.29 was adopted by 105
votes to 8, with 59 abstentions (resolution 60/37).
[Subsequently the delegation of Tonga informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution A/60/L.30, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has joined the
list of sponsors.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.

3

A/60/PV.60

Abstaining:
Cameroon, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/60/L.30 was adopted by 160
votes to 7, with 6 abstentions (resolution 60/38).
[Subsequently the delegation of Tonga informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/60/L.31, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zimbabwe have
joined the list of sponsors.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia,

4

Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela,
Viet
Nam,
Yemen,
Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Costa Rica, Nauru, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/60/L.31 was adopted by 156
votes to 6, with 9 abstentions (resolution 60/39).
[Subsequently the delegations of Mexico and of
Timor-Leste informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour, and the delegation
of Tonga that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote on the draft resolutions just adopted, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Laurin (Canada): With regard to the
resolution entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People”, in the
absence of clear value added as a result of the work of
the Committee, Canada maintains its opposition and
believes that the General Assembly should consider
reassigning scarce United Nations resources to efforts
that contribute more directly to the peace process
objectives.
With respect to the resolution entitled “Division
for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”, as we
indicated last year, Canada questions the value of the
work of that Division. We believe that the time has
come for the General Assembly to assess the
effectiveness of that particular body and to consider
reassigning resources to the implementation of
activities more strategic to the protection and

A/60/PV.60

promotion of Palestinian rights and to the achievement
of a peaceful settlement. Canada voted against draft
resolution A/60/L.29 for those reasons.
Finally, with respect to the resolution entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”,
Canada considers it imperative that an explicit and
unequivocal condemnation of suicide bombing be
included in a resolution pertaining to the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine. In the absence
of an explicit condemnation, Canada has taken the
difficult decision to change its vote this year from
support to abstention. That abstention should not be
misinterpreted as signalling any kind of change in
Canadian policy towards the Middle East peace
process. We continue to firmly advocate support for the
objectives of the road map.
Ms. Rivero (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay wishes once again to express its conviction
that a return to the road map is essential and urgent in
order to complete the peace process and achieve as
soon as possible a just and comprehensive settlement
in the Middle East.
Uruguay supports a just and lasting solution
achieved through peaceful means, leading to the
coexistence of two free and independent States, Israel
and Palestine.
My country believes that the creation of a viable,
democratic, sovereign and contiguous Palestine will
ensure the conditions necessary for both peoples to live
in peace within secure, internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with international law and with
the provisions of the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council.
Mr. Southcott (Australia): I am speaking in
explanation of Australia’s vote on draft resolutions
concerning the Division for Palestinian Rights, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People and the Special Information
Programme on the Question of Palestine.
Australia is concerned that a number of
resolutions of the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly are unbalanced in their criticism of Israel.
The singling out of one side only for blame in the
current situation is deeply unhelpful.
Australia remains concerned at the high level of
United Nations Secretariat resources allocated to antiIsraeli activity, including the Division for Palestinian

Rights of the Secretariat and the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. The annual resolutions endorsing those work
units do nothing to streamline or rationalize the
Secretariat’s structure or make its work more balanced.
Similarly, the Special Information Programme on
the Question of Palestine of the Secretariat’s
Department of Public Information is not a constructive
use of United Nations resources, or does it help make
the Secretariat’s work more balanced.
Those resolutions serve only to distract the
parties from more pressing issues and do nothing to
help the peace process.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/60/L/32 and A/60/L.33)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolutions A/60/L.32 and
A/60/L.33.
We turn first to draft resolution A/60/L.32,
entitled “The Syrian Golan”. Algeria has joined the list
of sponsors.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic

5

A/60/PV.60

Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/60/L.32 was adopted by 106
votes to 6, with 62 abstentions (resolution 60/40).
[Subsequently the delegation of Timor-Leste
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour, and the delegation of Tonga that it
had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/60/L.33 is entitled “Jerusalem”. The following
countries have been added to the list of sponsors:
Algeria and Guinea.

6

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Costa Rica, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.

A/60/PV.60

Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Cameroon, El Salvador, Fiji,
Guatemala, Haiti, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/60/L.33 was adopted by 153
votes to 7, with 12 abstentions (resolution 60/41).
[Subsequently the delegation of Timor-Leste
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour, and the delegation of Tonga that it
had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation after the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seat.
Ms. Davis (United Kingdom): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries that align themselves with this statement:
Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, Liechtenstein and
Ukraine.
I would like to explain the vote by the countries
of the European Union on the resolution on the Syrian
Golan.
The European Union remains concerned about the
situation in the Middle East. It reiterates to all parties
the importance of maintaining forward momentum
towards full implementation of the road map. There
can be no military solution to the Middle East conflict.
A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the
situation in the Middle East, including on the Syrian
and Lebanese tracks, must be based on Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), which emphasizes the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
and the need to work for a just and lasting peace in
which every State in the region can live in security, and
on subsequent Security Council resolutions 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003). It must be based on the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, in
particular the principle of land for peace, as well as on
the implementation of the road map and all existing
agreements between the parties. We will continue to
work relentlessly with the regional parties, as part of
the Middle East Quartet, towards that goal.
The European Union wishes to reiterate that a
final peace settlement will not be complete without

taking account of the Israel-Syria and Israel-Lebanon
aspects. Negotiations should resume as soon as
possible with the aim of reaching an agreement.
It should be recalled that, earlier this month, the
European Union voted in favour of the resolution on
the Syrian Golan in the Fourth Committee, which
called upon Israel to desist from changing the
demographic composition of the occupied Syrian
Golan and, in particular, to desist from the
establishment of settlements. We believe that the
resolution on the Syrian Golan under today’s agenda
item contains references that could undermine the
process of bilateral negotiations. For that reason, as in
previous years, the European Union abstained in the
voting on that resolution.
Finally, in the spirit of rationalizing the work of
the General Assembly, the European Union would
prefer to have only one resolution dealing with this
issue before this body.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to explain the votes cast by the delegations of
Brazil and Argentina on resolution 60/40 on the Syrian
Golan, just adopted by the General Assembly.
Brazil and Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution because it is our understanding that its
principal and fundamental thrust relates to the illegality
of the acquisition of territories by force. Paragraph 4 of
Article 2 of the United Nations Charter prohibits the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity of
any State. That is undoubtedly an imperative norm of
international law.
At the same time, I must clarify the position of
our two delegations with respect to operative paragraph
6 of the resolution. We wish to specify that our vote
does not prejudge the contents of that paragraph, and in
particular the reference to the line of 4 June 1967.
I take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Governments of Argentina and Brazil, to reiterate our
appeal to the authorities of Israel and Syria to resume
negotiations with a view to finding a definitive solution
to the situation of the Syrian Golan in conformity with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and in accordance with the principle of land for
peace.
Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): With
respect to resolution 60/40 on the Syrian Golan,
Canada noted last year that the resolution assigns to a

7

A/60/PV.60

single party, Israel, the responsibility for resuming
negotiations while in reality confidence-building
measures and gestures of good will are necessary on
both sides. We do not approve the annual submission
of this resolution in the plenary, while a resolution of
the Fourth Committee on the issue of the Syrian Golan,
which enjoys considerable support, is adopted by the
General Assembly every year. That is why we voted
against the resolution.

Today, the voting has sent a strong message of
encouragement and support to the Palestinian people,
who are living under occupation and suffering
tremendously under the ruthless system of occupation,
and stated in a clear way to them that the Assembly
will continue its support until the Israeli occupation is
terminated and the independent Palestinian State is
established on all of the land that was occupied by
Israel in 1967, including East Jerusalem.

With respect to resolution 60/41 on Jerusalem,
which we support, Canada believes that the status of
Jerusalem can be resolved only in the framework of a
comprehensive settlement of the situation between
Palestine and Israel. The issue of Jerusalem has yet to
be negotiated and Canada strongly urges Israel to
refrain from taking any step that would be prejudicial
to a just and negotiated peace.

Our people are not interested in resolutions. They
are more interested in moving from this aisle where I
sit to a seat among those who represent their own
countries here. We want to be as equal as anybody else.
We have been denied that right for the longest time,
and to those who think we are interested in resolutions
and who characterize those resolutions as biased and
one-sided, we say that what is biased and one-sided is
the action of the Israeli occupation. What is more
violent: words and resolutions, or the actions of the
Israeli occupation army? To those who think that these
resolutions are anti-Israel, we simply say that these
resolutions are upholding international law and that it
is the business of the United Nations and the General
Assembly to respect international law and to uphold it.
If Israel or any country violates international law, it is
our collective responsibility to tell that party — be it
Israel or any other — that nobody is above
international law.

Mr. Bagherpour Ardekani (Islamic Republic of
Iran): We voted in favour of the resolutions just
adopted under agenda items 14 and 15 on the question
of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East,
respectively.
The views of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
those important issues were articulated during the
general debate and the debate on the question of
Palestine in this Assembly. In short, we believe that a
durable peace in Palestine will be possible through
justice, an end to discrimination, an end to the
occupation of all Palestinian territories, the return of
all Palestinian refugees, the resort to democratic means
to determine the wishes of the people, and the
establishment of a democratic Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I give the floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): The voting that has
taken place this morning, endorsing — as usual, in an
overwhelming manner — the rights of the Palestinian
people and renewing the mandates of programmes
related to Palestine, is a clear indication of the will of
the international community to uphold international
law and to support what is right and what is just. We
are very gratified that additional countries have shifted
their votes by voting in support of those programmes,
and we are extremely delighted to see such results.

8

We would kindly ask those countries that lecture
us about the programmes of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and others being unbalanced and anti-Israel to
study carefully what those programmes are doing.
When the Committee is actively trying to have
activities in Europe, and maybe in Japan and other
countries to support the Quartet process and the peace
process at the political and the economic levels, does
that contradict what we are doing, or is it contributing
an additional effort to move the peace process forward?
Again, we are very, very proud of this moment, and we
hope that we can engage in intensive discussions and
dialogue with those who hold different opinions — and
they are in the extreme minority — so that we can
perhaps achieve a mutual understanding and the voting
might be different.
In this connection, I want to express our thanks
and gratitude to many countries and groups, including
the European Union. We negotiated with them during
the course of the last three months with a positive,

A/60/PV.60

constructive and flexible attitude. We are proud of the
fact that we were able to accomplish many positive
things, and both sides accommodated each other in a
positive way. We declare our commitment to maintain
the positive spirit that our side has demonstrated in this
exercise, in order to accomplish much more. I should
also like to declare our willingness to other countries,
including one country that, unfortunately, changed its
vote. We negotiated with that country in a very positive
spirit and will continue to do so. We hope that when we
negotiate in a positive spirit we will be rewarded, not
punished.
I should like to conclude my intervention by
reiterating our deep appreciation and thanks to those
who co-sponsored our resolutions as well as to those
who voted in favour of them. We hope that next year
the Palestinian people will be very much closer to
accomplishing their objective of having their own
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to express my delegation’s
appreciation for the adoption by the General Assembly,
moments ago, of the resolution on the Syrian Golan
and the other resolutions on the Palestinian question.
The outstanding votes in favour of the resolutions,
including that on the Syrian Golan, reflect one very
clear fact: the support of the international community
of our right to recover our lands occupied by Israel.
That occupation has gone on for the last 38 years.
We have listened to some colleagues commenting
on rationalizing and streamlining the work of the
General Assembly, including reducing the number of
resolutions adopted. I am sincere when I say that we
are all for it. However, it is truly regrettable that the
enthusiasm for rationalization is present only when
resolutions on the Middle East and Palestine are
submitted — and this at a time when resolutions
proliferate and mushroom due to actions by the same
people who call for rationalization in other areas which
serve certain interests and objectives. These, we

believe, are among the aspects that truly require
rationalization. We would have hoped for a single
consistent standard. The overwhelming majority of
Member States support the United Nations programmes
on the Middle East and Palestine, and we are quite
satisfied with that.
In conclusion, I would like to stress Syria’s great
appreciation to those Member States that sponsored the
resolution on the Syrian Golan and the States that
voted in favour of that resolution. I would also like to
stress that Syria will forever remain sincere in its call
for the realization of a just and comprehensive peace,
something that continues to be rejected by the Israeli
Government. We hope that States calling for the
realization of this just and comprehensive peace will
address the relevant party in reference to this matter
and bring pressure to bear on Israel to resume the
peace process, which we believe is the only way to
realize a promising future in the Middle East region.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 14.
Before adjourning this meeting, I would like to
inform members that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of decisions from the
2005 World Summit Outcome for action by the
Secretary-General, in particular regarding the ethics
office; the comprehensive review of governance
arrangement, including an independent external
evaluation of the auditing and oversight system; and
the independent audit advisory committee, will be
issued tomorrow, 2 December, as document A/60/568.
This report will be considered in informal consultations
under the co-chairs in charge of the Secretariat and
management reform, namely, Mr. Munir Akram,
Permanent Representative of Pakistan and Mr. Allan
Rock, Permanent Representative of Canada, on
Tuesday, 6 December. Members are advised to consult
the Journal for the time and venue of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

9
