A /75/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

69th plenary meeting

Monday, 24 May 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Picco (Monaco),
Vice-President, took the Chair.

I now give the floor to the representative of India to
introduce draft amendment A/75/L.89.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Mr. Sharma (India): I take the floor to introduce
draft amendment A/75/L.89 to draft decision
A/75/L.86, entitled “Participation of non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations, academic
institutions and the private sector in the high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS”. The amendment seeks to restore
the Indian academic institution MIT World Peace
University to the annex to draft decision A/75/L.86.

Agenda item 145 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Letter dated 21 May 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly (A/75/661/Add.3)
The Acting President: I would like, in keeping
with established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/75/661/Add.3, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/75/661/Add.2,
the Congo has made the payment necessary to reduce
its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of
the Charter of the United Nations.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of
the information contained in document A/75/661/Add.3?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 10 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on
HIV/AIDS
Draft decision (A/75/L.86)
Draft amendment (A/75/L.89)
The Acting President: Members are reminded that
the debate on the item will be held during the high-level
meeting to be held from 8 to 10 June 2021.

Civil society organizations are part of the fabric
of every country and play a critical role in the robust
democratic polity of any nation, as is the case in
India. We deeply value their contribution to our
nation-building process. That is particularly true of
the health sector, where such organizations help to
ensure the continuity of care from health facilities to
the community and provide world-class HIV prevention
and treatment services, which can serve as local sources
of capacity-building for addressing existing and new
health concerns.
Efforts made by civil society organizations have
been critical for advocating and improving HIV/
AIDS programming and overcoming many of the
major challenges in the HIV/AIDS response. Networks
of civil society organizations have delivered and
continue to deliver life-changing services to those most
affected and provide support for access to treatment,
prevention and other essential health services, but
those achievements should not be jeopardized. The
diminishing space for civil society globally and an
increasingly hostile political and social landscape call
for an urgent response.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-12767 (E)

*2112767*

A/75/PV.69

The name of the Indian academic institution, MIT
World Peace University, which has been omitted from
the list of the organizations approved to participate in the
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS, needs to be restored
so that it can contribute to and enrich discussions on
this pressing issue of global concern. The university
is recognized by the University Grants Commission
of India. With a teaching faculty of more than 300
qualified professors, the university offers high-level
academic courses to more than 50,000 students on its
10 campuses and 65 institutes. The university has a
school dedicated to public health, as well as a school
of pharmacy, and engages in research on health and
medical issues. We firmly believe that the university’s
participation and intervention will contribute greater
understanding to our approach towards HIV prevention
and contribute to shaping our efforts in tackling AIDS
as a public health threat.
The right to free speech and expression is the soul
of democracy. The Constitution of India guarantees the
freedom of speech. That right, exercised by genuine
actors of civil society and academic institutions,
contributes positively to the development of society.
We urge the world community, through the General
Assembly, to stand with the universal right of freedom
of expression and lend support to the voice of genuine
civil society organizations in contributing to our
discussions on global issues, as important stakeholders.
We urge Member States to support the amendment and
vote in favour of it, should it be put to the vote.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to
consider draft decision A/75/L.86 and draft amendment
A/75/L.89 thereto, delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of position are invited to do
so in one intervention. May I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Korac (United States of America): Civil
society are our eyes and ears on the ground and give
us critical information and perspectives on a number of
issues and should be at the table at all United Nations
meetings, including at the high-level meeting on HIV/
AIDS. Civil society participation is critical to the highlevel meeting. Civil society plays a key role in HIV/
AIDS advocacy and service delivery.
Without civil society, fewer services would be
available to key populations, people in remote areas
would have to travel greater distances for services and
2/9

24/05/2021

many of the gains made in treatment thanks to civil
society and advocacy would not exist. Without those
lead efforts in the fight against HIV/AIDS on the
ground, we simply would not have a high-level meeting.
Draft amendment A/75/L.60, which was adopted
by a comfortable margin on 23 February before the
adoption of resolution 75/260 on the organization
of the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS (see
A/75/PV.55), re-established a long-standing practice
for the high-level meeting. Asking for objections to
be brought for decision by the General Assembly
increases transparency and accountability and enables
the entire General Assembly membership, as opposed
to one or a small group of Member States, to decide
on the participation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs).
We are particularly concerned about the increasing
trend of Member States objecting to NGOs from another
country. The fate of a reputable and credible NGO should
not be determined behind closed doors by the objections
of one or a few Member States. The General Assembly
must consider the criteria set forth by the Committee
on Non-Governmental Organizations in determining
eligibility for participating in a meeting and push back
against politicizing the work of civil society.
The organization before us today has met all of
the criteria of the Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations. Civil society’s greatest added value
is that it works across countries, regions and issues
and pushes each of us to do better as Governments.
The voices that disagree with Governments are as
important — if not even more important — to shedding
light on problems and they push all Member States to
do better.
We have a lot more work to do to increase civil
society participation across the United Nations and we
will continue those efforts for future modalities and
meetings. The United States will vote in favour of draft
amendment A/75/L.89, should it be put to the vote, and
encourages all others to do the same.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting of the General Assembly
clearly demonstrates what we warned about in February
(see A/75/PV.55). Through distorted reasoning and
misleading and patently false arguments, the established
practice of the General Assembly was flouted — a
practice that was adopted by consensus to ensure the
participation of non-governmental organizations not
21-12767

24/05/2021

enjoying consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council, subject to the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly and the intergovernmental nature
of its work, and one that has worked successfully for
many years.
Consequently, the delegations that initiated an
unseemly manoeuvre under specious pretexts in
February got what they wanted today. Specifically, they
caused the General Assembly to consider an issue that
does not fall within its purview. They have undermined
the prerogatives of the Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations and the effective division of labour within
the United Nations system. They have unnecessarily
politicized the debate. They have divided Member
States in the General Assembly instead of helping to
resolve differences and helping interested delegations
to resolve contentious issues through bilateral dialogue.
That is all the more regrettable given that restrictions
related to the coronavirus disease pandemic have
limited the number of observers in the Hall and access
to online broadcasting, which would allow everyone to
follow the meeting.
It is also disappointing that such steps were imposed
on the General Assembly under the shining banner
of transparency. Where was such transparency in the
selection process of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) for their participation in multilateral hearings
in preparation for the high-level meeting on HIV/
AIDS? Who selected the NGOs and on what criteria
was their selection based? Why are the findings of a
group of organizations established in that manner being
presented as the views of civil society at large?
I would also like to ask the Secretariat, which
is responsible for verifying NGO applications, the
following questions. How did the list come to include
organizations that advocate the legalization of the use of
drugs, which contravenes United Nations legal policy?
How did organizations that promote the legalization
of prostitution get on the list? How does that square
with the zero-tolerance policy of the Organization on
that issue? What is the purpose of such a list? Is it to
give a voice to civil society to express its views or to
provide drug and crime syndicates with a pulpit at the
General Assembly?
We are glad that a number of organizations that are
actually working to help people living with HIV and to
prevent the spread of the disease were included in the
list of NGOs. They maintain a constructive if not always

A/75/PV.69

easy dialogue with national Governments. We are
pleased that Russian NGOs also count among them. We
appreciate the contribution of such organizations to our
work in the context of relevant authorized procedures.
At the same time, it is impossible to talk about
any sort of balance among the NGOs on the list with
divergent views. The list disproportionately represents
organizations that bring together proponents of a
lifestyle that is replete with risks with regard to HIV/
AIDS and advocate for the entrenchment of that lifestyle
as a social norm. Unfortunately, the direction that the
discussion has taken in that context is not conducive
to promoting healthy lifestyles and traditional family
values as a way to prevent HIV/AIDS.
We once again call on our colleagues in the
General Assembly to reflect on how we collectively
decide to take action. For our part, we advocate strict
adherence to the practices established in the General
Assembly, which have been reaffirmed by years of
consensus. We believe that it is important to respect
the intergovernmental nature of the Assembly’s work.
Every organ and subsidiary body of the United Nations
system has its own functions and rules. Failure to keep
them separate will affect the effectiveness of our work,
as we have seen in practice.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
attaches great importance to the 2021 high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS and we will continue to work
with other Member States towards ensuring a positive
outcome, thereby injecting fresh political impetus
into international cooperation on the prevention and
treatment of HIV/AIDS.
China has been a consistent supporter of the
participation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), civil society organizations and others in
the work of the United Nations. At the same time,
we must emphasize that the United Nations is an
intergovernmental organization. Therefore, any
decision concerning the participation of any NGO at
United Nations events must be based on the absence of
any objection from Member States. That is an important
principle on which the United Nations operates and the
inalienable right of all Member States.
China has serious concerns about draft amendment
A/75/L.89. The organization listed therein is engaged
in political activities that, while they have nothing to do
with HIV/AIDS prevention or treatment, are directed
against Member States and challenge their sovereignty

21-127673/9

A/75/PV.69

and territorial integrity. China unequivocally objects to
the participation of that organization at the high-level
meeting and is opposed to the draft amendment.
Ms. Dickson (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by thanking the co-facilitators for their work
on draft resolution A/75/L.86. We look forward to
supporting the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS. We
are grateful that the newly agreed modalities allow us
to see the rationale for objections to the participation of
non-governmental agencies (NGOs). Such transparency
is essential for ensuring that the high-level meeting
will introduce voices from a various range of experts
in the field of HIV/AIDS and we are grateful that the
modalities have returned the decision-making power to
the Assembly.
However, the non-objection basis does not have to
be the norm in the General Assembly and we regret that
Member States continue to use the non-objection basis
to attempt to block NGOs from other countries.
We know that the high-level meeting has a long
history of civil society participation dating back to
2001. Each and every participant has brought a valuable
perspective to our conversation here in New York. We
know that civil society plays a central role in the front
line of the fight against HIV/AIDS, working diligently
to improve access to antiretroviral treatments and
tackle the stigma that HIV/AIDS patients face.
We continue to have much work to do in combating
HIV/AIDS. Therefore, it is crucial that civil society
organizations be granted wide participation in the
high-level meeting. Their input to that important topic
is incomparable. Since civil society organizations often
serve as resources and service providers, it would be
a disservice not to take advantage of all the tools we
have. That includes partnerships with civil society. We
call on those who wish to contribute to the fight against
HIV/AIDS to join us in supporting draft amendment
A/75/L.89.
The United Kingdom will continue to champion
the inclusion of civil society voices at the United
Nations at various high-level meetings, conferences
and summits through accreditation by the
Economic and Social Council and the Committee on
Non-Governmental Organizations.
Ms. Saleem (Pakistan): My delegation would like
to support the statements made by the representatives
of China and Russia. We believe in constructive
4/9

24/05/2021

engagement and dialogue and my delegation fully
supports the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). They have contributed to
enriching the discussions at the United Nations and
contributing diverse perspectives to different meetings.
We greatly value the participation of civil society
organizations in the upcoming HIV/AIDS high-level
meeting. However, new norm-setting and bringing in
new precedents should not allow us to polarize the work
of the General Assembly. We should adhere to rules
and procedures and the existing guidelines. There are
parameters for the participation of NGOs and for that
purpose we have the Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations, which grants accreditation to a number
of NGOs. Currently the number stands at more than
5,000. Their participation is greatly valued. However,
the participation of a particular NGO pitching against
the interests of one State or another and polarizing the
work of the General Assembly is highly regrettable.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position. We will now take
action on draft decision A/75/L.86 and draft amendment
A/75/L.89 thereto.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of draft amendment
A/75/L.89 and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft amendment A/75/L.89: Belgium,
Bhutan, the Comoros, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, the Netherlands, the Niger, Poland, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Sweden.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to take a
decision on draft decision A/75/L.86, in accordance with
rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall
first take a decision on draft amendment A/75/L.89.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft amendment A/75/L.89?
Draft amendment A/75/L.89 was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft decision A/75/L.86, entitled
“Participation of non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations, academic institutions and the
21-12767

24/05/2021

private sector in the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS”,
as amended.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/75/L.86, as amended?
Draft decision A/75/L.86, as amended, was adopted
(decision 75/566).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those who wish to speak in explanation of position on
the draft decision just adopted, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to reiterate that China opposes the participation of
the Maharashtra Institute of Technology World Peace
University in the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS
and therefore dissociates itself from the amendment to
decision 75/566.
Ms. Shmat (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
wishes to reaffirm its interest in convening an effective
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS.
The Republic of Belarus joined the consensus
on decision 75/566, however we do not support
the procedure that was used to compose the list of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) participating
in the high-level meeting, namely taking a separate
decision subject to a possible vote.
We insist on preserving established procedures for
the consideration of the participation of NGOS on a
non-objection basis and we underscore the inarguable
and inalienable right of States in that connection.
Moreover, going forward, we call for compliance
with the deadlines for submitting amendments in order
to ensure that delegations have enough time to consult
and agree their positions with their capitals.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position on the decision just
adopted.
I give the floor to the observer of the European
Union, who wishes to make a statement after the
adoption of the decision.
Ms. Ludwig (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its 27 member
States. The candidate countries of the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential

A/75/PV.69

candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova; align themselves with
this statement.
We highly welcome today’s session of the General
Assembly — and of course its outcome — dedicated
to taking a final decision on the list of civil society
organizations that will participate in and contribute
their experiences and support to the important fight
against HIV/AIDS. This meeting provides the necessary
transparency and restores the power of decision-making
on the participation of civil society organizations in the
work of the Assembly.
We must nevertheless admit that we were surprised
by the interpretation and implementation of the
paragraph in the modalities resolution concerning the
participation of civil society organizations (resolution
75/260, para. 11). Given that the modalities define that
the list will include proposed as well as final names, we
would have expected to be presented with a complete
list comprising all proposed stakeholders for our
consideration today, or at least transparency with regard
to changes made to the list submitted for adoption.
HIV/AIDS claims lives on a daily basis and
shatters families and communities. Every case that
can be prevented saves lives and spares grievances
and life-long treatment, as well as economic resources.
Approximately 2 million people became newly infected
with HIV in 2019, about 40 million are currently living
with it and an estimated 7 million are not even aware of
their status and might spread it further.
The activities of civil society organizations have
been crucial for decades and merit a huge claim of
the success and progress made to date. The work of
civil society organizations to promote knowledge of
prevention and treatment and fight against stigmatization
is highly commendable. Their valuable outreach and
mobilization capabilities have been acknowledged and
taken into consideration since the beginning.
Given the challenges ahead, we cannot afford
to have experiences unheard to lack the support of
any stakeholder in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Civil
society participation in the high-level meeting is a
high priority for the European Union, which is why we
supported the amendment to reinstate the participation
of civil society organizations to the full list. We support

21-127675/9

A/75/PV.69

all voices being heard so that broad experience-sharing
can take place.
As we did not hear any convincing arguments as to
why a particular civil society organization should not
be relevant in the context of HIV/AIDS, we are happy
to see that the final list now includes all civil society
organizations that were contained in the initially
proposed list.
The fight against HIV/AIDS is not over. It is a
long-term fight and much still needs to be done. In
that regard, we are looking forward to an inclusive and
successful high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 10.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/75/L.88)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.88.
Mr. Lennartsson (Sweden): I am pleased to
introduce, on behalf of Kenya and my own country,
Sweden, draft resolution A/75/L.88, entitled
“International meeting entitled “Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all — our
responsibility, our opportunity”.
Allow me at the outset to thank delegations for their
active engagement during the informal consultations.
Next year will mark 50 years since the pioneering
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment
was held in Stockholm in 1972, a conference that greatly
contributed to the emergence of a global environmental
agenda through its various outcomes, including the
creation of the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP).
Over the past five decades, Member States have
agreed and committed to action, notably through
landmark conferences held in Rio de Janeiro and
Johannesburg, as well as through the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. While
significant progress has been made in meeting many
6/9

24/05/2021

sustainable development challenges, the science is
clear: environmental changes are undermining hardwon development gains. The implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals is lagging and the
pandemic has caused further severe setbacks. We need
to do more, faster and together.
Tackling biodiversity loss and pollution, climate
change and the transition towards a 1.5°C world will
require different responses from each of us. However,
no country will be able to resolve the challenge alone.
The coming decade is crucial. A multilateral approach
is necessary.
The title of the Stockholm+50 meeting calls
attention to the fact that our challenges are
interconnected: a healthy planet for the prosperity of all
is essential to achieving sustainable development and to
ensure the well-being of this and future generations. It
also highlights that it is our responsibility to leverage
that opportunity.
Stockholm+50 should be a platform to promote
collective action for strengthened cooperation
and the accelerated implementation of sustainable
development, including its environmental dimension,
with a focus on cross-cutting actions that are designed
to reduce inequalities and particularly benefit poor and
vulnerable groups. Stockholm+50 will also contribute to
advancing a sustainable recovery from the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
Success will require a whole-of-United-Nationssystem approach. The draft resolution requests UNEP
to serve as the focal point for providing support to the
organization of Stockholm+50. In that capacity, UNEP
will be well positioned to support preparations and
discussions, allowing for co-creation across United
Nations system entities and ensuring coherence and
consistency between Stockholm+50 and UNEP@50.
The United Nations Environmental Assembly of UNEP
and other relevant United Nations bodies are invited to
provide input to the meeting, as appropriate.
The Stockholm+50 international meeting will be
convened in Stockholm on 2 and 3 June 2022. Sweden
will assume financial responsibility for the costs of
the meeting.
By adopting this enabling draft resolution, a first
important step towards Stockholm+50 will be taken.
We are looking forward to the constructive engagement
of Member States and a speedy process for considering
21-12767

24/05/2021

and agreeing on the modalities for Stockholm+50
before the end of the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly.
Once again, I would like to thank all delegations
for their active engagement in the process so far.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/75/L.88.
(spoke in French)
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes draft
resolution A/75/L.88, on holding the international
meeting entitled “Stockholm+50”. We would like to
express our gratitude to the delegations of Sweden
and Kenya for the initiative and for the readiness to
provide Member States with the opportunity to jointly
commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in
the city where it was held, Stockholm. We note the
constructive and pragmatic approach of the delegations
to the work on the draft text. We particularly thank
the representatives of the Group of 77, the European
Union and the United Kingdom for their flexibility,
constructive approach and creative proposals and
for cooperating in the true United Nations spirit of
multilateralism. By Sweden and Kenya taking the
views of all delegations into account, it was possible
to achieve a clear and balanced draft text, providing
a sound basis for agreeing the remaining details for
the event.
It is important that the draft resolution that I hope
we are about to adopt should reflect the history of the
process of sustainable development from the Stockholm
Conference and the subsequent development of the Rio
principles through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
During the international meeting next year, we
will discuss ways to accelerate progress given the
impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which
has caused serious global economic damage. As is
known, developing States find themselves in a very

A/75/PV.69

difficult situation. In that context, it is important
that our discussion take into due account not only
the environmental, but also the economic and social
dimensions of sustainable development and that the
proposed measures help to bridge the gap between
developed and developing countries, while decreasing
the anthropogenic impact on the environment. For our
part, we are also ready to work constructively in the
same manner on the modalities of the event in order to
ensure that a comprehensive discussion that takes the
interests of all States into account.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.88, “International
meeting entitled ‘Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the
prosperity of all — our responsibility, our opportunity’”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/75/L.88, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bhutan, Bulgaria,
Canada, Colombia, the Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Libya, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, the Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, the United Arab
Emirates and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.88?
Draft resolution A/75/L.88 was adopted (resolution
75/280).
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor for explanations of vote or position after
adoption, may I remind delegations that explanations

21-127677/9

A/75/PV.69

24/05/2021

are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

reference, follows a similar format, is concise and is
adopted by consensus in a short time frame.

Mr. Diallo (Guinea): I have the honour to deliver
this statement in explanation of position on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.

Ms. Korac (United States of America): The
United States firmly supports efforts to promote an
international meeting dedicated to environmental
protection and sustainable development for all, and we
are pleased to join the consensus on resolution 75/280.
We thank Sweden and Kenya for their leadership on this
text and for their work to ensure that the text reflects
the views of all United Nations delegations.

We thank the co-facilitators, Sweden and Kenya,
for their efforts in the negotiation process to achieve
consensus on the adoption of resolution 75/280
“International meeting entitled ‘Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all — our
responsibility, our opportunity’”. We also welcome
the generous offer of Sweden to host and to assume
the costs of the international meeting, with the support
of Kenya.
As reflected in paragraph 1 of the resolution,
the decision to convene this international meeting
is to commemorate the 50 years since the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment
and its outcome documents. This meeting will
take place as a contribution to the environmental
dimension of sustainable development to accelerate
the implementation of commitments in the context
of the decade of action and delivery for sustainable
development, including a sustainable recovery from the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
In that regard, the Group understands that there will
be no expectation to redefine, renegotiate or mandate
new mechanisms or new commitments or to go beyond
the provisions of multilateral environmental agreements.
We also note that the international meeting will
result in a summary of discussions as its outcome
document, as indicated in paragraph 5.
The Group highlights the decisions that the
international meeting should be mutually reinforcing
with the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), avoiding overlap and
duplication, and the role of UNEP in the preparations
of the meeting, as well as the invitation to the United
Nations Environment Assembly of UNEP and the
Committee of Permanent Representatives to UNEP in
order to provide input leading up to Stockholm+50. We
look forward to those contributions to the preparatory
process and the international meeting.
We note that the decision of holding this event as
an international meeting has followed the precedent
of resolution 57/262. Therefore, we look forward to
a modalities resolution that takes such a text as its
8/9

The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 19.
Agenda item 54 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/75/413/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I
shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Committee that is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. May I remind Member
States that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the
General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
21-12767

24/05/2021

explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in

A/75/PV.69

paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
75/281).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

21-127679/9
