S/PRST/2001/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 May 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4320th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 May 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
between Eritrea and Ethiopia”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“Recalling all previous resolutions and statements of its President
regarding the situation between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the Security Council
emphasizes the importance of the commitments undertaken by the Government
of the State of Eritrea and the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia to the Agreement of Cessation of Hostilities signed in Algiers on
18 June 2000 (S/2001/601) and the subsequent Peace Agreement between the
parties (S/2000/1183) signed in Algiers on 12 December 2000 (“Algiers
Agreements”).
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the SecretaryGeneral’s role in helping to implement the Agreements, including through his
own good offices, and for the efforts of his Special Representative. It further
expresses its appreciation for the continued role of the Organization of African
Unity in helping to implement the Algiers Agreements.
“The Security Council also reiterates its appreciation for the continued
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
both to the troop-contributing countries and to those Member States that have
provided UNMEE with additional assets.
“The Security Council encourages both parties to continue working
towards the full and prompt implementation of the Agreements and, in this
context, to take concrete confidence-building measures. The Council further
reaffirms its continued commitment to a peaceful definitive settlement of the
conflict. In this connection, the Council notes with satisfaction that the parties
have agreed to the Secretary-General’s proposal of 1 May 2001, on the
composition of the Boundary and Claims Commissions, critical components to
the peaceful definitive settlement of the conflict. It now calls on the parties to
fully cooperate with the Boundary Commission and to fulfil their financial
responsibilities regarding the Boundary Commission’s work.
“The Security Council stresses that the parties must provide free
movement and access for UNMEE and its supplies as required throughout the
territories of the parties, without any restrictions, including within the

01-37277 (E) 150501

*0137277*

S/PRST/2001/14

Temporary Security Zone (TSZ) and the 15 km wide adjacent area. Free and
unhindered access for UNMEE is a fundamental condition for the success of
the peacekeeping operation. The Security Council emphasizes further that the
purpose of the TSZ is to separate the parties’ armed forces. The TSZ must be
completely demilitarized. The civilian populations inside the TSZ should be
supported by an appropriate but limited number of Eritrean civilian militia and
police.
“The Security Council calls on the parties to cooperate fully and
expeditiously with UNMEE in the implementation of its mandate and to abide
scrupulously by the letter and spirit of their agreements, particularly regarding
the inviolability of the TSZ. It also calls on both parties to exercise restraint in
their public statements.
“The Security Council further calls on the parties to continue to facilitate
mine action in coordination with the United Nations Mine Action Service. It
encourages the parties to exercise caution in returning civilians to the TSZ
before it has been adequately demined. The Council further calls for the
immediate establishment of a secure air corridor between Addis Ababa and
Asmara that does not require a detour through other countries. It also calls on
Eritrea to conclude the necessary Status of Forces Agreement for UNMEE.
“The Security Council notes that, in accordance with paragraph 16 of
resolution 1298 (2000) of 17 May 2000, the arms embargo on the parties
expires on 16 May 2001. The Council recognizes that the Algiers Agreements
are consistent with paragraphs 2 through 4 of resolution 1298 (2000). Under
the current circumstances, the measures imposed by paragraph 6 of the same
resolution have not been extended by the Council beyond 16 May 2001.
“The Security Council urges the parties to ensure that efforts are
redirected from weapons procurement and other military activities towards the
reconstruction and development of both economies, and regional
reconciliation, with a view to achieving stability in the Horn of Africa. The
Council reiterates its encouragement of Member States to exercise the highest
degree of responsibility in discouraging arms flows to countries and regions
emerging from armed conflicts.
“The Security Council remains vigilant and expresses its intention to take
appropriate measures if the situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia again
threatens regional peace and security.
“The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.”

2
