after discussion with the parties and with the Chief of
Staff, he considers would reduce existing tensions along
the- armistice demarcation lines, including the following
points:

parties et avec le Chef d•etat-major, les mesures qu'il
considerera comme devant reduire la tension actuelle sur
les lignes de demarcation de !'armistice, et notamment
les mesures suivantes:

(a) Withdrawal of their forces from the armistice
demarcation lines;
(b) Full freedom of movement for United Nations
observers along the armistice demarcation lines, in the
demilitarized zones and in the defensive areas;

a) Que Jes parties retircnt Jeu.rs forces des ligncs de
demarcation de !'armistice;

(c) Establishment of local arrangements for the pre-

vention of incidents and the prompt detection of any
violations of the Armistice Agreements;

c) Qu'elles s'cntendent localement pour prevenir Jes
incidents et constater rapidement toute violation dL:s
Conventions d 'armistice;

4. Calls upon the parties to the General Armistice
Agreements to co-operate with the Secretary-General
in the implementation of this resolution;

4. Requiert lcs parties aux Conventions d 'armistice
general de cooperer avec le Secretaire general a la misc en
ceuvre de la presente resolution;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council in his discretion but not later than one month
from this date on the implementation given to this
resolution in order to assist the Council in considering
what further action may be required.

5. Demande au Secretaire general de faire rapport au
Conseil, a une date qu'il fixera Iui-meme mais au plus
tard dans Ull mois, sur la suite donnee a la presente resolution, de fai;on a aider le Conscil a examiner quelles
nouvelles mesures pourraient ctrc necessaires.

b) Qu 'elles donnent aux observ::itcurs de, Nations
Unies plcine liberte de mouvement le long des lignes de
demarcation de I 'armistice, dans Jes ,ones demilitarisees
et dans Jes regions defensives;

Adoptee a /'unanimite
722' seance.

Adopted unanimously at the
722nd meeting.

114 (1956). Resolution of 4 June 1956

114 (1956). Resolution du 4 juin 1956

[S/3605]

[S/3605]

The Security Council,

a la

Le Conseil de securite,

Recalling its resolutions 113 (1956) of 4 April 1956
and 73 (1949) of 11 August 1949,

Rappe/ant ses resolutions I 13 (1956) du 4 avril 1956
et 73 (I 949) du 11 aout 1949,

Having received the report of the Secretary-General
on his recent mission on behalf of the Security Council, 7

Ayant rec;u le rapport du Secretaire general sur la mission qu'il a accomplie recemment pour le compte du
Conseil de securite 7,

Noting those passages of the report (section III and
annexes 1-4) which refer to the assurances given to
the Secretary-General by all the parties to the General
Armistice Agreements 6 unconditionally to observe the
cease-fire,

Notant les passages dud it rapport (section III et annexes
1 a 4) relatifs a !'assurance que toutes les parties aux
Conventions d'armistice general 6 ont donnee au Secretaire general de respecter sans condition la suspension
d'armes,

Noting also that progress has been made towards the
adoption of the specific measures set out in paragraph 3
of resolution 113 (1956),

Notant aussi que des progres ont ete accomplis vers
!'adoption des mesures precises enoncees au paragraphe 3
de la resolution 113 (1956),

Noting, however, that full compliance with the General
Armistice Agreements and with Council resolutions 107
(1955) of 30 March 1955, 108 (1955) of 8 September
1955 and 111 (1956) of I 9 January 1956 is not yet effected,
and that the measures called for in paragraph 3 of
resolution 113 (1956) have been neither completely agreed
upon nor put fully into effect,
Believing that further progress should now be made
in consolidating the gains resulting from the Secretary-

Notant toutefois que les Conventions d'armistice general et Ies resolutions l 07 ( I 955), I 08 (1955) et 111 (1956)
du Conseil, en date des 30 mars 1955, 8 septembre 1955
et I 9 janvier I 956, ne sont pas encore integralcment
observees, que !'accord complet ne s'est pas encore fait
sur Ies mesures enoncees au paragraphe 3 de la resolution 113 (1956), et que ces mesures n 'ont pas ete integralement miscs a execution,
Persuade que !'on devrait maintenant faire de nouveaux
progres dans la voie de la consolidation des resultats

7 Ibid., Eleventh Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1956.
document S/3596.

7 Documents officiels du Conseil de securite, onzieme annee,
Supplement d'avril, mai et juin 1956, document S/3596.

4

General's m1ss1on and towards full implementation by
the parties of the Armistice Agreements,

obtenus grace a la mission du Secretaire general et de la
mise en reuvre integrale, par les parties, des Conventions
d 'armistice,

1. Commends the Secretary-General and the parties
on the progress already achieved;

I. Exprime son appreciation au Secretaire general et
aux parties pour Jes progres deja realises;

2. Declares that the parties to the Armistice Agreements should speedily carry out the measures already
agreed upon with the Secretary-General, and should cooperate with the Secretary-General and the Chief of Staff
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
in Palestine to put into effect their further practical
proposals, pursuant to resolution 113 (1956), with a
view to full implementation of that resolution and full
compliance with the Armistice Agreements;

2. Declare que les parties aux Conventions d 'armistice
devraient appliquer sans tarder Jes mesures deja convcnues avec le Secretaire general et cooperer avec lui et
avec le Chef d ·ctat-major de l 'Organisme des Nations
Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve en Palestine
pour donner effet a leurs autres propositions pratiques,
en application de la resolution 113 ( 1956), en vue de la
mise en reuvre intcgrale de ladite resolution et de )'observation integrale des Conventions d'armistice;

3. Declares that full freedom of movement of United
Nations observers must be respected along the armistice
demarcation lines, in the demilitarized zones and in the
defensive areas, as defined in the Armistice Agreements,
to enable them to fulfil their functions;

3. Declare que la pleine libertc de mouvemcnt des
observateurs des Nations Unies doit ctrc rcspcctee k long
des lignes de demarcation de !'armistice, dans lcs zones
demilitarisees et dans les regions dcfensives, tellcs qu'el\es
sont definies dans Jes Conventions d 'armistice, de manierc
qu'ils puissent s·acquitter de !curs fonctions;

4. Endorses the Secretary-General's view that the reestablishment of full compliance with the Armistice
Agreements represents a stage which has to be passed
in order to make progress possible on the main issues
between the parties;

4. Fait sienne !'opinion du Secretairc general scion
laquelle le rctablissement de conditions dans lesquelles
les Conventions d 'armistice seraient intcgralement obscrvees represente une etape qu'il faut franchir si !'on vent
faire avancer le reglement des questions principales qui
restent a regler entre Jes parties;

5. Requests the Chief of Staff to continue to carry
out his observation of the cease-fire pursuant to resolution 73 ( 1949) and to report to the Security Council
whenever any action undertaken by one party to an
Armistice Agreement constitutes a serious violation of
that Agreement or of the cease-fire, which in his opinion
requires immediate consideration by the Council;

5. Demande au Chef d'eta.-major de continuer de
s'assurer du respect de la sm- ,ension d'armes, conformement a la resolution 73 (19,,)), et de rendre compte au
Conseil de securite chaque fois qu'une initiative d'une
partie a une Convention d'armi&tice constitue une violation grave de ladite convention ou de la suspension
d'armes et qu'il estime que cette initiative exige un examen immediat de la part du Conseil;

6. Calls upon the parties to the Armistice Agreements
to take the steps necessary to carry out the present resolution, thereby increasing confidence and demonstrating their wish for peaceful conditions;

6. Requiert les parties aux Conventions d'armisticc
de prendre les mesures nccessaires pour mettre en reuvre
la presente resolution et, ainsi, d 'accroitre la conti.ance
et de prouver \cur dcsir de paix:

7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
good offices with the parties, with a view to full implementation of resolution 113 (1956) and full compliance
with the Armistice Agreements, and to report to the
Security Council as appropriate.

7. Demande au Secretaire general de continuer de
mettre ses bons offices a la disposition des parties en vue
de la misc en reuvre integrale de la resolution 113 ( 1956)
et de \'observation intcgrale des Conventions d'armistice,
et de faire rapport au Conscil de securite lorsqu'il y
aura lieu.
Adoptee a l'unanimit,;
728• seance.

Adopted unanimously at the
728th meeting.

a la

Decisions

Decisions

At its 714th meeting, on 19 October 1956, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Jordan and Israel
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of th-:
complaints by Jordan against Israel (S/3678) 8 and by
Israel against Jordan (S/3682). 8

..\ sa 744~ seance, le 19 octobre 1956, le Conseil a
decided 'inviter les representants de la Jordanie et d 'Israel
a participcr, sans droit de\ ote, a la discussion des plaintes
de la .lordanie conlrc Israel (S/3678 ') et d 'Israel contre
la Jordanie (S/3682 8 .)

5
