UNITED NA TIONS

I

•

NA TJONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIIIL RECORDS
THIRTEENTH

834

YEAR

th MEET IN G: 18 JULY 1958

eme SEANCE: 18 JUlLLET 1958
TRE1ZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOClJMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

Provisional agenda (SjAgenda/834)

Adoption of tIle agenda

Page-

CONTENTS
,..............

, .. ,

.

, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

.

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from the representative of Lebanon to the President
of the Security Council concerning "Complaint by Leuanon ill respect
of a situation arising from the intervention of the United Arab Republic
in the internal affairs of Lebanon, the continuance of whhh is likdy to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and security" (Sj4007,
SI'1047jRev.l, Sj4050jRe,.I, S(1054)
Letter dated 17 July 1958 from the representative of Jordan to the PrEsident
of the Security Council concerning" Complaint by the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan of interference in its domestic aflairs ()f the United Arab RcpubHc" (.1/4053, Sj4047/Rev.l) . .. .
.. .. . . . .. .. ..

TABLE

DES

I

MATIERES

Ordrc du jour provisoirf'. (S/A.gendajS34)

'.....

I

, .. , .. ,...

1

Lettre, en date uu 22 mai 1958, adressee au President till CouseL de sccurite
pnr le representant du Liban, concernant la question suivante : (( PIRinte
du Liban touchant une situation ereec par }'intervention de 1.80 Republique
arabe tmie dans les aiIaires interieures du Liban, et dont la prolong3tion
etil susceptible de rnena.cer le nU'lintien de la paix et de la seeurite internationales " (SI4007, S/4047IRev. I, S/4050jRe,. 1, S/4054)
Lettre, en dute du 17 juillf'.t HJ58, adressce au President du Consed de securite
par le representant de la Jordanie, concern ant la question suivuDte :
(( Plainte du Royaume haehernite de Jordanie pour irgerence de la Republique arabe unie dans ses afJaires interleLlres " (5/4053, S/4047fRev. 1)...

t

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

,

,

SjPV.834

( 20 p

\

(

t·

Rclevnnt docuUlents not n'pl'Oduccd ill full in the records of the lIIcctiug:.
of the Security COUIlCi! are pllulishcd in quarterly sU]Jplemcn Ls to the Official
Records.

Symbols 0/ United Natio/ls documents are composed 0/ capital fellers combined
with figrlres.

.MeT/tion 0/ sucll a symbol ifldicafc.~ a reference 10 a United Nations

document.

,,,

l,
"

('

),

,j

,
I, ,

Les documents pcruncnls qui ne liont pas reproduiLs ill extenso duns les
comptes rcndus des seances du r.onscil de secut'ite sooL Tlllblies duns des supple-

ments trimestriels nux D(JclIrnenl,<; officicls.
Les coles d~ documents de l'Organisafir)Jl des Nations Ullies se oompostrlt de

.

\

leltri$ majuscules et de chiUns. La simple mention ri'une cole dallS LUI te.-r:le signifle

qu'it s'agil d'un document de l'Orfloni.~ali(Jn.

t

f,
,,,"

.
.

,

,

.,

,
i"

I

'I',
,r
I,

1iI

J

EIGHT HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, IS July 1958, at 3.30 p.llI.

HUIT CENT TRENTE-QUATRIEME SEANCE
Tenne a New-York, le veudredi 18 juillet 1958, a 15 h. 30

President: Mr. A. AHAUJO (ColomlJia).

President .. M. A. ARAUJO (ColomHe).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Canada, China., Colombia, France, Iraq, Jap<l.ll,
Panama. Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Greal Britain and Northern Ireland.
United States of America.

Pre.sents : L~s represcntants des pays suivants ;
Canada, Chine, Colombie, France, 1rak, Japon. Panama,
Suede, Union des R.epubliques sociliIistes sovietiques,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'lrlande du
Nord, Etats~Unis d'Amerique.

ProviBional agenda (SjAgenda(834.)

Ordre dn jour provisoire (SfAgenda/834:)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1.

A.l1option dc l'ordre du jour.

2.

Let.t.er dated 22 May 1958 from the representative
of Lebanon to the President of thE' :-5eCllTity Council
concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in respect
of El situation arising fmm the intervention of the
United Arab Republic in the internal affairs of
Lebanon, the continuance of whicll is likely to
endanger tile maintenance of international pp-ace
and security" (5{4007).

2.

Lettre, en date du 22 rnai 1958, adressee au
President du Con.seil <le secnrite par le representant
uu Liban, concern:mt la qnestion 5uivante: <I Plainte
dll. Liban toucllant line situation creee par "intervention de la nepl:.hliquc arabe unie dans Jf'!:
atTaires interieures du Liban, et d[}fit la prolongation
est susceptible de menacer le mainticn de la paix
et de la secur:te internationales)) (8/4007).

3.

Letter dated 17 July 1958 from the representative
of Jordan to the Presiclent of the Security Council
concerning ~ Complaint by the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan of interference in its domestic affairs
by the United Arab Repl1,blic " (5{4053).

3.

Lettre. en date tlu 17 ju.illet 1958, adressee au
President du Conseil de llecnrite par lc representant
de la Jordanle, concernant la ql1eslion SLllvante ;
,c Plainte du Royaume hachemite de Jordanie pour
ingerencl'. de la RepLlblique arabe unie dam ::;~s
afIair~ interiem8S 11 (S/4053).

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Adoption de l'ordre dil jour

L'ordre du jour est adcpte.

Letter dated 22 May 1953 from the repre.Bentative of
Lebllbon to the President of the Security CUllDei1
concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in respect of
a situation arising from tbe intenention of the
United Arab Republic in the internal affairs of
.Lebanon, tbe eontinllADu of which iB likely to
endanger the mrontenance of international Peace
and Ifenuil:y" (5{4007, S/4047jRev.l, Sj4.0S0/
Rev.I, 814054)

Lettre, en date dn 22 roai 1958, aOres8ce an I"resident
dn CotlBtJil de Secul'ite par le representant du Liban,
CODcernant III question suivunte : «Plainte du
LwaD. touchant one situati.on Cleee par I'intervention de la Repuhlique arabe lInie dam les a:8'aires
intelieures du Lihun, et dont I" pr6llJDj!lltion I("Jlt
susceptible de menacer le maintif;ln de In paix et de la
securite internationaleS)1 (S/4007, SJ4047JRev, 1,
S/4050/Rev. I, 8//,(54)

Letter dated 17 July 11)58 £rum the representative
of Jordan to the Pres.idellt of t..be Security C(JutteD

Lettre, en date dll 17 juillet 1958, adressee /lU Presi~
denl du {;l)nseil de sC:curite par le representant de
la Jordanle, eoncernant la question suivante ~
( Plainte du Royaume hal'.b6.mite de Jordanie pour
ingereuce de la Repuhlique. arnhe unie dans 8fl8
affaires interieures» (5;'4053, S/4047JRev. 1)

concerning "Complaint by the Hashemite Kingdom pf J()rdan uf interference in its dOlll(\Btie nfl"ail'fl
by the Umled Arab Republic" (814053, 8/40471
Rev.!)

At the invitation of tile President, Mr. A. Ghaleb
TouTcan, representative of Jordan, Mr. Karim Azkoul,
representatiue of Lebanon, and 1Ur. Omar Loutfi, repre~
sentatiue of the United Arab Republic, took places al [he
Council lable.

Sur ['invitation du President. M. A, Ghaleb Toukan,
representant de la Jordanie, M, Karim Azkoul, reprbseniant du Liban, cl M, Omar Loutfi, representant de la
Republiquc arave unie, prennent place d la table dn
Conseil.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I call
on the Secretary-General.

1. Le PRf:SIDENT (lraduit de l'espagnol) : Je
donue la parole au Secretairc generaL

2. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Before the Council
embarks on the debate on the draft resoluLions before
it, I have to ask for the floor [or the following reasons,

2. Le SECRETAIRE G8NERAL (lraduit de l'anw
glais) ,. Avant que le COllseil n'aborde la discussion
des projets de resolution dont il est saisi, il me raut
demander la parole pour les raisons snivantes,

3, Rule 15 of the provisional rule:! of peocedure of
the Security Council reads as foHows:
.. The credentials of representatives 011 the Security Council and of any represent.<'ltive appointed in
accordance with rule 14, shall be examined by the
Secretary-General who shall submit <l report to the
Security Council for approvaL"

3, L'article 15 du reglement intericur provisoire du
Comeil de sccurite est ains! nidige :
«Les pouvoirs des representants du Conseil de
securite et ceux de tout representant designc confar·
mement it l'article 14 sont examines par le Sccretaire
general, qui soumet un rapport it l'approbation du
COllscil de securite. II

4,

I have now to submit orally the following report.

4. Je dais maintcnant vons soumettre veehalement le
rap[Jort suivant.

5. I h<'lve Lhis afternoon received a letter, duly signed,
,md dated 15 July 1958, to the following effect:

5, eet apn'~s-midi, j'ai reo;;:u une lettre dOment signee
qui portait la date dn 15 jnillet 1958, et etait ainsi
con9ue :
"J'ai J'honneue de portee a votre connaissance
que le GOllvernement irakien a nomme M. Hashim
Jawud reprc~entant de I'Irak au Conseil de securite.
Les pouvoirs de M. Abdul Majid Ahbas sont annules.
J'ai l'bonneue de demander qu'il soit pris bonne note
de la presente communication et que toutes les
declarations que pouITa fnire et les initiatives que
pourra prendre M. Jawad au Conseil de secuut6
soient consider6es comme pleinement autorisees, »

" I have the hOllour to inform you -Lhat the Government of Iraq has appointed Mr. Hashim Jawad as
Iraqi representative on the Security Council. The
credentials of Mr. Abdul Majid Abbas are withdrawn,
I have the honour to request that due note be taken
of this communication and that full faith and credit
be given to all that may be said and done by
Mr, Jawad in the Security Council."

,)

.

.',.. ..

.'•

I

It

,...

.:

~ii ~

\

6. Secondly. I had previously received a cable dated
17 July, which reads as follows:
"On 15 July 1958, the Council of Ministers of the
Republic of Iraq declared the 'withdrawal of lra.q
from the Arab Union with Jordall. The GovernmenL
-of the Repuhlic considers all financial and military
commitments entered into and obligations arising
from the said Union as null and void."

6. D'autre part, j'avais reo;;:u auparavant UIl tele..
gramme date du 17 juillet et nldige comme suit:
!( Le 15 juillet 1958, le Conseil des ministres de la
Republique d'Irak a deelare que l'lrak se retimit
de rUnion arabe avee la Jordanic. Le gOl1vcmement
de la RepubIique considere comme nuls et non avenus
tous les eng<.lgements financiers et mjlitaiees contrades
du fait de ladite Union, ainsi que les ohligations en
decoulant. ))

7. In the third place, I have to draw the attention
of the Council to the following stipulation in the Constitution of the Arab Union, which Constitution, as the
Council knows, has been duly rati'ficd: .. The Head of
the Union appoints diplomatic representatives of the
Government of the Union."

7. Enfin. ie dois appeler l'aUention du Conseil sur
la dispositlon srnvante de la Constitution de l'Union
nrabe, Constitution qui, le Conseil ne l'ignore pas, a
ete dument ratifir.e : (( Le chef de l'Union design~ les
representants diplomatiques du Gouvernement de
l'Union. ~

8, This quotatiOJI from article 51 has to he read together with article 5 of the Constitution, to which I
referred the other day [827/h mating] and which contains the following clause: "The King of Iraq shall be
the Head of the Union and, in his absence, the King
of Jordan shall be the Head."

8, Cette citation de l'article 51 de la Constitution
doit etre rapprochee de l'article 5, auquel j'ai fait
allusion rautre jour [827t shmceJ, et qui contient la
clause suivante : (( Le roi d'lrak est le chef de I'Union.
En Bon absence, le roi de Jordanie le remplace. II

9. Under rule 13 of the rules of procedure, ! have
considered it my duty to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the three hcts mentioned,

9. Aux termes de l'article 1.5 du reglement inlerieur,
rai eonsidere qu'il etait de man devoir d'appeler
l'attention du Conseil de securite sur le!; trois elements
d'infonnation que je viens d'exposer.

. ,,

10. I am afraid I may have been ambiguQus on one
point. I said that I had reeelved a letter" duly signed",

10. Je crains de n'avoir pas ete suffisanunent precis
sur un point. J'ai dit que j'avais re9u untO lettre

..,,

2

.;;

L
,

-:'
,

I
!

"

.,

•

'I-

",
~k

'/I(

•
It is signed: A. Joumaro, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
and it is on the paper of the Government of Iraq,
Ministry for Foreign Affair!!.

"dl1meI1t signt!e n. Elle est signee : A. .Tollrnafn,
ministTe des affaites etrangeres, et cUe est redigce
sur papier dn Mirlistcre des s.ffaire.s etrangeres du
Gouvernement iraklen.

11. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist RepulJ~
lies) (translated from Russian); I take the floor with
reference to the report just submitted t.y tile SecretaryGeneral.

11. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Hepubliques socialistes
sovietiques) flJ'llduit da russcJ : Je prends III paroJe
au sujet de la declaration que vient de faire le Secretair~ general.

12.

12. L'article 13 d<1 rEglemcnt interieur du Conseil de
securite prEvoit ce qui sllit au sujet des pouvoirs des
representants :
'( Chaque mernbre du Conseil de securitri est
represenre fluX reunions ciu Conseil de securitc par
un representant accredite. Les pOl:voirs des reprtl.selltlll1ts all Consei) de securite sont communiques
an Secretaire general vingt-qnatre heures au moins
avant que ces representants occupent Icur siege
au Conseil de securite. Les pouvoirs doived emaner
soit du chef de :'Etllt 011 i1u r:hr.f nIl gouvernement.
soit du mini~tre des afTaires etrangeres. ))

I would point out Ulat rule 13 of the rules of pro-

~rlure

of the Security Council concerning the credentials of the representatives reads as foUow,:
" Each member of the Security Cou:tcil shall he
represented at the meetings of tllP. Ser.urity Council
by an accredited representative. The credentials of
a representative on the Secmity Coundl shall be
communicated to the Se(;retary~Gencral not less than
twenty-four hours before he takes his seat on the
Seeurity Council. Tile credenHals shall be issued
either by the Head of the State or of tIlt: Government
concerned or by its Minister of Foreign Affairs."
l;·t Thus, the SeereLury-General', report on the credentials of Mr. Jawad, representative of Iraq, is in
keeping witb the provisions of rule 13; Mr. Jawad's
credentials have been signed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq and consequently there is no doubt
wlmt.ever that he is the representative of Iraq.

13. Ain5i, le rap[1ort oral que le Secretaire general
vient de faire an sujet des pouvoirs de M. Jawad. le
representant de l'Imk, eBt conforme aux dispositions
de I'articlc 13. en dIet. les pouvoirs de M. Jawnd ant
cte signe~ par le Ministre des affaires etrangeres de
l'Irak. et il ne pent done subsister aucun doute sur le
fait que M. Jawad est le representant du GOllvernemp.nt.
de l'Irak.

14. A further statement by the SecretRly-General
requires scrutiny. TIle Secretary-Generlll referred to
the I.onstitution of the Arab Union and said that it
lays down a specifc procedure for tbe is.suc of credentials. There is such a Constitution, true enough, but
there is no Union. The COIlstitution existed and
remained ill force as long as the Union remained in
existence. The Union was made up of two States Iraq and Jordan. When the Governml".nt of the Republic of Iraq left the Imioo, the latter ceased to exist,
because one State cannot constitute a Union. At all
events there is no Arab Union as described in the Constitution. There is still another circumstance to which
I must call nttentioll. The Head of State referred to
in the Constitution of the Union does nul exi:>t, There
is JlO Head of State, heeause the Kingdom of Iraq has
become the Hepublic of Iraq, Consequently, the
observation that the existence of the Constitution in
some wa:y changes the situation with respect to
Mr. Jawad's credcntiP.ls has. in the Soviet delegation's
opinion, no bearing on the matter. There is no federation nor Head of the federation, and hence there
cuuld be no valid credentials issued by the Union.

14. Mais le Secfl3tltire general a fniL une autre commu~
nicatjon qui merite d'clre examinee. Le Seeretaire
general a declare qu'il y a une Constitution de I'UniGn
ara.be, d'a pn~s laqucllc ccs POl\VOlrs doivent Il.t.re conferes
selon certaines regles. II est vrai qu'il y a une Constitution, mats I'Union n'cxiste IJlus. 11 y a eu une Constitution, qUi est demeun~e elL vigueuf tant qu'U cxistait
une Union. Ccttc Union etait composee de deux Etats
- l'Irak et la Jordanie. Depuis que le Gouvernement
de la Republique irakicnne s'est retire de l'UUiOIl,
!'Umon n'existe plus, car il ne peut ex.ister d'union
composec d'un seul Etat, En tonL cas, l'Ur.ion arabe,
telle eu'elle Hait prevue dans la Constitution, n'existe
pas. ri est un autre fait sur lequel il convient d'll.ppeler
l'attcntion du COIl<;ril. Lp. chef de l'Etat dont iI est
question dans la Constitution de cette Union n'existe
pas non plus, II n'e::dste pas en tant que chef d'Etat,
puisque la monarchic iro.kienne a cesse d'rxister et
qu'il y a maintenant une Rcpublique irakienne. Done,
l'observaLion seIoLl laquelle l'existence de la Constitution modifierait en lJuoi que cc 50it la 6i1..uation
quant aux pouvoirs de M. Jawad n'a, de l'avis de la
delegation sovietiquc, lien it ·voir avec les pouYoirs
de ~t Jawad. II n'y a pas de Federaticu, il u'y a pas
de cllef de la Federation, done, il n'y a pas non plus
de prlUvoirs qui pourraient etre consideres comme
emanant de cette federabon,

15. It seems to me therefore thBt the situation is
entirely clear. From the Secn:tary-General's rellort
to us, it appears that the credentials of the representative of Iraq, Mr. Hashlm Jawad, are entirely in order
and fully in conformity with the rules of procedure of
the Security Council and that Mr. Jawad should take
his place at the Council table.

15. C'est pourquoi il r.1C semble que la situation est
parfaitement claire, Le :Seertltaire gelH~ral HOllS a fait
un rapport d'ou iI ressort que les pouvoirs du representant de l'Ira:'" M, Hachim Jawad, sont en benne
et due fame: ils sonl entierement conforrnes aux
dispositions du reglement interieur du Conseil de
seeurite, ct M. Jawad dl1it occuper sa place a la table
du Conseil.

3

,

.1
16. Even if objections were to be made to his credentials, rule 17 of the rules of procedure of the Council
clearly states:
"Any representative on the Security Council, to
whose credentials objection has been made within
the Security Council, shall continue to sit with the
same rights as other representatives until the Security Council has decided the matter."

16. Meme si la validite de ces pouvoirs etait contell,tee,
nous pourrions invoquer l'article 17 du reglement
interieur du Conseil, dont les termes sont parfaitement
clairs :
I1 Tout representant au Conseil de securite dont
les pouvoirs SQulevent des objections au sein du
Conseil de securite continue a sieger avec les meme!.
droits que les autres representants, jusqu'a Cl'. que
le Conseil de securite ait pris une decision a ce sujet. p

17. Thus, if any objections were to be made to
Mr. Jawad's credentials, then he should, according to
rule 17 of the rules of procedure, sit in the Security
Council until the Council has decided the matter.

17. Par consequent, si l'on soulevait des objections
quelconques en Cl'. qui concern I.'. la validite des pouvoirs
de M. Jawad, celui-ci devrait, conformement aux dispositions de l'article 17 du reglement, sieger a la table
du Conseil de securite jusqu'a Cl'. que Cl'. dernier ait pris
une decision.

18. This is the Soviet delegation'~ position on the
question.

18. Telle est la position de la delegation sovietique
sur cette question.

19. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): I made my
position clear on this matter when it was raised earlier
this week [827th meelingI, and it seemed to me then
that the Council !lad also made its position clear.
On that occasion the right of Mr. Abbas to sit as the
representative of Iraq was questioned but the matter
was not pressed. Indeed, we did not even find it neces·
sary to vote.

19. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume~Uni) Ilraduil de
I'anglais] ; J'ui indique nettement queUe etait ma
position sur Cl'. point lorsque la question a ete soulevCl'.
au debut de la semaine [827e seance], et it m'a semble
alors que le Conseil avait lui aussi precise la sienne.
On avait alors mis en doutc le droit de M. Abbas de
sieger en qualite de representant de I'Irak, mais
personne n'avait insiste pour qU'llne decision ffIt prise
a ce sujet. En fait, nous n'avions m~me pas juge necessaire de proceder a un vote.

20. As I indicated at that time, Mr. Abbas has taken
his seat under credentials duly issued by tbe legitimate
authorities. Under our rules he is entitled to continue
to sit until objections to his credentials have been
sustained by the Council, which I do not anticipate will
be the case.

20. Comme je l'avais indiqlle alors, M. Abbas siege
au Conseil en vertu de pouvoirs qui lui ont ete do.ment
conferes par des autorites legitimes. Aux termes de
notre reglement interieur, il est habilite a sieger jusqu'a
Cl'. que les objections soulevees au sujet de ses pouvoirs
aient ete reconnues valables par le Conseil, Cl'. qui, je
crois, n'arrivera pas.

21. My delegation is not prepared to recognize any
document purporting to have issued from the revolu~
tionary authorities in Baghdad as affecting the validity
of Mr. Abbas, credentials.

21. Ma delegation n'est pas disposee a admettre qu'un
document presente comme emanant des autarites revolutionnaires de Bagdad puisse porter atteinte a la
validite des pouvoirs de M. Abbas.

22. :Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, would
the Secretary-General tell us who signed Mr. Abbas'
credentials?

22. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [lraduit du russe] : Je voudrais demander
une precision au Secretaire general : qui a !.ignc les
pouvoirs de M. Abbas?

23. Mr. ABBAS (Iraq): I think that at this stage I
owe you, Mr. President, a few words of explanation.
J have listened with a great deal of interest to the statement made by Mr. Sobolev and to his qualification of
constitutional documents. If Mr. Sobolev takes very
poor note of constitutional procedures and does nut
appreciate what a government of laws is, and if he tries
to belittle a constitutional entity as being mere legal
fiction maintained for aggressive or other designs, he
is at liberty to do so. But I trLlst that there are many
people here who do not share his views.

23. M. ABBAS (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais] : Je crois.
monsieur le President, qu's. Cl'. stade du ctebat je vous
dois une breve explication. J'ai ecoute avec un vi!
interet la declaration de !I'L Sobolev et les reserves
qu'il a fannuIees au sujet des textes constitutionnels.
Que M. Sobolev fasse tres peu de cas des procedures
constitntionnelles, qu'il ne se rende pas compte de
Cl'. qu'est un gouvernement fonde sur la loi et qu'il
essaie de ramener un texte constitutionnel a LIne fiction
legale destinee a semr des desseins agressifs au autres,
c'est son droit. Mais rose esperer qu'il y a ici un
grand nombre de personnes qui ne partagent pas cette
opinion.

24. Now I come to his question and I will answer it
directly. My letter of credentials was signed by the
Foreign Minister of Iraq before the Union became
effective between Iraq and Jordan. Before I left
Baghdad, the Constitution of the Union came into
effect. I was confLrmed in my position by the Foreign

24. J'en arrive a la question qu'a posee M. Sobolev,
et j'y repondrai directement. Ml's let1res de cn~ance
ont ete signees par le Ministre des aITaites etrangeres
d'lrak avant l'entree en vigucur de I'Union entre
l'Irak et la. Jordanie. Avant mon depart de Bagdad,
la Constitution de I'Union est entree en vigueur. Ma

4

I
.-

. ,','"
~.

,..,--

',"

f.>'

. ~"

I

';.&P")'

I••') I

. .

"~ ~

r~1 ~
-'..,

I

~

.,I .'

.'v,
(":'

~/

t'
~ .~

>

'fi-"
~

1~--'

';,

..l.

\,....

,
,

"~

.... ,,:,.

•

•

Min.ister of the Union, who did not feel it necessary
to Issue new credentials since the COnstitution confi~med al~ matters of foreign affairs, which it was preVIOusly dIrected would remain in force. I came with
this credential.

nomination El. He confirrnee par le Ministre des affaires
etrangeres de l'Union, qUL n'a pas juge necessaire de
me delivrer de nouvelles lettres de creance etant
donne que la Constitution sanctionnait toutes les
mesures relatives aux affaires etrangeres, qui devaient
demeurer en vigueur. C'est done muni de ces pouvoirs
que je sms vena id.

25. When the recent events took place in my country,
I naturally sougiIt a legal interpretation of my position.
Being legally minded as I am, I tried to place myself
at the service of the legal Government which gave me
my credentials and my irrstructions to represent tlIem
here. I can add very little to what the Secretary~General
has said about the articles of the Constitution of the
Arab Union. He indicated that the Constitution stipulates that the head of the Arab Union is the King of
Iraq. This is the first fact. The second fact is that
in the absence of the King of Iraq, the Head or President, as the Constitution says, of the Arab Union,
is the King of Jordan.

25. Lors des evenemenls qui se sont praduits recemment dans man pays, j'ai bien entendu cherche a faire
preciser ma position juridique. Soucieux de la legalite,
j'ai essaye de me meUre au service du gouvernement
legitime qui m'avait donnt des POllvoirs et des instructions pour le representer ici. Je n'ai pas grand-chose a
ajouter aux declarations du Secretaire general sur les
articles de la Constitution de I'Union arabe, Le Secretaire general a indiql1e qu'en vertu de la Constitution
le chef de l'Union arabe est le roi d'Irak. Tel est le
premier point. Le second point est qu'en l'absence du
roi d'Irak, le chef ou le president - pour reprenclre
les tennes de la Constitution - de l'Union arabe est
te rai de Jordanie.

26. The third fact is that the President of ULe Union
appoints, receives and accredits all diplomatic officials.
In addition to that, there is an article in the Constitution
which defines the scope and authority of the Government of tlLe Union. One article stipulates - and the
document is readily available in English here - that
among the things which are entrusted to the Government of the Union is foreign affairs.

26. Le troisieme point est que le president de l'Union
nommc, relt0it et accrcdite tous les membrcs du corps
diplomatique. En outre, iI y 1I dans la Constitution un
article detinissant les questions qui retevent de La
competence uu Gouvernement de l'Union. Un article
dispose - et les membres dn Conseil peuvent facilement se procurer le texte anglais de ce document que les affaires etrangeres sont nu nQmbre des questions
qui relevent de la competence du Gouvcrnement de
l'Union.

27. At the time of these recent events in my country,
I received an official communication from Amman.
I will not bother the Council by quoting it at length;
I will only summarize it. The communication states
that in the ahsence of the King of Iraq, the King of
Jordan assumes his constitutional authority as the
head of the Arab Union. Then I received ~everal
communications from Amman instructing me that the
direction of foreign affairs in the Arab Union is now
in Amman and directing me to continue to represent
Iraq in the United Nations and in the Security Council,
and to receive my instructions from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in Amman. I was also notified by
cable that a new Minister for Foreign Afinirs has been
appointed for the Union by His Majesty King Hussein.
now constitutional head of the Arab Union.

27. Lors des evenements qui se sont produits recemment dans mon pays, fai re~u une communication
officielle d'Amman. Je n'abuserai pas de l'attention des
membres du Conseil en la citant integralement; je me
bornerai a la resumer. Elle indique qu'en l'absence du
roi d'Irak le rei de Jordanie assume les pouvoirs que
la Constitution conrere au chef de ]'Union arabe. Par
la suite, j'ai rer;u d'Arnman plusieurs communications
m'informant que In direction des affaires etrangcres de
I'Union arabe se troLLvait maintenant a Amman, me
chargeant de continuer it repnisenter l'Irak a l'Organisation des Nations Unies et au ConseiI de securite et
m'avisant que je recevrais des instructions du Ministere
des affaires itrangeres, a Amman. n m'a e!e cgalement nohfie par telegramme que S. M. le rai Hussein,
qui, en vertu de la Constitution. est maintenant le
chef de l'Union arabe, avail nomme un nouveau
Ministre des afIaires ctrangcres de l'Union.

28. These are all the facts about my position. 1 want
to limit myself to these points because I feel that I
have no right to take more time or to indulge in any
other arguments now.

28, Vous avez maintenant des renseignements complets
sur ma situation. Je m'en ticndrai Il'l, car j'esUme que
je n'ai pas le droit de prendre davantage de votre
temps ni d'avancer de nouveaux arguments pour
l'instant.

29, The SECRETARY·GENERAL: The representative of the Soviet Union asked me a question which I
consider it my duty to answer, although the reply has
already been to some extent anticipated by the representative of Iraq.

29. Le SECRETAmE GENERAL (traduil de l'anglnis) : Le representant de I'Union :;ovietique rn'a,
pose une question a laquelle j'estime qu'il est de mon
devoir de Tllpondre, encore que te representant de
l'Irak m'ait deja. dans une certaine mesure devance..

30. According to information available to the Secretariat the Constitution of the Arab Union, after receiving parliamentary approval in accordance with the

30. D'apres les renseignements dont dispose le Secn~­
tariat, la Constitution de rUnion arabe, apres avoir
ete approuvee par les parlements irakien et jordanien

>

5

!

I

1

respective Constitutilms of Iraq and Jordan, was signed
by King Faisal and King Hussein in Baghdad on
12 May and came into force on that date. I have
before me the letter of credentials for hIr. Abbas
which is signed by the then Minister of Foreign Affairs.
The date of the letter is 18 May.

conformement aux constitutions respectives des deux
pays, a ete signee a Bagdad le 12 mai par le rai FaisaJ
et le roi Hussein et elle est entree en vigueur a eette
date. J'ai sous les yeux les lettres de creance de
M, Abbas, qui ont ete sigmles par le Ministre des affairt:5
etrangeres d'alors, Elles portent la date du 18 mai.

31. I finally would like to quote the following part of
the Constitution of the Union whicll confirms a fact
mentioned by the representative of Iraq:
"Article 62. (a) The following affairs shall be
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Government
of the Union:
.. 1. Foreign affair.; and diplomatic and consular
representation. "

31. Je voudrais enfm citer un passage de la Constitution de l'Union qui confirme un fait mentionne par
le representant de l'lrak ;
«Article 62. - u) Les questions suivantes releveront
exdusivement de la juridiction du Gouvcrnement de
l'Union :
11 10
Affaires etrangeres et representation diplomatique et consulaire. "

32. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): In connexion with
what the Secretary-General and Mr. Abbas have said,
I think it will be useful to prnce the following facts on
record,

32. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (lraduil du russeJ : A propos des indications
Iournies par le Secretaire general et par M. Abbas,
je crois qu'il serait utile de relever, pour le compte rendu
stenographique, les faits suivants.

33. Mr. Abbas is occupying the Security Council seat
belonging to Iraq. May f repeat - to Iraq, not to the
federation. It was Iraq tllat was elected to the Security
CounciL

33. M. Abbas siege au Conseil de sec'Jrite a la place
I']ui appartient a l'lrak• .Te dis bien : non pas a la
Federation, mais a l'Irak. C'est l'Irak qui a ete Clu
membre du Conseil de secllrite.

34. In the second place, notwithstanding the establishment of the Union, there are two Members or States,
Iraq and Jordan, representing the fedemtion in the
United Nations. Thus, with the establishment of the
federation these States did not merge nor did they lose
their sovereignty with regard to United Nations affairs;
on the contrary, they retained it.

.34. Second fait: bien que l'Union arabe ait etc crice,
cette federation est representee Et l'Organisation des
Nations llnies par deux membres - par deux Etats.
Ce sont rIrak et la Jordanie. Ains!, ces deux Etats,
loin de fusionner apres la creation de cette federation,
loin de perdre leur souverainete a regard de I'Organisation des Nations llnies, ont conserve eette souverainete.

35. As you may n.call. the position of the United
Arab Republic was diITerent. Two States, Syria and
Egypt, fanned a republic, 3ud now only the one State,
the United Arab Republic. is represented in the United
Nations. This was not the situation in regard to the
Arnb Union. Both Iraq and Jordan were represented
in the United Nations. As J haVe already said, Iraq,
and not the Union, was represented on the Security
Council. And as the SecTGtary-Genera1's reply and
Mr. Abbas' remarks indicate, the latter's credentials
were signed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
Naturally this is so, Lec.ause Mr. Abbas was sent lJere
as the permonent representative of Iraq, and not of the
Union. There is no representative of the Union in the
United Nations. And the Union did not notify the
United Nations or any United Nations organ that one
person, rather than two, would represent it, as is now
the case. That situation did not prevail in tIle past
nor does it prevail at present.

35. On se rappellera qu'il en allait autrement dans
le cas de la Republique arabe unie. Deux Etats - la
Syrie et l'Egypte - ont forme une republique, et,
l'heure actuelle, un seul Etat, la Republique arabe
unie, est represente a l'Organisation des Nations Unics.
S'agissant de l'Union arabe, la situation etait ditIerente.
Les deux Etats, la Jordanie et l'Irak, etaient representes
a I'Organisation. Ainsi que je l'ai deja dit, c'est l'Irak,
et non l'llnion, qui etait I'epresente au Conseil de
seeurite. Et la reponse du Secretaire general, comme Jes
declarations de M. Abbas, monue clairement que les
pouvoirs de ce dernier ant ete signes par le Ministre
des afTaires etrangeres d'Irak. Cela est d'aiIleurs pllrfaitement naturel, puisque M. Abbas a ete envoye ici
eomme representant permanent de I'Irak, et non de
l'UniOl1. Il n'y a pas de representant de l'Union a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. L'llnion n'a pas
fait savoir it l'Organisation des Nations Unies ni a
aucnn organe des Nations Unies qu'elle serait representee par une personne, au lieu de deux, comme c'est
le cas aetuellement. Pareille situation n'a jamais existe.
Elle n'existe pas non plus maintenant.

36. Consequently the constitutional obstacles, which
attempts have been made to put forward, are nonexistent. Such obstacles are contrived. They are, of
course, based on political attitudes toward the new
Government in Iraq and not on legal grounds. But
that runs counter to United Nations principles, because
neither Memhers of the United Nations nor the United
Nations itself are authorized to intervene in matters
within the domestic jurisdiction of Member States,

36. Par consequent, les difficultes -- d'ordre constitutiol1nd - que l'on a essaye de soulever ici n'existent
pas. Elles sont imaginaires. Bien entendu, ces difficultes
der.oulent, nOll pas de la situation juridique, mah d'une
attitude politique envers le nouveau gouvernement au
pouvoir en Irak. Or, cela est contraire aux principes
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, paree qu'aucun
Membre de l'Organisation, ni l'Organisation elle-meme,
lI'a le droit de s'integrer dans les affaires interieures

a

I

,
~

;,;'
-,
"'-!1,I.
\:

r

".
;

'f
•

.

,

"•

t, ,,"'.

i

,,

6

. . .liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii

./

. .iz
.

much Less to prescribe the government by which a
State i5 to be headed or the person who is to represent
it.

des Etats membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
et, qui plus est, d'imposer a un Etat tel chef, teUe forme
de gouvemement ou lel representant.

37, May I poiul out that Mr. Abbas' credentials signed
by a minister for foreign affairs are cancelled by other
credentials signed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq and issued to Mr. Jawad, This is a perfectly
normal procedure whicll aITects everyone sitting lIere
in the Security CounciL At a specific time each of us
receives credentials signed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. Some time later another individual receives
credentials from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
takes over tllC seat we previously occupied at the Council
table. That is the normal course of events. WllY
are members of the Council unwilling to follow the
normal procedure in this instance? Why is Sir Pierson
Dixon, the United Kingdom representative, in effect
Objecting to these credentials? It is hard to understand
the grounds for such an attitude. The legal arguments
that have been put forward in the Council have no force
whatever. The fact to whlch I have just drawn attention, namely, that there are lwo Members of the United
Nations, Iraq and Jordan, makes the position entirely
clear. It is self-evident that the Head of Jordan cannot
sign the credentials of the representative of Iraq, par~
ticularly as the Government of Iraq does not wish to
be represented by Mr. Abbas and has, on the contrary.
issued credentials to Mr. Jawad.

37. Jc voudrais faire remarquer que les pouvoirs de
M. Abbas, qui ont ete signes par un ministre des affaires
etrangeres, ant ete annuIes par d'autres pouvoirs signes
par le Ministre. des afiaires etrangeres d'Irak et conferes
a M. Jawad. C'est la une procedure parfaitement norm~lc, suivie pour tous ceux qui siegent actuellement au
Conscil de secllrite. En temps VOUlll, chacun de nous
re\;oit des pouvoi.rs signes par le Ministre des afTaires
etrangeres. Apres un certflin temps, une autre personne
re\;oit de.s pouvoirs cOllfcrcs par le Ministre des affaires
etrangeres et occupe Ifl place que chacun de nous
occupait all Conseil. C'tsL le cours normal des choses.
Pourqlloi, en l'espece, les membres du Consei! ne
veulent~ils pas suivre la procedure normale? Pourquoi
sir Pierson Dixon, le representant du Royaume-Uni,
conteste-t-il memc ees pouvoirs? On ne voit pas sur
qlloi on se fonde. Les arguments juridiques que l'on a
fait valoir ici ne rcposenl absolument sur nen. Ce que
je viens de demontrer, a savoir que l'Irak et la Jordanie
sont representes tous deux a I'Organisation des Nations
Unies, ecLaire entierement la situation. Et il va de soi
que le chef de l'Etat jordanicn ne peut signer les
pouvoirs du representant de l'Irak, d'autant plus que
le Gouvernement irakien ne le vcut pas. All contraire,
ce gouvernemcnt a confere ses pouvoirs a M. Jawad.

38. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
agree with the representative of the Soviet Union that
the problem of credentials which has arisen at this
meeting must be decided in the light of rule 17 of the
Council's rules of procedure, which states:

38. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) ; Jc
pense, comme le repn'5entant de l'Union sovietique,
que la question soulevee Ala presente seance au sujet des
pouvoirs d'un representant doit etre resolue conformement aux termcs de l'article 17 du reglement interieur du Conseil, qui stipule:
~ Tout representant au Conseil de seeurit(\ dont
les pouvoirs soulevent des objections au sein du
Conseil de securite continue a sieger avec les m~mes
droits que les autl'es representants, jusqu'a ce que
le ConseiI de securite ait pris une decision a ce sujet.»
39. En ma qualilf de President, }'estime qu'il convient
de considerer que le representant de I'Irak qui a siege
au ConseiJ pendant les precedentes seances doit con..
tinuer a exercer tous ses droits jusqu'A ce que Le Conseil,
sur proposition de l'un de ses membres, en decide
autrement.
40. Par consequent, si aucun representant ne presente
de proposition, je considererai que le Conseil decide
de poursuivre l'examen des questions a l'onire du
jour.
41. :M. SOBQLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovictiques) [traduil du ll1sse] : Je crois qu'une question
comme ceJle de la confirmation des pouvoirs ne peut
etre resolue par une dtkision presidentielle. C'est la
une question qui appelle une decision formelle du
Conseil de securite.
42. Si j'ai bien compris la siluation aetuelle, le Conseil
de securite n'cst pas encore pret a prendre une telle
decision. C'est pourqlloi je me reserve le droit de
rev£'nir sur la question des pouvoirs du representant
de l'Irak A un moment plus opportun.
43. Le PRESIDENT (lraduit de l'espagnol)
Nous
poursUlvons l'examen des questions figurant a l'ordre
du jour.

'I

t

.. Any representative on the Security Council, to
whose credentials objection has been made within
the Security Council, shall continue to sit with the
same rights as other representatives until the Security Council has decided the matter."
39. It is the opinion of the President that the representative of Iraq who has been seated during previous
meetings should continue to sit with full rights until
the CounCil, on the motion of one of its members,
decides otherwise.
40. Consequently, if there is no motion to be submitted to a vote, I assume that the Council will continue
with the agenda.

41. Mr. SQBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub~
lies) (translated from Russian): In my opinion a question
such as the approval of credentials cannot be decided
by the President's ruling, but requires a formal decision
by the Security Council.
42. As I understand 'the present situation, however,
the Security Council i> not yet ready to take such a
decision. I therefore reserve the right to revert to the
question of the eredenl ials of the representative of Iraq
when the circumstanc~s are appropriate.
43. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall continue the disi":ussion of our agenda.

7

,

2
4 1.
1

Mr. LODGE (United States of America): J under-

41. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) ftraduil df
l'anglais] : Si je comprends bien, nous repre-nons m~in_
tenant I'examen des trois projets de resolution dont le
ConseU est saisi, et je voudrnis faire une breve dllclaration a ce prapas.

stand we are now reverting to the discussion of the
three draft resolutions which are before the CoaucH,
a.nd I would like to make a brief announcement.

.'

45. This morning the Soviet representative appeared I 45.

Le rcprescntnnt de l'Unioll sovietique se:nhhd
per:ser ce matin que ma demande de priorite empe_
cherait d'exa.miner equitablemcnt son projet de reso.
Iution. Je ne crois pas qu'jf ait raison, et ie pensiste a
penser qll'i1 serait plus ]ogiq;le de voter en pre:l1ier
lieu sur le projet de resolution de~ ELatt;~Ullis, Mitis,
d\;ne maniere genernle, je pense qu'assez de diver~ences
de vues no us opposent au sein de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et que nOllS devons faire tout cc qui est
en notre pouvoir paur eviter Ies desaccords_ qui ne
SOllt pas alJsolument nece!lsaires. C'est dans eel esprit
que je retire ma dernantle de priorite.

to feel that my motion concerning priority would jeopardize fair consider:ttion of his draft resolution.

1 do not happen to believe that he is right, and I con·
Lnue to thin]( that it would be lllOM: logical to vote
fmlt on tl1~ United States draft resolution, but] think.
as a general proposition, that we have disagreements
enough here in the Cnlted Nations 30 that we should
do all th.a~ we can to avoid disagreements tha.: are not
absolutely necessary. In that spirit, J withdraw my
motion for priority.

J
t
~

A

in

"'

Cl

M:
WE

NB

a,

Uu
Uu.
Uni
pen
the

,16. The PRRSlnENT (translated from Spanish): I
should like, as representative of COLO:\-1BIA, to make
a. numher of (]bservaLions on the draft rC5(llu~i(]ns
before the COllndl.

46. Le PR£SlUENf (traduil de l'espagnol) : En ma
qt.;atite de Mpres.:.ntar:t de la COLOMBIE, ie desire
presenter quelques observations sur les proict> .-le
resolution dont le Con~eil est ~uisi.

47. 1'!mre is nil need for me to teU the Council that
my delegation shares the concern and anxiety of otller
delegations concerning events in the Middlp. East.
My delegation can appreciate the deep concern that
must be felt by the people and Government of the
United States of America, which has bep.n r.ompelled
by circnmstances to send members of it:> armed forces
to serve in a foreign land.

4i.

,"

•

r•

Il me parait inutHe de souligner que la dclcgatbn

••

colomhicnne parta5t'· l'inqllietlIde et l'angoisse ces
autres delegations deva.nt les eveneIrwnts du M)ymOrient. Elle croit que, en toutc sin~erite et en tDlLto
bonne foi, le gouvernement et le peuple de.<; Etats-Unis
d' Amerique regrettent de s'etre vus obliges par lcs
circonstanees d'envoyer des troupes americaines en
territoire etf1lnger.

48. My delegation believes that whatever the result
of the vote on 1:.11e draft resolutionS bf'.fore US the
Counr.il's decision will not solve the substantive problem which has kept this important area. in turmoil.
Tne presellee of Ob::lCrVllr~ to verify wh~ther there has
be-f'R infiltration of arms and other materiel across the
Syrian-Lebanon frontier, the pre5ence of United States
forces with all the resources of modern military techniques at their disposal to seal the frontier. the djg~
patch of troops or ally additional arI'llngements that
may be decided upon by the United Nations to achieve
the same end - 'lone of these measures, I say. wilt
bring a lastir:g, JlUmane and just solution that will
eliminate the unrt_st that bedevils these peoples who
BTe seeking, by every means within their power, to
achieve :peace within a l1islorical framcVlork of raci:tl,
religious and economic association.

•

..

De l'a'\i.s dp ma delegation, queUe que sDit la
decision que prendra le Conseil au sujet des prohtsde
resolution qui lui ~unt presc.ntes, o.ucune ne lui Fer.
mettra de nl.~oudre le probleme [ondamental ~ui
explique Ies bouleversements constants dans cEtte
importJmte region I.hl mcndc. Ni I'action des abler.
vateurs cha!"ges de verifier s'il s'est produit de~ km.
trations d'armes et d'autres elements a la front m
syro-libanaise, ni la presence de troupes des Etats.l'nb
dot.(i.es ne taus les armements con~us par la techni~ue
moderne et qui chercil€raieni a lermer hermetiquement
ta frontU~re, ni l'envoi de troupes ni la pri~e de rr,e.~ures
additiorrnelles auxquels l'Organisation des Nations U~ie.l
pourrait eventuellernent recounT dans la meme rigion
et aUK m~lIles fins, ricn de tout cela, dis.je, ne permeUra
d'apporter une solllt:on permanente, humaine cl; jJSte
aux crises qui secouent ces peuples a:urs que, par
luus les moycns u lcur disposition, ils chercher.t a
atteindre la paix, animes d'un ideal historique de
communautc raciale, religieuse et economique.
48.

nor

· >

,>

"

B6.
tlttcZl

existf
COUI'S

Gavel

that r
neithe

NatiOl
WitJlin

-

49. Whatever resolution is adopted, the Council must 4-1}. Il importe que le Conseil ~omprenne que, m~me
rf;fllize that it will have done no more than alleviate s'it approuve I'un que1conque dp.s proj3ts de rasolLtion
an alarming symptom of a grave disea~e; it will not httve dont il est saisi, il n'aura fait qu'attenuer un des
provh.Led tllC l:'Cmedy that will bring about a final cure. symptllmes ala.rmants de cett~ grave muladie, mills
Tile Council should decide at once to undertake a n'aura pas d01\ue le r"mede qt,i permette 19 6ue~islln
thorough €xamiuation of tll~ ol'igin of these sporadic defnitive. II taut que le Cvn.~eil de securite d~cide
am.I tragic events among the peoples of the Middle imm~(Hatement d'entreprencre une enquete uppmEast. We must consider what steps could be taken. I fond.le ~ur la cause de ces rcnctions sporBdi111p-.<; ei
respecting their philosophical and political orient:.ltions. trs.gJ.{j"ues des pet:ples du Moyen-Orient. II imror:e de
to establish zonf'~q that would permit them to maintain VOll' .comment, ,t?ut en respects nt l'orientation ]l]liJo-a peaceful co-exisLcnce with the great Powers of West WplllqUC et pohtlque de ces peU\91es, on pourrait creer
and East and take advantage of U.e geograpllical des zones qmleur permettent de main tenir des relations
position in whkh fare has placed them. Studies of this pacif:qu,es .avec les grandes p:.dssances de l'Occident
kind are th€ only means that will enable us to learn et de lOnent en rnettant it profit ta situation g~o-

8

·

,,
,,

·•
.>

1
in what respects these COllntries differ in their ideology
from the West and in what respects they agree with
Soviet thinking. On the basis of this knowledge which
would rest on facts and not on suppositions, it would
be possible to devise arrangements that would guarantee the neutrality of these countries and also,
taking into account the circumstances I referred to and
others too numerous to mention, remove for ever the
sources of the discontent, unrest and rebellion that now
plague them, and lead them into the paths of that
peace and human understanding which is the basis
of the United Nations Charter.

graphique oil: le destin les a places. SeuIe cette etude
nous permettra de savoir en quoi l'ideologie de ces
pays difTere de l'ideologie occidentale et en quoi elle
se rapproche des tendances soviHiques. C'est a partir
de cette etUde, c'est-a-dire d'apres la rcalite et non
scIon des hypotheses, que nous ponrrons elaborer un
statut qui non seulement garantisse la neutralite de
ces pays mais aussi, compte tenu des circonstances
dont j'ai parIe et de beaucoup d'autres qu'i1 serait
trap long d'enumerer ici, permette d'llliminer it jamais
les causes de mecontentement, de desaccord et de
rebellion parmi ces peuples afin de les orienter vers
I'ideal de paix et de comprehension humaine qui a
inspire les autems de la Charle des Nations Unies.

50. My delegation will vote for the draft resolution submitted by the United States of America (S/4050/ReIJ.11_
I wish, however, to make it clear that our approval
of the draft resolution does not imply an obligation to
provide troops for service with the United Nations, as
my country did on two earlier occasions, in Korea and
later in the Middle East. We make this reservation
because Colombia is not at present in a position to give
this type of assistance to the United Nations.

50. La delegation colombienne volera pour le projet
de resolution presente par les Etats-Unis d'Arnerique
(S/4050/R.ev. 1], mals elIe tient a declarer qu'il n'en
decoule pour eIle aucune obligation de meUre des
troupes au service de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
comme eUe I'a fait en deux occasions anterieures, en
Coree tout d'abord, au Moyen~Orient par la suite. La
delegation colombienne tient a faire cette reserve, car
a l'heure actuelle eUe n'est pas en mesure de fournir
ce genre de concours it l'Organisation.

Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub~
lies) (translated from Russian): I should like to reserve
the right of members of the Council to explain their
vote, if they so desire, after each individual draft resolution has been put to the vote.

51. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduil du russe] : Je demande que les
membres du Conseil de securite aient le droit d'expliquer leur vote, s'ils le jugent utile, apres le vote sur
chaque projet de resolution.

52.

Mr. LODGE (United States): It seems to me that

52. M. LODGE (Etats~Unis d'Amerique) [iraduit de

it would be a much more orderly procedure if the

l'anglais] : 11 me semble que la procedure serait beaucoup
plus ordonnee si nous votions d'abord sur les trois
projets de resolution, apres quoi les membres du ConsiliI
auraient la faculte d'expliquer leur vote ou de prendre
la. parole comme ils I'entendent.

51.

Council voted on all three draft resolutions, and then,
after the voting, members would have a chance to
explain their votes or take the floor for any other
reason.

53.

I would llOpe that tIle usual practice would be
followed - voting without interruption and wituout
debate.

53. J'espere qU'on suivra la procedure habituelle qui
consiste a voter sans interruption et sans debat

54. 1\Ir. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I am not proposing tllat
the debate should be reopened after the vote on each
resolution. I merely ask that those delegations that
so desire should be given the opportunity of explaining
their vote.

54. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [iraduit du russe] : Je ne propose pas

55. I respect the United States representative's desire
to speak after all the draft resolutions have been put
to the vote, as he is entitled to do. But I ask also that
consideration be given to my desire and rigllt - and
possibly to that of other delegations - to speak after
the vote on each text.

55. Je respecte le desir du representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique de prendre la parole apres que tous Ics
projets de resolution uuront ete mis aux voix, C'est
son droit. Mais ie voudrais allssi que l'on tienne compte
de mon desir et de mon droit - et peut-etre des desirs
et des dl'oits d'autres deIegatioILS - d'intlOTvenir apres
le vote sur chacun des textes.

56. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): 1 have
nothing to add to what I have already said. I think
it would be a more orderly procedure if we had no
debate and no proposals of any kind between the
various votes, because all of these draft resolutions
pertain to the same subject. I would hope that the
President would rule that the voting should proceed
without interruption and without debate. Then, of
course, all members would be free to do as they wish
after the last draft resolution has been voted upon.

56. M. LODGE (Etats~Unis d'Amcrique) Itrariuit de
l'anglais] : Je n'ai rien a ajouter a ce que j'ai deja dit.
Il me semble que notre procedure serait bCGucoup plus
ordonnce si aucun debat n'avait lieu et si aucune pro~
position n\~tait presentee entre les votes, puisque les
troi!'! projets de resolution portent sur le mfune sui et.
J' espere que le President voudrn bien decider que les
votes auront lieu sans interruption ni de-bat. Naturellement, les membres du Conseil pourront agir comme
bon leur semblera des que le vote SllI' le dernier projet
de resolution aura pris fin.

d'ouvrir un debat apres le vote sur chaque projet de
resolution. Je demande seulement de donner aux dele..
gations qui desireraient le faire la possibilite d'expliquer
leur vote.

9

Ic

!

ti
.':/

;;rk

•

57. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Sociali~t Repub~
lies) (translated from Russian): The usual procedure
in the Security Council is for the members themselves
to decide when they wish to speak. This is the procedure which has hitherto been followed and there have
never been any misunderstandings. I believe that
we should adhere to tllis procedure both at the present
meeting and in future; in other words, to believe that
the representatives of States which are members of the
Security Council should themselves decide when they
wis11 to speak.

57. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe] : Il existe au Conseil de
s~curit~ une procedure normale, selon laquelle les
membres du Conseil decident eux-memes du moment
Oil its desirent prendre la parole. Jusqll'a present.
cette procedure a 6te respectee et il n'y a jamais ell
aucun malentendu. Je pense qu'a la seance d'aujourd'hui, comme a l'avenir, nous devons nous en tenir
a ceUe procedure, c'e.st-a-dire a la procedure d'apr~s
[aquelle les reprcsentants des Etats membres du Conscil
de securite decident eux-memes du momenl auquel
ils desirent prendre la parole.

58. Sir Pierson DIXON (United I{jngdom); I would
judge that there is no particular rule in this matter.
It is really a question of orderly procedure. It is also
to a certain extent, I think, a question of fairness.
We heard the representative of the Uni.led States at
the outset of the discussion on this point say that he
did not intend to press for priority for his draft resolution. It would seem to me that that is also a consideration which should be borne in mind and that it would,
as a consequence partly of thal, be a perfectly fair as
well as an extremely orderly procedure if we were to
follow the usual practice. [t is good to be clear, before
we vote, on exactly what we are going to do and to
follow the practice, which is not at all extraordinary, of
making speeches which members may wish to make
at the end of the voting on all three draft resolutions.
To a certain extent the three hang together.

58.

Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaumc-Uni) [Iraduit de
l'anqlais] ; Je pense qu'il n'y a ellectivement pas de
regie precise en la matiere. C'est en rea lite line question
de bon ordre dans notre procedure. C'cst aussi, dans
une certaine mesure, une question d'equite. Au debut
de notre discussion sur ce point, le representant des
Etats-Unis a declare qu'jJ n'illsisterait pas pour que
son projet de resolution ait la priorite. C'est la egalement, me semble-t-il. une consideration dont no us
devrions tenir un certain compte, et, par consequent,
il serait a la fois parfaitement juste et strictement
conforme nux exigences d'une procedure ordonnee de
snivre l'usage etabli. I1 serait bon, avant de voter, de
savoir exactemcnt ce que nous allons faire et de suivre
un usage qui n'a rien d'exorbitant et qui consisterait
It entendre les diseours eventuels a l'issue du vote
sur les trois projets de resolution. Dans une certaine
rnesure, ces trois projets forment d'ailleurs un tout.

59.

Finally. of course, the Council, being master of
its own procedure, particularly in a case where tlle
rules do not give any very direct guidance, can always
take a decision on the matter and could decide before
it voted how it was going to proceed in this matter.

59. Enfin, il va de soi que le Conseil est maitre de
sa procedure, en particulier dans un cas oule reglement
intCrieur ne donne pas de directives tres nettes, et qu'it
peul toujours prendre une decision en la matiere et
determiner avant le vote l'aUitude qu'i1 entend
adopter.

60. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): I feel
that this question has been discussed now and that
possibly it would be appropriate for me to make a
motion so that the Council itself may decide [lOW it
wants to deal with the matter.

60. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de
l'anglais] : Je pense que cette question a ete suffisamment discutee et qu'il serait peut.etre opportun
que je presente une motion qui permettra au Conseil
de se prononcer sur la procedure a suivre.

61. Sir Pierson Dixon has kindly said that I had
tried to be accommodating about all these things. I
ttlerefore move that the Council vote on all three
pending draft resolutions in immediate succession and
that all explanations of votes or other statements be
made after the voting.

61. Sir Pierson Dixon a fort aimablement dit que je
m'etais efforc6 d'etre accommodant. Je propose done
formellement que le COnsei) vote sans aucune interruption sur les trois projets de resolution dont il est
saisi, et d'attendre pour toutes Ie.~ explieations de votes
et autres declarations que les trois votes aient eu lieu.

62.

62. Le PR~SlDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) .' J'invite
le Consejl a se prononeer sur la motion du representant
des Elats-Unis u' AmerLque, relative it la maniere dont
le vote doit avoir lieu.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish); We

will now vote on the motion of the representative of the
United States of America concerning the voting procedure,
A voie was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Canada, China, France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Absiaining: Colombia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
The motion was adopted by 9 votes to none, Willl 2

11 est pTocedi au vote cl main levee.
Votent pour: Canada, Chine, France, Irak, Japan,

Panama. Suede, Royaumc-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'lrlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
S'absliennent : Colombie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.
Par 9 VOU: contre zero, avec 2 abstentions, la motion

abstentions.

est adoptee.

63. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub.
lies) (translafed from Russian) In regard to the vote

63. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe] : Apropos du vote qui

10

•, •
•
••

.., .,
.~

...
,.,

,

· I~

· -,

~

.
-r,

-

·
{

.

.

.,

·- '"
,•

,•

just taken, I wish to place it on record that the procedure adopted at the proposal of the United States
rl'presentfltive smacks of political gagging. In my
-opinion, such a motion should never have been put to
the vote. That was the reason why I abstained. I
regard another procedure as the right one, namely, the
procedure that the Security Council has hitherto followed under which every member of the Council him~
sp.lf decides whcn he considers it necessary to speak.

vient d'avoir lieu, je voudrais qu'il soit consigne dans
le compte rendu que l'adoption de la proc~ure proposee par le representant des Etats-Unis temoigne
de la voLonte de nous contraindre au silence sur le plan
politique. Je peuse qu'i! n'aurait pas faUu du tout
mettre une telle proposition aux voix. C'est pn\cisement pour cette raison que je me suis abstenu de
voter. A mon avis, la procedure correcLe est ceLle que
le Conseil de securite a suivie jusqu'a present et selon
la queUe chaque membre du Conseil decide lui-miime
du moment oil i1 juge necessaire de prendre la parole.

M.

64. Par ailleurs, je tiens a dire combien j'ai eM surpris

I should like to say how surprised I was to learn.
when I sent the secretary of the Soviet delegation to
put my name down to explain my vote, that a list of
speakers already existed. Three members were already
on the list and thus, unless I am mistaken, I shall be
the fourth speaker.

d'apprendre, lorsque j'ai e.nvoye un secretaire de la
delegation sovictiquc faire inscrire man nom sur la
liste des orat~.nrs desirellx (]'expliquer hmr Yote, qu'une
telle liste etaiL dejii etablie et que les noms de trois
represenLants y figuraienL deja. Je sui~;, si je comprends
bien, le quatrieme sur cette Iiste.

65. That is the real reason for the procedure whieh
has been adopted here at the insistence of the United
States representative.

65. C('·la explique pourqlloi on a adopte cette pro~

66. The PRESIDENT (transla/ed from Spanish): We
shall now vote on the draft resolutions in the order
in which they were presented.

66. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnoi) : Nous
allons maintenant Yoter sur les projets cle resolution,
selon l'ordTe dam; lequel us ont 6te presentes.

67. The Council will vote first on t11e draft resolu
tion submitted by the ::ioviet Union [S/4047/Rev.lj.

G7.

Against: Canada, China, Colombia. France. Trllq,
Panama, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern lreland, United States of America.
Abstaining: Japan, Sweden.
The drafl resolution was rejected by 8 Poles to 1, with
2 abs/enlions.

Le Conseil se pronollcera d'abord sur le projet
rt!suluLion presenLe par I'Union 30victique [S/4047
jRev. 1].
Il est procMe au vote a main leuee,
Vole pou.r : Union des Repllbliques socialistes
sovietiques.
Votent confre : Canada, Chine, CoJombie, France,
Irak, Panama, R,oyaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats~Unis d'Amerique.
S'abstiennmt: Japon, SuMe.
Par 8 voix contre /lne, avec 2 abstentions, le projet de
rrfsolulion est reiete,

68. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by the
United States [S/4050/Reu.lj.

68. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) : Je mets
aux voix le prajet de resolution presente par le...
Etats-Unis d'A1ncrique IS/40fJO/Rcv. 11.

A uote was taken by show oj hands.
In favour: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq,
Japan, Panama, United Kingdom of Great Britain ond
Northcr Ireland, United States of America.
Against: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

11 est pl'Ocede au vote a main levee,
Volenl pour : Canada, Chine, Colombie, France,
IraIr, Japon, Panama, Royaume-Uni rle ('T~ll.nlie_Rrp._
tagne et d'Trlande du NOl'd, Etats-Unis d'Anu;rique.
Vole contre : Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.
S'abslient : SuMe.
Il y a 9 eoix pour. z.me voix contle et une abstenli{)n.
La t'oix con/re elant celle d'un membre permanenl du
Conseil, le projet de resolution n'est pas adopte-.

d~

A vole was taken by show of hands.
In fauour: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Abstaining: Sweden,
The result of the vole was 9 voles in lauour, 1 against.
and 1 abstention, The draft resolution is not adopted,
the negative vote being lhat of a permanent member of the
Security Council.

A vole was taken by show 0/ hands,

In favour: Sweden. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq,
.Taplln, Panama, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
The draft resolution was rejected by 9 voles 10 2.

,~
,Ir

eedurc sur les instances du t'epn!senf,ant des Etats-Unis
d' Amcrique.

p

69. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
shall now put to the vote the draft resolution submitted
by Swtden [S/1054j,

i

69. Le PRESIDENT (lruduit de l'espa{fHol) : Je
mets maintenant aux voix le projet de resolution
presente par la Suede [8/4054J.
Il esl procMe au lJote a mrIin levee.
Volent pour .. Su~de, Union des Republiques socia~
liste5 sovietiques.
Volent contre : Canada, Chine, Colombie, France,
Irak, Japon, Panama, Royallme-Uni de Grande--Bretagne et d'Irlandc du Nord, Etats-Unill d'Amerique.
Par 9 voix cOlltre 2, le projet de resolution esi rejeU..

11

~'

a
70. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglais] : II est extremement regrettable que I'Union

70, Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The veto
by the Soviet Union of the United ~tates draft resolution is deeply regrettable. Once again the Security
Council has been frustrated in its effort to mitigate the
present threat 10 the peace of the wnrld. But I would
like to emphasize that nil;e nations have voted in
favour of the United States draft resolution. This is
an endorsement which shows the true opinion of the
Couneil and whieh is bound to impress world opinion.

sovietique ait oppose son veto au projet de resolution
des Etat.'l_Unis. Une fQ.is de plus, les efforts que deploie
le Conseil de securite pour dissiper la menace qui pese
actuellement sur la paix du monde ont ete contrecarres.
Je voudl'3is cependant souligner que mmf pays ant
vote en faveur dll projet de resolution des Etats-Unis.
C'est la une approbation qui reveJe l'opinion veritable
du Conseil et qui ne manquera pas de faire impression
sur I'opinion illondiale.

·,
•

,"<

71. Les Eb:;ts-Unis estiment qu'aucun des mOyens
dont l'Organisation dcs Nations Vnics dispose pour
remedier a la situation ne doit etre n~g)jge, Ainsi que
le President des Etats-Unis le declarait le 15 juillet ;
~ Les Etats-Unis appuieront. dans le cadre de
I'Organisation des Nations Unies.les mesures qui
sembleront propres a faice face a la situation nouvr.lle
et qui permettront aux Etats-Unis de retirer rapidement leurs forces du Liban, I)
Le veto de l' Union sovietique au Conseil de seCurite
ne suffIra pas a dejouer nos efforts dans ce SellS.

71, The United States believes that all available
United Nations remedies must be exhausted. As the
President of the United States stated on 15 July:
.. The United States v.ill support in the United
Nations measures which seem to be adequate to meet
the new situation and Wllich will enable the United
States forces promptly to be withctrawn from Lebanon."
Our purpose in this respect will not be thwarted merely
by a veto in the Security Council by the Soviet Union.
72 To this end I submit on behalf of the United
States Government the following draft resolution:
.. TIle Security Council.
" Having considered the' Complaint by Lebanon in
respect of the situation arising from the intervention
of the United Arab Hepublic in the internal affairs
of Lebailon, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of internaiional peace and
security' [8j4007],
.. Taking into account that the lack of unanimity
of its permanent members. at the 834th meeting,
has prevented the Council from exercising its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security,
.. Decides to call an emergency special session of
the General Assembly, as provided in General
Assembly resolution 337 (V), in order to make a ppro~
priate recorrunendations concerning the Lebanon
complaint." [5j40:;0.J

72. En etlnsequence, je presente au nom du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis le projet de resolution suivant:
• Le Comeil de sccurite,
• Ayant examine la (( Plainte du Liban touchant
line situation creee par l'intervelltion de la RepubIiquc
arabe unie dans Ies afIai.re~ illlerieure:; du LilJan, et
dont la prolongation est susceptible de menaccr le
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales ~
[8/4007),
~ Prenanl note que le rnanque d'unanimitc des
membres permanents du Conseil de securite. a la
834e seance, a empechc le Conseil de s'acquitter de
sa responsabilite pIincipale touchanl le maintien de
la pail{ et de la securite internationales,
(( Decide qu'une session extraordinairc d'urgence de
l'AssembJee generale sera convoqucCl conformemcnt
flUX dispositions de la resolution 377 (V) de I'Assemhlee genera le, afin de faire les recommandations
appropriees concernant la plainte du Lihan. ~
[5/4056.J

7B. I have been advised that the representative of
Japan - in fact, he has publicly stated so - intends
to introduce a draft resolution in the Security Council.
Ir. the light of this, I am willing to withhold my motion
in order to permit him to do so, as, of course, we must
fIrst do everything possible to take action in UH~ Security COuncil.

73. J'ai appris que le r(;pr~eJltant du JaVQIl a I'intention - il l'a du reste declare publiquement - de
presenter un projet de resolution au ConseB de securite.
Dans ces conditions, je suis pret a retirer ma proposition
pour permettre au representant du JapQn de presenter
son prQjet, car, bien entendu, il faut c!'abord que
nous fassion!; tout ce qui est en notre pouvoir pour que
le Conseil de securite agisse.

74. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): I would
like to say a few words on the votes Cilst by the United
Kingdom on the three draft resolutions with which the
Council has been dealing and on the reasons for voting
as I did. I have already explained that the United
Kingdom Government supported tllE~ position adopted
in tlJe United States draft resolution [S/4050/Rev.l1
because WP- regarded thi:'. as a constructive approar.h
to the problem with which the Sec'urity Council is r:onfronted in Lebanon. The United States Government
has made it clear that it is ready to withdraw United
States forces from Lebanon when effective alternative

74. Sir Pien;oll DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [lraduil de
l'anglais] ; Je voudrais dire quelques mots au !iUict
des votes emis par le Royaume-Uni sur les trois
projets de resolution presentes au Conseil et en exposer
les motifs. J'ai deja explique que le Gouvcmement
du Royaume-Uni approuvait I'attitude adoptee par
les Etats-Unis dans leur projet de resolutioll
[Sj4050jRev. l}. Nous pensions, en eITet. que c'etait la
une fm;on constructive d'envisager le probleme auquel
le Conseil d" securite dolt faire face au Liban. Le
Gouvernement des Etats~Unis a bien precise qu'il
etait pret a retirer sc!> forces du Liban des que d'autres

)2

•

•

•

.

·

(

•

r

.'

measures have been taken for preserving tIle independence and integrity of that country. In its draft
resolution, it proposed a means by which possible
measures to that end could be studied and put into
effect. It seems to me deeply regrettable that the
exercise of the veto by the Soviet Union has prevented
the Council from proceeding on these lines.

mesures efficaces destinecs 11 preserver I'independance
et l'int!~grite de ce pays auront ete prises, Dans son
proj et de resolution, il a propose des moyells qui
permettraient d'etudier et d'appliquer des mesures
eventuelles a r.ette fin. 11 est, me semble-t-il, extr~
memellt regrettable qu'en eXert;3nt son droit de veto,
l'Union sovietique ait emp.!che le Conseil d'agir dans
cc sens,

75. The Soviet draft 'resolution [S/4047/Rev.lj itself
ignored, and was irrelevant to, the problem under consideration by the CounciL That there is a problem
was recognized by the Security Council when it adopted
the resolution of 11 June, and it was recognized by the
Government of the United States, when, at the beginning
of this week, they aeceded to the request of the Presi~
dent and Government of Lebanon for military assistance. The Soviet Government, in its draft resolution,
asked the Council to decide that this assistance should
be withdrawn ",ithout anything being put in its place.
This suggestion was quite unacceptable to my Government.

75. Quant au proiet de resolution de l'URSS
[Sj4M7/RelJ. 1J, il meeonnait le probleme dont nous
sommes saisis et il est sans rapport avec la situation.
L'existence d'un probleme a ete reconnue par le Conseil
de securite lorsqu'il a adopte sa resolution du 11 juin,
et par le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis lorsque, au
debut de la semaine, il a accede a la demande d'assistance militaire que lui adressaient le President et
le Gouvernement du Liban, Dans SOn projet de resolution, le Gouvernement sovietique a demande au
Conseil de se prononcer pour le retrait de rette assistance militaire sans que rien vienne la remplacer.
Cette proposition dtait absolument inacceptable pour
man gouvernement,

76. The reasons for which my delegation was also
obliged to oppose the draft resolution submitted by
Sweden [S/4054] are, in a sense, similar. The present
position is that the independence llnd integrity of
Lebanon are buttressed by the presence, on the one
hand, of the United Nations observers, and on the other
hand, by the United States forces. The Soviet draft
resolution aimed at the removal of one of these supports, and the effect of the Swedish draft resolution
would have been to remove the other.

76. C'est pour des raisons un peu analogues que ma
delegation a dil egalement voter contre le projet de
resolution de If! Suede [S/4054]. Actuellement, l'ind&pendance et l'integrite du Liban trouvent un soutien
dans nne double presence : celle des observateurs des
Nations Unies et celle des forces des Etats~Unis. Or,
le projet de resolution sovietique visait a supprimer
celle~ci. et le projet de resolution suedois aurait fait
disparaitre celle-la,

77. There is, in the opinion of my Government, no
incompatibility between the presence in Lebanon of
the forces of a friendly power and of a United Nations
agency, I do not see how it can be maintained that
there is any inconsistency between these two things.
Moreover. it seems to me that it would be particularly
unfortunate to suspend the activities of the United
Nations Observation Group in Lebanon at the very
moment when, as we have learned from its latest report
[S/4052]. the Group hall succeeded in opening tlle
frontier regions to their inspection and have put forward practical plans for increasing the elllciency of
their operations.

77, Mon gouvernement estime que la presence au
Liban de troupes d'une puissance amie n'est pas
incompatible avec celle d'un organisme de l'Organi~
sation des Nations Unies, Je ne vois pas comment
l'on pent affirmer qu'il y a la une contradiction, De
plus. il me semble qu'il serait particulierement regrettable de suspendre les activites du Groupe d'observation
des Nations Unies au Liban au moment m~me ou.
comme l'indique son demier rapport [S/4052J. le
Groupe a pu obtenir d'inspecter les regions frontalieres
et a presente des plans conerets pour s'acquitter plus
efficacement de ses fonctions.

78 My Government has, from the outset, supported
and encouraged the work of the Observation Group.
It considers that the United Nations owes a debt of
gratitude to the Secretary-General, to tlte members
of the Observation Group, and to all the personnel
employed in Lebanon, for their tenacious and devoted
pursuit of the task assigned to them. It would have
been a serious setback to their work if the Security
Council had now decided to suspend the Group. as
was proposed in the Swedish draft resolution.

78. Des le debut. mon gouvernement a appuye et
encourage les travaux du Groupe d'observation. I1
estime que l'Organisation des Nations Unies a une
dette de gratitude envers le Secretaire general, les
membres du Groupe d'observation et tout le personnel
employe au Liban. pour la tenacite et le devouement
avec lesquels ils ont rempli la mission qui leur elait
confiee. Lenr ceuvre aurait ete gravement compromise
si le ConseH de seturite avait decide de suspendre les
activites des observateurs, comme le proposait le projet
de resolution de la Suede.

79. May I. finally. take this opportunity to make a
point of clarification, In case there should be any
genuine doubt on the question of the dispatch of
British troops to Jordan, I would like again to explain
what the position is. In the first place, I should recall
that British troops are there in response to a request
from the King and the Government of Jordan. This

79. Je voudrais entin saisir cette occasion pour
apporter une precision, Pour dissiper les malentendus
qui pourraient exister quant a l'envoi de troupes
britanniques en Jordanie, je tiens a expliquer a nouveau
comment la situation se pnisente. Je rappellerai tout
d'abord que des unites britanniques se trouvent en
Jordanie parce que le roi et le gouvernement de cc

13

•

'~'

I

."

""".'

'

step was thus taken in complete accord and co-operation between two sovereign and friendly Governments.
It is not contrary to the United Nations Charter or to
international law. and it has been duly reported to the
Security Council.

pays l'ont demandi. Cette mesure a donc cte prise
d'un commun accord et en collaboration par deux
gouvernements souverains et amis. EUe n'est contraire
ni it la Charte des Nations Unies ni au droit international, et le Conseil de securite en a lite dument
informe.

80. After I had informed the Council tlmi Her
Majesty's Government had decided to necede to the
request of the Jordan Government for military aid, I
continued:
" These British forces are in Jordan for the PUTk
pose of helping the King and Government of that
country to preserve its political independence and
territorial integrity. We are not there for any military purpose of our own and our presence does not
constitute a tllreatto any other country." [831st meeliflg, para. 30.J

80. Lorsque j'ai fait savoir au Conseil que le GOllvernement de Sa Majeste avait decide d'acceder it la
demande d'assistance militaire du Gouvernement jordanien, j'ai ajoute :
"Ces forces britanniques sont en Jordanie pour
llider le rai et le gouvernement it preserver l'ind6pen dance politique et l'integrite territoriale du pays.
Nous ne sornmes pas Ut-bas pour proteger des interets
militaires britanniques, et noire presence ne constitue
une menace pour aucun pays.)) [831 e seance, par. 30.]

81. Later in the day, I was asked by the representative of Iraq [832nd meeting] whether I could, for the
purpose of the record, give a clear declaration that
Her Maje!>ty's Government would withdraw its troops
if the legally constituted Government of Jordan requested it to do so. I was able to give the representative of
Iraq an unequivocal assurance to that effect. I would
like to emphasize that the sole purpose of the military
forces we have sent is to secure the stability of the
Government against external aggression or against a
coup so created, and we have made it perfectly clear
that that is the sole role such a force would be allowed
to undertake.

81. Plus tard dans la journee, le representant de
l'Irak m'a demande [832e sl!ance] si je pouvais, pour
qu'it en soit pris acte, declarer clairement que le
Gouvernement de Sa Majeste retirerait ses troupes
si le gouvernement legak:ment constitue de la Jordanie
le lni demandait. J'ai ete en mesure de donner nu
representant de I'lrak des assurances categoriques a
ce sujet. Je voudrais insister sur le fait que les troupes
que nous avons envoyees en Jordanie ont uniquement
pour mission d'assurer la stabilite du gouverncment
contre une agression exterieure ou contre un coup
d'Etat fomente
l'etranger. Comme je I'ai deja
souligne, c'est le seul rOle que ces forces armees seront
al1torisees it assumer.

82. Article 2 of the Constitution of the Arab Union
makes it clear that each State member of the Union
shall retain its international status and its existing
system of government. It is to the Kingdom of Jordan
that we are sending our help in this time of need. There
is no question of OUI using the thrcat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State, and our action does not conflict with
Article 2, paragraph 4, or any other provision of the
United Nations Charter.

82. L'article 2 de la Constitution de l'Union arabe
indiql1e clairement que chacun dcs Etats membres de
l'Union conserve son statut international et .~on propre
systeme de gouvernement. C'est au Royaume de
Jordanie que nous envoyons notre aide en celte periode
de crise. Il n'est pas question pour nous de rerourir
a la menace ou it la force pour porter atteinte a l'integrite
territoriale DU l'indepcndance politique de quelque Etat
que ce soit, et notre decision n'est contraire ni an
paragraphe 4 de l'Article 2, ni a aucune autre disposition,
de la Charte des Nations Unies.
83. Je pense que ces assurances sont parfaitement
claires. Je ne vois pas comment elles peuvent etre mal
interpretees. Notre position pellt se resumer en ces
mots que le Premier 1I'Iinistre britannique, M. Macmillana prononces hier apres~midi, lors de sa premiere declaration a la Chambre des communes:
«Le but de celte assistance militaire est de stabiliser la situation en Jordanie en aid ant le Gouver~
nemcnt jordanicn a resister a I'agression et aux
menaces dirigees contre l'integrite et l'independance
de SOil pays. ))
84. M. MATSUDAIRA (Japon) [traduii de l'anglaisJ :
Ma delegation voudrait expliquer son vote ::>l1r le projet
de resolution de la Suede [S/4064].
85. Comme il I'indiquait dans son rapporL interimaire
du 16 juillet [S/40611, le Groupe d'observation des
Nations Unies au Liban a pu etendre ses activites a
tous les secteurs de la frontiere du Liban auxquels il
n'avait pas acces ju~qu'alors. Je suis sftr que, s'il ne
se heuite pas a des obstacles, le Groupc d'observation
continuera a donner plus d'ampleur a 8es operations.

•

,
"

,

.'
"r/' 't

a

83. I think that these assurances are entirely clear.
I do not liee how they can be misinterpreted. Our
position can bc summed up in the words which Mr. Macmillan, the British Prime Minister, used when making
his first announcement to the House of Commons
yesterday afternoon:
"The purpo:;e of this military assistance is to
stabilize the situation in Jordan by helping the Jor~
danian Governmenl to resist aggression and threats
to tIle integrity alld independence of their country."

I'::'

"

84. Mr. MATSUDAlRA (Japan): My delegation wishes
to explain its vote on the Swedish draft resolution

[8/4054],
85. .Al> the United Nations Observation Group in
Lebanon indicated in its interim report of 16 July
15/4061], the activities of the Group have now been
extended to all sections of the frontier of Lebanon to
which it had heretofore had no acce:os. I am sure that
the Observation Group, if ullhindered, will continue to
develop its activities.

14

,
'.

.'•
(

,.
•

86. On many points my delegation shares the views
expressed by the Swedish delegation in its draft resolution. The draft reflects to a great extent the feeling
Qf the Government and people of Japan. I deeply
regret, therefore, that the important operative part in
which the Security Council "requests the SecretaryGeneral to suspend the activities of the observers in
Lebanon until further notice" is not acceptable to my
delegation. We firmly believe that the solution of this
problem should be sought within the framework of the
United Nations. We cannot support any draft resolution which proposes to disassociate the United Nations
even temporarily from its proper function to maintain
international peace and security. I had to vote against
the draft resolution, though I did so very reluctantly.

86. Ma delegation partage sur de nombreux points
les vues que la delegation suedoise a exprimees dans
son projet de resolution. Ce texte correspond dans une
large mesure a l'opinion du gouvernement et du peuple
japonais. le regrette done vivement que l'important
paragraphe dll dispositif aux termes daquel le Conseil
de securite « prie le Secretaire general de suspendre
jusqu'a, nouvel ordre les activites des observateurs au
Liban )) ne puisse etre accepte par ma delegation. Nons
avons la ferme conviction q!.le c'est dans le cadre des
Nations Unies qu'il convient de chercher EL resoudre
ce probleme. Il nous est impossible d'appuyer un
projet de resolution qui prollose d'enlever a l'Organisation des Nations-Unies, filt-ce a titre temporaire,
la mission qui lui incombe de maintenir la paix et la
securite internationales. l'ai done eM contraint, bien
a regret, de voter contre le projet de r~solution.

87.

We are now confronted with :1 situation in which
As a
last attempt to save the situation in the Security Council, I wish humbly to submit for your careful consideration a draft resolution. It will be circulated formally
later.1

87. Il nous faut maintenant constater qu'aucUll des
projets de resolution n'a pu ctre adopte. Desireux: de
faire une dernU~re tentative pour sauver la situation au
Conscil de securite, je prends la libertc de soumettre a
votre exameu attentif un projet de resolution, dont le
texte sera distribue ensllite officiellement 1.

88. My delegation wishes to make a brier explanation
Qf this draft resolution. Vtre note with appreciation, as
I have already said, that the Observation Group has
been carrying out its mission promptly and efficiently
and that the situation in Lebanon seems to have
improved recently. The continuance and strengthening of the activities of the Observation Grollp, r
believe, will contribute to the creation of conditions
that will enable the United States forces to be withdrawn from Lebanon.

88. Ma delegation voudrait ex.pliquer brievement ce
projet de resolution. Comme ie l'ai deja dit, nous
notons avec satisfaction que le Groupe cl'observation
s'acquitte de sa mission avec zeIe et efficacite et que la
situation au Liban semble s'~tre rccemment amelioree.
Je crois que la prolongation et I'extension des activites
du Groupe d'observation contL'ibueront it. creel' des
conditions qui permettront aux: Etats-Unis de retirer
leurs forces du Liban.

89.

My delegation wishes to reiterate that the question
before liS now has to be settled through the United
Nations and that tbis draft resolution is the only one
left in the Security Council for the solution of tbis
difficult problem. I realize thnt every delegation
will have to seek instructions from ils Government.
J understand perfectly the statement made this morning
by the representative of the Soviet Union [833rd meeting]. I therefore submit to you, l\k President, this
suggestion: after having heard the explanations of
votes, the Security Council might adjourn until Monday
morning when we would be able to proceed to the vote
on my draft resolution.

89.

90.

Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation
voted against the United States draft resolution
because that draft contained approval of the intervention of Lebanon by United States armed forces.
Such approval by the Security Council would be a
mockery of the most important fundamental principles
on which the United Nations is based: it would be an
affront to public opinion in the Soviet Union, the
Chinese People's Republic, India, Indonesia, the United
Arab Republic and many other countries of the world
_ in fact, an affront to world public opinion.

90. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Rt!publiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit dUl'tlsse] ; La delegation de l'Union
sovietique a vote conlre le projet de resolution des
Etats-Unis, parce que ce projet approuvait l'intervention
des forces armees des Etats~Unis au Liban. En donnant
parcille approbation, le Conseil de securite auruit bafoue
les principes essentieJs sur lesquels repose notre Organisation. Cela aurait ele lLtl camoufiet pour l'opinion
publique de l'Union sovietique, de la Republique
populaire de Chine, de l'lnde, de l'Indonesie, de la
Republiqne arabe unie et de nombrcu:x autres pays
du monde - en fait, un camoutlet potu' l'opinion
publique du monde entier.

1 The final text of the draft resolution was later distributed under the symbol 5{4055.

1 Le texte detinitit du pl'Ojet de resoluticHI a eM distribue ulterieurement sous la cote 5/4055.

all the draft resolutions have failed of adoption.

15

Ma delegation tienL cl repeter que le probleme
dont nous sommes saisis doit etre resolu par l'Organi·
sation des Nations Unies, et que ce projet de resolution
est le dernier auquel le Conseil de securite puisse
recourir pour resoudre ce difficile probleme. Je con<;ois
que chaque dClegation doive demander des instructlons
a son gouvernement, le comprends parfaitement la
declaration que le representant de I'Union sovietique a
faite ce matin [833e seance]. C'est pourquoi, monsieur
le President, je presente la suggestion suivante : apres
avoir entendu les explications de vote, le Conseil de
securite s'ajournernit jusqu'l\ lundi matin, date a
lu([ueUe mon projet de resolution pourrait etre mis
aux voix.

r

I

!I

•

a
91.

We voted against the United States draft resolu-

91. Au surplus, nous avons aussi vote contre le projet
de resolution des Etats-Unis parce qu'il prevoyait la
creation d'unites armees de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies qui auraient ete envoyees au Liban et dont les
fonctions et les objectifs auraient ete contraires aux
dispositions fondamentales de la Charte de notre
Organisation. La presence de forces armees des Nations
Unies sur le territoire du Liban, alors que ce pays ne
se trouve pas menace de l'exterieur, aurait constitue
une ingerence de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
dans les afIaires intedeures du peuple libanais; par la
meme, eUe aurait ete contraire aux buts et aux principes
de 1'0rganisation, tels qu'ils sont enonces dans la
Charte.
92. Le representant des Etats--Unis a declare it maintes
reprises que son gouvernement desirait retirer le plus
t31 possible ses forces armees du Liban. Cette decla~
ration se tTouve dementie par le fait que les effectifs
des forces armees des Etats-Unis au Liban sont renforces
de jour en jour, d'heure en heure. Rien n'empeche
les Etats-Unis de retirer immecIiatement leurs troupes
du Liban. Personne ne les retient au Liban, et personne
ne se rejouit de leur presence dans ce pays.

tion for the further reason that it envisaged the orga-

nization of United Nations armed forces to be sent to
Lebanon with functions and aims which conflict with
the basic principles of the United Nations Charter.
In the absence of any external threat, the presence of

United Nations forces on Lebanese territory would
constitute United Nations intervention in the domestic
affairs of the Lebanese people and, as such, would be

contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, as set out in the Charter.

92. The United States representative Iras repeatedly
stated that his Government is anxious to withdraw

its armed forces from Lebanon as quinckly as possible. That assertion is refuted by the fact that the
United States armed forces in Lebanon are increasing
daily, indeed hourly. No one is preventing the United
States from withdrawing its armed forces from Lebanon
at once. No one there is keeping them in Lebanon
and no one tbere enjoys their presence.
93. Several members of the Security Council have
referred to the Soviet Union delegation's use of the
right of veto. As is well known to them and to anyone
who is interested in the matter, Article 27 of the Charter
requires the affirmative vote of all the permanent
members for the adoption of important decisions in the
Security Council. Neither the Charter nor the rules
of procedure contain, nor in fact could they contain,
any stipulation requiring the Soviet Union to vote for
every draft resolution proposed by the United States.
In voting against the United States draft resolution,
the Soviet delegation acted in complete conformity
with the Charter and did not commit the slightest
infringement of its provisions. On the other hand,
the United States, by its actions in the Near and Middle
East, is violating the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter.

ii

94. The Security Council did not support the Soviet
draft resolution which called upon the Governments of
the United States and the United Kingdom to cease
armed intervention in the domestic affairs of the Arab
States and to remove their troops from the territories
of Lebanon and Jordan immediately.
95. Today's vote will be a dark stain on the record
of the Security Council; today will be a black day for
the United Nations. In the face of armed intervention
in the affairs of the Arab countries by the United States
and the United Kingdom, the Security Council has taken
no steps to put an end to these aggressive actions
which constitute a threat to peace and security not
only in the Near and Middle East, but throughout the
world. Thus the Security Council has not fulfilled the
obligation to maintain international peace and security
laid upon it by the Charter.

96. The members of the Security Council who did
not support this draft resolution incurred a heavy
responsibility for the deepening of international tension

'.

93. Certains membres du Conseil de securite ont fait
des observations au sujet de l'usage, par la delegation
de l'Union sovietique, du droit de veto. Chacun sait
- et les membres du Conseil de securite comme touies
les personnes qui s'interessent a cette question - que,
conformement a I'Article 27 de la Charte, les decisions
importantes du Conseil de securite sont prises a l'unani~
mite de tous les membres permanents. D'autre part,
ni dans la Charte ni dans le reglement interieur il
n'existe aucune disposition - et il ne saurait en
exister - selon laquelle l'Union sovietique devrait
voter en faveur de tous les projets de resolution
presentes par les Etats-Unis. En votant contre le
projet de resolution des Etats~Unis, la delegation
sovietique a agi en tous points conformement a la
Charte, dont eBe n'a pas enfreint la moindre virgule.
Au contraire, par leur action dans le Proche-Orient et
le Moyen-Orient, les Etats-Unis foulent aux pieds les
principes essentiels de la Charte des Nations Unies.
94. Le Conseil de securite n'a pas appuye le projet de
resolution de l'URSS qui faisait appel aux Gouvernements des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni pour
qu'iIs cessent toute ingerence dans les affaires interieures
des Etats arabes et qu'ils retirent immediatement leurs
troupes des territoires du Liban et de la Jordanie.
95. Le vote d'aujourd'hui fait tort au Conseil de
securitc, et la journee d'aujourd'hui marque une date
sombre dans l'histoire de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies. En presence de l'intervention armee des EtatsUnis et du Royaume-Uni dans les affaires des pays
arabes, le Conseil de securite n'a pris aucune mesure
pour mettre fin a ces actes d'agression qui constituent
une menace pour la paix et la securite non seulement
dans le ProcIle-Orient et le Moyen-Orient mais aussi
dans le monde entier. Le Conseil de securite ne s'est
done pas acquitte des obligations que lui conH:re
la Charte en ce qui concerne le maintien de la paix et
de la securite internationales.
96. Les membres du Conseil de securite qui n'ont pas
appuye ce projet de resolution assument la triste
responsabilite d'avoir contribue a une aggravation de

16

r•

,

•

..

r

i

,

" '

r'
>

·,
•

,

r•

i-,

,•

,,

,

and for the increased danger of the outbreak of a new
war, They thus share responsibility with the Governments of the United State~ and the United Kingdom,
who hear thc principal blame fur this sitllalioll which
threatens pCfl.ce ;mJ security.

la temdOll inLeruntiollllle d all renforcemcnt du danger
d'Llll(- nOll vellc gucrre. lls [JarL~gcl\t cette responsabilite
avec les GOllvernemclIts dc,s Etats-Unis d'Amerique et
du nOY~lurne-Uni, qui sonl les principaux artisans
ri'lIllc ~iLllatiOI1 qlli met hi pnix d la sc.curite tu danger.

97. In view of the results of the voting, which has
just taken lllace, the SovlcL Unioll, as I explained
yesterday ISJlsl meeting], requestl\ the immediate convening of a special liessioll of the Gcneral Assembly
to consider the question, "the intervention of the
United States and tll,-' Ullited Kingdom in Lebanon
and Jordun ".

97. Ell raiso:l des rcsultats du voLe qui vient d'avoir
liell, l'Union sovietique, cotllme jc ]'aj annonee bier
[831 C seancej, (~x.ige In cOllvoeatioll immediate d'ulle
:;cssion extnwrdinllire de l'Assemhlee gcnernlc en vue
de l'examen de la q\lestion de 'Il'illlervcntion des
Etflts-Unis d'Amcriqlll' cL till Roy.H1mr-Uni fill Liball
el en J ordanie 11.

98, As regards the Soviet Cllion's position concerning
the situatiOll ill the Near mul Middle Ea~t, the Soviet
Government llfls alread)' indicated that Lhe Soviet
Union willllOt remain indilTerenl Lo <lets of unprovoked
aggression in all area close to its borders. And it will
be compelled La take the necessary fletion required by
iLs own security and the llwintcnance of intcmutional
peace.

08. PO\ll' cc qui est de la position de l'Union sovietique
a l'egard de la sitnation dam; le Proche-Orient et le
Moyen-Oricnt, le Gouvemcrnent sovietique a deja

1VIr. HOLiYlES (Canuda): I should merely like to
explain very briefly wby I W\lS forced, with very great
reluctance, 10 vote against the Swedish draftresohllloll.
I was particularly reluctant to do 50 because the Cmadial1 GovernnH~Jlt very heartily supported the Swedish
illitiaLive in esLablishing the Observation Group, and
1 know very well that the purposes whieh the Swedish
delegation are pursuing arc, as they always have been,
the same as those purposes which my Government
pursues. Where we differ is not in {lur intentions but in
our appreciation of llOW the United Nations can most
effectively proceed from the present situation towards
the achievements of our common purposes.

\J9, M. HOLMES (Canada) [tradldi de l'anglais] ;
Je me bornerai a cxpliquer tres bicvement Its raisons
pOUf lesquclles rai ere contraint, a mon grand regret,
de voter contre le projet de resolution de la Sln'!de.
J'ai d'autant pIllS hesite a adopter cette attitude que
le GouverncmCllt canadien avait tres chalcllrcusemcnt
appuye I'initiative suedoise tendant li crerr le Groupe
d'observation. Jc sais fort bien qllC la delegation
sucdoise vtse - et a loujours vise - les memes bub
que mOll gouvernemenL Ce ne sont I'u>! nos intentions
qui difl'erent, mais nos opiniollS quant iJ. la fa((on dont
l'Organisation de:; Nations Unies peut, dans)[\ situation
aetuelle, s'achemiller le pIllS st'TJ"cment \'el'S nos objeclifs
communs.

100.

100. Le GOllvernemenL canadien, commc je J'ai
declare mnrdi [828~ seance], estimc que le moment
est vcnll d'appuycr, et non pas l.1'afTaihlil', I'aetion
direclc. de l'Organisation lies Nations Unies au Liban.
Nous pcnsons qn'il serail plus utile de consifMrcr que
I'nction des Etab-Unis II'est pllS incompaLihle avee 10.
mission dn Groupc d'observation, et il me semble que
les assurances repetecs que lc representant des EtatsUnis nOIH. <l dOlllleeS deplli:; lors sont venlles rcnIorcer
I'opinion qlle j'nvais expril\lcc mardi dewier dalls ce
sens.

declare que rOnion sovietique ne S,lllrait demeurer
inHctive devlllll des netcs d'agression non provoquce
accol::lplifi dans UI\e region proche de ses frontiercs.
El cUe devra prendre les mcsures indispensables que
lu! dicteront la nccessitc d'assurer sa secmite et le
lIlaiutien dc la pnix dam le mondc,

99,

In the Canadian view, as I stated 011 Tuesday

[8281h meetingj, this is tlte time to strengthen mther

than to weaken Lh{'c direct action or the United Nations
in Lebanon. We helieve that it is H l!Iore profitable
approach to regard the adion of the UniLed States as
not inconsistent with the work at the Observntion
Group, and the opinion to this effect which I expressed
on Tucsd:lY has, I think, been reinforced by the repeated
assurances whieh have been givell since lhat limc by
the United States representative.

lOt. M. AZKOUL (Liban) : Je voudrais Iaire enrcgistrer au compte rendn le regret du Gouvernement
Jibanais que I'assistance adequate qU'il a demandee
all Conseil de :;eettrite pour l'aider a proteger l'indepen dance et l'integrite dll Liball ne lui a pas ere aceordce,
et cc u cause de I'attitudc negative de la delCgation
de l'Union sovil~tique ill'cgard du projet de resolution
des Etats-Unis, qui tcndaiL fJ realiser eette fin.

101. Mr. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (trnm'laLcd [!'Om Fl'mch):
J should like to plnce on record the Lebanese Government's regret tho.t the adequate assistance iL requested
from the Security Council to help it protect the inde~
pendence and integrity of Lebanon ha.~ not ueell provided, because of the negntive positi01: of the Soviet
Union on the United States draft resolution, whicll
would have nchieved that pllrposp..
102. Mr. TSJANG (China): III my statement 01 yesLerday afternoon [8Jlsl meeting], I explained my delegations's attitude with regard lo the question on the
agenda. I find it really unnecessary to add anything
to that statement. However, at the present meeting,
after the voting, the delegation of Japan placed before
us a draft resolution. The represcntative of Japan
was good enough to ill form us that he would not expeet
l\ vote on the draft until Monday morning and that his

102. M. TSIANG (Chine) [lrndfiil de l'anglai.~j : Dans
la declaration fJue j 'ai faite hier aprcs-midi [831 e seance].
j'ai explique ]'aLtitllde de ma dclegalion en ce qui
C<lucerne la question inscrite it l'ordre du jour. Je ne
j uge gncre utile d'y njouter quoi que cc soit. Cependant,
a notre seance d'anjourd'hui, la delegation japonaisc
nous a soumis apres le vote un projet de resolution. Le
representant du Japan 11 blen vouLu nous fain~ savoir
qu'il tH, comptait pas voir le pro,jet mis aux voix avant

17

-

a
purpose was to enable LlS and our Governments to
study and consider the text carefully.

lundi, car il desirait nous donner, ainsi qu'it nos gouvernements, la possibilite cl'en etudier attentivement

le texte.
103. In order to arrive at a complete understanding
of the draft and also in order to enable my Government
to understand its. real meaning, I ask permission to
put a question to the representative of Japan. Naturally, any proposal coming from the delegation of
Japan has the careful and sympathetic consideration
of my delegation. It is for this reason that I find
that the question which I am going to put to him is
especially important.
104. I note that in operative paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution, the Secretary-General is requested to do,
in fact, two things: one, to make arrangements for such
additional measures as he may consider necessary, and
two, to strengthen the United Nations observation
Group in Lebanon. That part is perfectly clear and I
have no question regarding it, That paragraph ends
with a long phrase reading as follows:
.. With a view to ensuring the territorial integrity
and political independence of Lebanon and to create
as soon as possible lhe conditions that will enable
the United States forces to be withdrawn from
LebanOll."
105. That long phrase in itself is also clear. What
is unclear' to me is the relation of that part to the previous two points. Is that part related to both functions
assigned to the Secretary-General or to only one? In
other words, when the Secretary-General makes arrangements for additional measures, will that also be
done with a view to ensuring the territorial integrity
and political independence of Lebanon? And, when
the Secretary-General strengthens the Observation
Group, will that be done with a view to ensuring the
territorial integrity and political independence of
Lebanon?

105. In short, does the phrase" with a view to ensuring the territorial integrity and political independence
of Lebanon" relate to both functions which the Secretary-General is asked to perform, or does it relate to
only one of them?
107. Mt. MATSUDAIRA (Japan): Replying to the
question put by the representative of China, I can slate
that we have not as yet submitted our draft resolution
to the Secretariat. I hope that, when it is formally
circulated, the representative of China will have no
difficulty in interpreting the phrase in question.
In case he does have any doubt or difficulty, I would be
very glad to be at his disposal when the meeting tal,es
place on Monday.
108. The PRESIDENT (tmnslated from Spunish): In
conformity with the suggestion of thc representative
of Japan, I sh:1lI, if there are no objections, adjourn the
Council until Monday. 21 July. at 3 p.m.
Jl was so decided.

The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

103. Afin de saisir parfaitement Le sens de ce projet
et de permettre a mon gouvernement d'en apprecier
la port-ie exucte, je voudrais demander line precision
au representant du Japan. Bien entendu, les propo·
sitions de la delegation japonaise sont toujours etudiees
avec beaucollp d'intcr~t et de soin par ma delegation.
C'est pourqlloi j'attache line importance taute parUculierc a In question que je vais poser.
104. Je note qu'au paragraphe 2 du dispositif du
projet de resolution le Secretaire general est pratiquement prie de fairc deux choses : d'une part, prendre
des arrangements en vue des mesures suppIementaires
qu'i! pourra estimer necessaires, et, d'autre part,
renforcer le Groupe d'observation des Nations Unies
au Liban. Cette partie est parfaitement clairI'. et je n'ai
pas de question a poser sur Cl'. point. Le paragraphe
se termine par un long membre de phrase ainsi con~u :
« En vue d'assurer le maintien
de I'intcgrite
territoriale et de l'independance politique du Liban
et de creel' aussi rapidement que possible les conditions qui permettront aux forces des Etats-Unis
d'elre retirees du Liban. »)
105. En soi, Cl'. long membre de phrase est egalement
clair. Cl'. que je comprends mal, e'esf le rapport qui
existe entre cette derniere partie et les deux points
precede'nts. Se rapporte-t-elle allx deux categories de
mesures que le Secretaire general est prie de prendre,
ou seulement a l'une d'elles? En d'autres termes,
lorsque le Secretaire general prendra des arrangements
en vue de mesures suppJementaires, le fera-t-il aussi
en vue d'assurer le maintien de l'integrite territoriale
et l'independance politique du Lihan'? Et lorsque le
Secretaire, general renforccra le Groupe d'observation,
le fera-t-il egalement en vue d'assurer le maintien de
l'integrite territoriale et de l'independance poHtique
du Liban?
106. En resume. le membre de phrase" en vue d'assurer le maintien de l'integrite territoriale et de l'independance politique dll Liban ~ a-t-il trait aux deux
taches que le projet de resolution confie au Secretaire
general, ou bien ne porte-t-il que sur une seule des
deux?
107. Ill. MATSUDAIRA (Japon) [traduit de l'anglaisJ:
En reponse a la question poseI'. par le representant de
In Cllinc, je ferai observer que nous n'avons pas encore
remis notre projet de resolution au Secretariat, et
j'esperc que, lorsque Cl'. texte sera officiellement distribue, le representant de la Chine n'eprouvera aucune
dilTieulle a interpreter le membre de phrase en question.
S'il conserve des doutes ou s'il a des difJicultes, je me
ferai un plaisir de lui repondre a la seance de lundi.
108. Le PRESIDENT (traduil de l'espagnol) : Confor~
mement it la suggestion du representanl du Jflpon,
je propose de lever la seance, si aucun representant ne
formnle d'objection, et de fixer la prochaine reunion
au lundi 21 juillet, El 15 heures.
If en est ainsi decide.
La seance est leute a 18 h. 40.

-----~~~~~~~~~-

Printed in France

Price: $U.S 0,35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

- - - - -

12141-February 1960-1,675

.'
,
I

•

,, .

,
'j

,

.'

•

c•

,
.,
