United Nations

S/PV.6599

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6599th meeting
Wednesday, 10 August 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-44894 (E)

*1144894*

S/PV.6599

meet this remarkable challenge. Recent security
developments in Mogadishu, which have unfolded at
breathtaking speed, have likewise provided us with a
unique opportunity and a set of very grave risks. There
is a chance for real progress if we can mobilize the
support necessary to capitalize on this moment.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: Under rule 37 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, to
participate in this meeting.
I welcome Special Representative Mahiga, who is
joining this meeting via video-teleconference from
Mogadishu.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Catherine Bragg, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Augustine Mahiga.
Mr. Mahiga: I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency on behalf of your
country, India. I wish also to thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to brief members of the Security
Council on the latest developments in the Somalia
peace process. I would also like to thank the Council
for its continued support for the peace process in
Somalia. This is moment of both great challenge and
great opportunity for Somalia and for the international
community.
At this historic juncture, I am particularly
gratified to be addressing the Council once again from
Mogadishu. I have just met today with the leadership
of the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) and the
Mogadishu business leaders. We discussed how we can
work together and reinforce our shared commitment to
a peaceful and stable Somalia.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia and the
region in general is uppermost in our minds. The scale
of humanitarian suffering is immense. The
international community is mobilizing and trying to

2

On the political side, we have reached a critical
juncture as well. The signing, on 9 June, of the
Kampala Accord by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
and Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, Speaker of the
Transition Federal Parliament, ended the five-month
political stalemate between the executive and the
legislature on the way forward. By deferring the
elections for one year and providing for the
establishment of a road map with clear benchmarks,
timelines and compliance mechanisms for the
implementation of priority transitional tasks, the
Kampala Accord sets us on a new forward trajectory in
the peace process.
I am also encouraged by the timely manner in
which the Accord has been implemented so far. In a
show of statesmanship, former Prime Minister
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed resigned his post on
19 June, 20 days ahead of the deadline provided for in
the Accord. His successor, Prime Minister Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali, was overwhelmingly endorsed by
Parliament on 28 June, five days after his appointment
by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed.
On 11 July, the Parliament overwhelmingly
endorsed the Kampala Accord, in effect receiving a
three-year extension in conformity with the one-year
extension of the Government. On 20 July, the new
Prime Minister appointed a new, lean Cabinet of
18 ministers. I am heartened to note that all of these
developments have taken place ahead of the timelines
envisaged in the Accord.
This is a critical moment in the Somali peace
process, and for Somalia itself. We are beginning to
undertake the substantive work of implementing the
road map, which outlines the key tasks to be
accomplished in the next 12 months. This phase will
begin with the adoption of the road map at a
consultative meeting on ending the transition in
Somalia, which, after some unfortunate delays, will
now be held from 4 to 6 September.
The preparatory committee, chaired by the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), is

11-44894

S/PV.6599

completing its work. This morning, the committee
discussed the details of a meeting here in Mogadishu
chaired by the Prime Minister and held in the presence
of the newly appointed Cabinet. The adoption of the
road map will give the people of Somalia much-needed
ownership of the process and will send a clear signal
that real political progress is finally within our grasp.
The unequivocal support and attention of the
international community in this time of crisis will be
especially crucial in order to solidify and guarantee the
progress
already
achieved.
The
international
community must be ready to provide tangible support
to the political, humanitarian and security tracks. At
the same time, we will put in place a high-level regular
initiative to monitor compliance and make it clear to
the TFIs that there will be consequences for
obstruction and inaction.
The recent and unexpected withdrawal of the
Al-Shabaab insurgent group from Mogadishu is
likewise a significant event that presents both great
opportunities and, again, new challenges. For the first
time in years, the TFG has the prospect of exercising
authority over the whole of Mogadishu, which is a
welcome development that, if managed effectively, will
expedite political gains and the delivery of muchneeded humanitarian assistance to the thousands of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) who have travelled
to Mogadishu in a desperate attempt to escape the
devastating famine.
Although Al-Shabaab has described the retreat as
only a tactical manoeuvre, the truth remains that
Al-Shabaab has been compelled to retreat from
Mogadishu. Here I pay tribute to the forces of the TFG
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
for their hard work and sacrifice in pushing back the
insurgents. Al-Shabaab’s withdrawal is the culmination
of a number of factors, including the pressure that
those forces have steadily brought to bear on the
insurgents.
But it is vital to highlight here that significant
dangers remain as well. The TFG and AMISOM both
have limited resources to exploit the opportunity
presented by the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab. Pockets of
Al-Shabaab remain in Mogadishu, the security
situation remains precarious, and the insurgents are
likely to resort to terrorist attacks and guerrilla tactics
targeting the TFG and AMISOM forces and,

11-44894

unfortunately, even the internally displaced and other
civilians.
The insurgents’ sudden withdrawal from
Mogadishu and the rapid spread of famine have
radically changed our planning horizon. Events we had
anticipated coming to pass in a year or 18 months are
happening right now. It is essential, in that regard, for
the TFIs to remain united and coherent, and that they
put in place basic administrative structures and
promote law and order in areas under their control.
Without immediate action to fill this gap, a real danger
exists that the warlords and their militia groups will
move forward to fill the vacuum created by
Al-Shabaab’s departure. The TFG should immediately
assume a coordinating role in order to bring local
militia under its authority.
We also must encourage and assist the revival of
economic activities in Mogadishu, especially in the
Bakara market, the beating commercial heart of the
city that, as recently as last week, was under the
control of the insurgents. As I said, I met today with a
group of Somali business leaders and I was very
encouraged by what I heard. They are ready to do their
part, and we should help.
I am pleased to inform the Council that the TFG’s
National Security Council met and created a
Mogadishu security plan through which the
Government is defining its priorities, including its
resource requirements. The plan calls for the Somali
Police Force, rather than its military personnel, to
occupy the areas vacated by the insurgents. I call on
the international community to expedite the building of
the capacities of the Somali Police Force to allow this
institution to protect, inter alia, the increasing number
of IDPs in Mogadishu. As Somali police deploy in the
recently recovered areas, we must expedite the
deployment of AMISOM police personnel and
equipment so that they complement the efforts of the
Somali police in protecting civilians and promoting the
rule of law.
In UNPOS, we are adjusting to respond to the
new situation and to meet such new challenges. We
originally anticipated that Mogadishu would be
stabilized within roughly a year, but we are now
revising our planning to focus on the immediate. We
are now actively planning for an expanded United
Nations presence inside Somalia, rather than the light
footprint that we had envisaged. It is thus critical to the

3

S/PV.6599

Mission that we secure the logistical support, including
the fast-track construction of permanent facilities, to
pave the way for the deployment of additional staff in
Somalia, especially in Mogadishu. An additional guard
force, under AMISOM, must be dedicated to providing
protection and facilitating movement for United
Nations staff in Mogadishu. It is vital and is an
immediate requirement.
I ask the Council to seriously consider bringing
forward the proposed guard force with the resources
that are available and all that it entails in order to
ensure that AMISOM can successfully meet those new
challenges and adapt to the new reality on the ground
in Mogadishu.
Central to our strategy will be the augmentation
of AMISOM’s capabilities, including personnel,
logistics, mobility, aviation and unexploded ordnance
disposal. The force is now being asked to perform a
series of additional complex tasks, such as the
protection of IDPs, the consolidation of vacated
positions and the facilitation of humanitarian
assistance. The AMISOM Force Commander, who is
sitting here on my right, faces a dilemma over the
deployment of his forces to a much larger area of
cooperation without the key enablers or the full
complement of Security Council-authorized troops.
Significantly, the additional demands of the
humanitarian community to protect and assist with the
delivery of humanitarian aid also stretch the Mission’s
limited resources.
Significant gaps in the United Nations support
package to AMISOM still exist. The force requires
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding to cover
self-sustainment, which includes the most basic, yet
essential, life-support items and services integral to
supporting all peace operations. I appeal to the Council
to consider expanding the support package for
AMISOM to cover some of the critical categories of
self-sustainment and to look at the issue of the funding
of contingent-owned equipment.
I am gravely concerned, as we all are, by the
humanitarian tragedy that is unfolding before our eyes.
Nearly half of the Somali population — 3.7 million
people — is now in care and directly at risk due to the
famine. Tens of thousands have already perished. Most
of the vulnerable reside in the south of the country. As
our humanitarian partners predicted, famine is
spreading further in south and central Somalia, and the

4

other regions are now designated famine zones. In
parts of Lower Shabelle and in the settlements of
internally displaced persons in and around Mogadishu,
more than 13 out of 10,000 children under 5 years of
age die every day as a result of malnutrition and
famine-related diseases. That means that 10 per cent of
children under 5 die every 11 weeks. Those figures are
truly heart-wrenching. I hope that we can collectively
view them as nothing less than a call to immediate
action.
Indeed, it is not too late to act. Every day counts.
I strongly urge members of the Council to appeal to
their own Governments and to the international
community to generously support the humanitarian
relief operation currently under way in Somalia. We
need approximately $1 billion for Somalia, channelled
through our Consolidated Appeals Process, to avert a
further worsening of the emergency. So far, we have
received less than 50 per cent of that sum. Our
humanitarian partners are working tirelessly and stand
ready to further scale up their operations. However, our
efforts must focus on reaching all of those in urgent
need wherever they are in Somalia.
I appeal to all opposition groups in Somalia to lay
down their arms during the peace process and to allow
aid agencies to access all Somalis in dire need of
assistance.
As I have said a number of times, this is an
extraordinary moment for Somalia. There are both
great opportunities for progress and huge risks and
challenges to be overcome. Now is the time for the
international
community
to
demonstrate
its
commitment and to step forward and robustly support
the peace process immediately on all fronts. The
Somali people simply cannot wait any longer.
The President: I thank Mr. Mahiga for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Catherine Bragg.
Ms. Bragg: I thank the Council for the
opportunity to brief its members this morning on the
humanitarian situation in Somalia.
Since our last briefing of 26 July, the magnitude
of the crisis has become even greater. A little less than
two weeks ago, the United Nations declared a famine
in two regions in Somalia and warned that urgent
action needed to be taken to prevent famine from
spreading further. On 3 August, the Food and

11-44894

S/PV.6599

Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Food
Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit announced that
famine thresholds had been surpassed in the three
additional areas of southern Somalia, in Middle
Shabelle, the Afgoye corridor internally displaced
persons (IDPs) settlement and the Mogadishu IDP
community.
Nationwide, 3.7 million people are in crisis, with
3.2 million people in need of immediate life-saving
assistance, of whom 2.8 million are in south-central
Somalia. That is twice the entire population of
Manhattan. Children are the most affected by the crisis,
and an estimated 1.25 million children across southern
Somalia are in urgent need of life-saving assistance.
Tens of thousands of children have already died, and
many more will die in the coming days unless aid is
provided to them.
The under-five mortality rate is higher than 4 per
10,000 per day in all areas of the south, peaking at
13 per 10,000 per day in the riverine and agro-pastoral
areas of Lower Shabelle and among Afgoye and
Mogadishu IDPs. Let me illustrate what 13 per 10,000
per day actually means. It means that by the time I go
to bed tonight, 13 people, six of whom would be under
5 years of age, would have died, and tomorrow 13 will
also die. That will continue the day after that unless we
can reverse the trend. And this is only in one
community of 10,000. As we all know, the IDP
community is a great deal larger than that in the famine
area.
According to the Food Security and Nutrition
Analysis Unit, the current situation represents the most
severe humanitarian crisis in the world today, and
Africa’s worst food security crisis since Somalia’s
famine of 1991 and 1992. We have not yet seen the
peak of the crisis, as further deterioration is considered
likely given the very high levels of both severe acute
malnutrition and under-five mortality in combination
with an expectation of a continued increase in local
cereal prices and a below-average rainy season harvest.
The drought crisis has generated displacement on
a large scale within Somalia, as well as refugee
outflows into Kenya and Ethiopia. An estimated
100,000 people, fleeing drought and famine, have
reached Mogadishu over the past two months alone in
search of food, water and shelter. In addition to the
370,000 people who were already displaced to the
capital, to date the overall number of IDPs in Somalia

11-44894

is estimated at 1.5 million. An estimated 410,000 IDPs
are located in the 15 kilometre stretch of road in the
Afgoye corridor outside Mogadishu.
Since 1 August, an estimated 1,500 Somali
refugees have crossed the border into Kenya on a daily
basis. In Ethiopia, the number of refugees has
decreased from over 1,000 to an average of 270 people
a day.
A massive multisectoral response is critical to
prevent additional deaths and total livelihood and
social collapse. Health interventions are as important
as the provision of food aid or therapeutic feeding, in
particular since, with the start of the rains in October,
the risk of epidemic disease due to a lack of access to
potable water is likely to increase.
In recent weeks, some progress has been made in
scaling up the response. For example, on 4 August, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
announced the increase of its emergency operations in
central and southern Somalia to assist more than
1 million people affected by drought and conflict. The
ICRC has been the only organization allowed to
conduct food distribution in Al-Shabaab areas since the
suspension of World Food Programme (WFP)
operations in January 2010.
In areas under the control of Al-Shabaab, the
United Nations and its partners continue to negotiate
access with local authorities and communities to reach
new areas and move closer to the people affected. In
July, following assessment missions to two newly
accessible areas in the Gedo area, where spontaneous
settlements are springing up due to the increased
movement of people, we have seen an increase in the
delivery of life-saving assistance to the most needy,
including, for example, a wet-feeding programme
providing 25,000 meals per day for five days, starting
2 August.
UNICEF is boosting its supply pipeline to
support the existing supplementary feeding centres,
stabilization centres and therapeutic feeding centres.
Blanket supplementary feeding is meanwhile scheduled
to start this week, with priority given to operations in
famine-affected regions, including in Lower Shabelle.
Supplies will assist an estimated 154,000 people.
Since 27 July, 97 tons of supplies have been
airlifted to Mogadishu, Gedo and Lower Juba to treat
some 34,000 malnourished children under five years of

5

S/PV.6599

age for one month. High-energy biscuits have also been
airlifted to the areas of Gedo and Lower Juba to feed
60,000 people.
Emergency measles campaigns targeting more
than 72,000 children aged six months to 15 years are
under way in accessible districts in the Gedo region,
while negotiations are under way with local authorities
to secure access to additional areas. A measles
vaccination campaign targeting 40,000 children under
five years of age was completed in Mogadishu.
Furthermore, a health campaign targeting 215,000
children under five years of age with measles and polio
vaccines was carried out along the Somali-Kenyan
border.
Across southern and central Somalia, sanitation
activities have reached almost 340,000 people. Water
interventions, such as borehole rehabilitation and water
trucking, have reached over 817,000 people.
In Mogadishu this week, an Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees airlift
carrying 31 tons of shelter material and some 2,500
emergency assistance packages for thousands of
displaced people landed in the capital, for the first time
in five years.
However, humanitarian operations in Mogadishu
remain complex, and the scaling up of activities is not
a quick endeavour. Humanitarian actors are still
assessing the implications of the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu. It remains unclear if this
move is a complete pull-out or a change of tactics on
the part of Al-Shabaab, or how this new scenario will
affect overall security and our ability to deliver
humanitarian aid.
Furthermore, the capacity of the local civilian
administration in supporting the delivery of aid and
ensuring the security of IDP sites remains weak. Last
Friday, for example, 10 people were shot dead at an
IDP site in the area under the control of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, when local clan
militias attempted to loot resources destined for IDPs.
Earlier this week, on 8 August, the Humanitarian
Coordinator met with the Prime Minister in
Mogadishu, together with the Department of Safety
and Security, WFP, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), to

6

discuss the scaling up of the humanitarian programme
and improving security at IDP sites.
Last week, the TFG created the Disaster
Management Agency (DMA) to coordinate the
provision of humanitarian assistance. The Prime
Minister reassured the United Nations delegation that
the Government would be able to negotiate secure
access to assist delivery in the camps. However,
technical support will still be required, and OCHA is
now following up with DMA to improve informationsharing on the delivery of assistance.
At the current juncture, it is of paramount
importance that the capacity of the local administration
be strengthened to allow proper coordination between
the humanitarian community and the Government and
ensure that the Government fully discharges its
responsibilities with regard to the protection of the
civilian population.
I would like to conclude my statement with some
remarks on the funding situation of humanitarian
programmes. To date, the United Nations Consolidated
Appeal for Somalia is funded at 46 per cent.
Humanitarian partners still require more than
$560 million for life-saving assistance. In the region,
we still urgently need $1.3 billion to save lives. Donors
have committed more than $1 billion to the response so
far, and continue to pledge more. We are very grateful,
especially in these difficult economic times. But the
magnitude of human suffering in Somalia today
demands more.
Despite the difficulty of operating in one of the
most conflict-riven countries in the world, we cannot
let people down. Our response must be scaled up, and
the resources to support that effort must be provided.
Every day counts. We believe that tens of
thousands have already died. Hundreds of thousands
face imminent starvation and death. We can act to
prevent further loss of life and ensure the survival of
those who are on the brink of death.
A massive multisectoral response to save lives in
the immediate term and rebuild livelihoods in the
medium-short term are critical. We will continue to
appeal to donors to provide the resources needed to
respond to the crisis. We expect assistance needs to
continue for the rest of this year, if not longer.

11-44894

S/PV.6599

As we have stressed over recent weeks, this is the
most severe food crisis emergency in the world right
now. We must treat it with the urgency it demands.
The President: I thank Ms. Bragg for her
briefing.

11-44894

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
