United Nations

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6672nd meeting
Wednesday, 30 November 2011, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Hodžić
Mr. Garcia
Mr. Sun Xiaobo
Mr. Quintana
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Eick
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Karanouh
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Kravchenko
Ms. Kota
Ms. Sheard
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 18 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2011/726)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-61406 (E)

*1161406*

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 4.10 p.m.
The President: I wish once again to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to express particular gratitude to Portugal
for having convened this open debate. Mr. President, as
your delegation stated during the debate on this same
issue held in April last year (see S/PV.6300), the
elected members of the Security Council have
historically been the ones who have pushed forward
reforms in the working methods. Perhaps the reason for
this is that only elected members can understand the
importance of transparency, particularly when their
two-year mandate expires and they themselves become
dependent once again on the information provided by
the new members.
I should like also to commend the efforts made
by Japan during its chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions during 2009 and 2010, which
culminated with the update of presidential note 507
(S/2010/507) and its subsequent distribution.
We have to recognize that the Security Council
has improved its working methods in recent years.
Since the adoption of presidential note 507, more
public meetings and open debates have been held. The
content of and the consultations held prior to issuance
of the Security Council’s annual report have seen an
improvement, and greater interaction with troopcontributing
countries
and
police-contributing
countries has been established.
Following along those lines, Mexico, during its
participation in the work of the Security Council as an
elected member in 2009 and 2010, resorted to
innovative and inclusive meeting formats, such as
Arria-formula meetings and interactive informal
dialogues, with the aim of hearing the views of the
Member States affected and civil society in cases that
concern them directly.
Despite that progress, we have to acknowledge
that the implementation of these improvements has

2

been uneven, depending, on many occasions, on the
Security Council presidency of the day.
In order to continue enhancing the transparency
and efficiency of the Security Council and its
interaction with the rest of the membership, we
propose
the
Informal
Working
Group
on
Documentation consider making the following
improvements to the Council’s working methods.
First, during open debates the order of the
speakers’ list should be reversed, so that Council
members would deliver their statements at the end.
That would allow them to truly listen to the
membership and to include its contributions in the
outcomes of such meetings, particularly when a
presidential statement is adopted. We regret, Sir, that
your presidency was not allowed to take innovative
steps in this respect during today’s debate, which
shows that much work remains to be done.
Second, informal consultations should be
convened only when it is strictly necessary. We do not
understand the relevance of holding informal
consultations to hear the presentation of reports and
written statements that could perfectly well be
delivered openly.
Third, we should maintain the practice of inviting
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission to participate in debates
that involve issues that are on their agenda. This could
be extended to informal consultations as well.
Fourth, there is a need to continue to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular
by inviting the relevant organizations to participate in
public and private meetings of the Council.
Fifth, transparent mechanisms should be
established in connection with the designation of the
chairs of the Council’s subsidiary organs. The opacity
that currently prevails is unacceptable.
Sixth,
sanctions
committees
should
be
encouraged to hear the views of Member States
affected by sanctions and to include such views in their
mandatory reports to the Council.
Seventh, it is necessary to promote stronger
interaction between the Security Council and other

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

bodies, particularly the Fifth Committee, when
considering decisions that have financial implications.
Eighth, there is a need to strengthen transparency
and accountability in the establishment and renewal of
the mandates of special political missions and in their
financing.
The convening of this debate reflects the Security
Council’s openness to considering improvements in its
working methods. We hope that the many ideas that
have been discussed here today will not fall on deaf
ears. The best way to avoid this would be for the
incoming presidency of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation to submit a report to the
membership on the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations discussed
today.
Finally, we invite the incoming members of the
Security Council to adopt these recommendations.
The President: I give
representative of Slovenia.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I would first like to thank
the Portuguese presidency for convening today’s open
debate and you, Sir, for your initiative to discuss the
Security Council’s working methods and assess the
implementation of measures set out in the renewed
presidential note S/2010/507 of July 2010. I would also
like to recognize Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
pay tribute to the work and contribution of Japan to the
development of the Security Council’s working
methods, including through its leadership on the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507
and its renewed version. Slovenia also welcomes and
supports the initiatives of group of five small nations in
this regard.
It is timely and appropriate to have a debate in
open format on this important issue. The need to
further adapt the Security Council’s working methods
is one of the key areas of the reform of the Council,
and one on which there is a broad sense of agreement.
There is still room for improvement in order to
enhance the transparency, inclusiveness, legitimacy
and accountability of the Council so that it can fulfil its
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security in the most effective and efficient manner. In
recent years, we have seen some progress towards the

11-61406

realization of these goals. Strengthening the Council’s
interaction with the wider United Nations membership
is an important element in these efforts.
United Nations Members have been confronted
with an increasing number of Security Council
decisions with notable security, legal and financial
implications for each Member State. It is also for this
reason that the Council must ensure better transparency
and engagement with non-member States in its
decision-making processes on a more regular basis.
The holding of open briefings and debates
remains of particular importance. The wider
membership should have an opportunity for its views
to be heard and, to the extent possible, reflected in the
outcomes of such debates. Consideration could be
given to the order of speakers, while at the same time
allowing some time between the meeting and the
adoption of the possible outcome document, thus
demonstrating that the Council is willing to reflect on
the views presented by the wider membership before
the final decision is taken. The distribution of concept
papers has proved to be a useful tool for delegations to
adequately prepare for their interventions and to focus
discussions.
We support enhanced dialogue of the Council
with relevant actors, in particular parties directly
affected, concerned or interested. We welcome the
Council’s approach to new meeting formats, such as
Arria Formula meetings and informal interactive
dialogues, and call for greater use of such meetings.
Interaction with non-State actors, non-governmental
organizations and civil society should be further
encouraged.
We support a more systematic consultation
process with troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat on peacekeeping mandates. We
welcome the concrete steps taken to cooperate more
closely with the chairs of country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as to interact with regional and subregional
organizations and make better use of Article 54 of the
United Nations Charter.
We welcome the introduction of monthly horizonscanning briefings as an important contribution to
conflict prevention and early warning. We support
more frequent and open briefings by the Secretariat,
the Special Representatives and Special Advisers of the
Secretary-General on situations on the Council’s

3

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

agenda and those of emerging concern. We welcome
the use of available technology that allows for more
briefings from the field and real-time reaction to
situations on the ground. We see Council field missions
as a valuable tool in providing the right perspective on
local realities.
In our view, the Security Council should
emphasize the importance of the rule of law in dealing
with matters on its agenda. This embraces reference to
upholding and promoting international law and
ensuring that the Council’s own decisions are firmly
rooted in that body of law, including the Charter,
international
human
rights
law,
international
humanitarian law and international criminal law.
Special attention should be paid to the protection of
civilians and those most vulnerable. We urge the
permanent members to refrain from the use of the veto
in the event of genocide, crimes against humanity and
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
We also support further consideration of ways to
improve the transparency and work of the sanctions
Committees.
Throughout the years, we have witnessed the
widening of the diversity of the Council’s agenda, its
ever-increasing workload, and the growth in
complexity of the issues before the Council. We
believe that the way the Security Council considers
improving its working methods is in large part
connected to the increasing need to refine and enhance
its work throughout the conflict cycle by considering
prevention,
including
new
emerging
threats,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in a
holistic manner.
Slovenia remains convinced that Security Council
reform needs to address both the enlargement of the
membership and improvement of its working methods.
In that context, it is crucial to ensure that the Security
Council continues to regularly assess how its practice
matches the goals contained in presidential note 507
and that it continues to collect valuable inputs from the
entire membership on ways to improve its working
methods further.
The President: I give
representative of Australia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate. We hope that these
debates can be institutionalized by the Council. I will

4

abbreviate what I have to say, and am circulating a
longer statement.
As we all do, Australia supports a Security
Council that better reflects the contemporary world and
is responsive. Reform of the Council’s composition is
central, but so too, of course, is improving its working
methods. The working methods of an organization can
be the key to its performance. We have said here before
that the basic mindset of the Council should be one of
active accountability and deliberate transparency. The
more transparently the Council undertakes its work, the
more accountable it is; the more it shares information,
consults and accepts input, the more effective it will
be.
There have been good developments on working
methods to welcome, but as we know there remains
much to do. I will mention three issues.
The first relates to conflict prevention. As the
security challenges facing the globe evolve, it is vital
that the Council make best use of the tools already at
its disposal to prevent conflict. To do so, it needs to be
able to act in an informed manner. In this context, we
join others in welcoming the practice of regular
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs, with a
focus on horizon-scanning and early warning. These
should be maintained. We also commend the Council’s
willingness to consider complex thematic issues
relating to some of the globe’s most demanding
challenges. The recent debate on climate change and
security signalled responsiveness to challenges that
affect small island States in particular.
Of course, the Council should not stray into the
prerogatives of other organs, but the Council is of
course responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. We now understand that challenges to this
can be complex and non-traditional. Having up-to-date
information and analysis on new security challenges
and discussion of their implications is essential to the
Council’s preventive role.
In order to enhance the Council’s capacity for
prevention, we support the suggestion of regular
briefings from the Special Adviser for the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. We have also
encouraged the Council to issue a standing invitation to
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

The second issue I want to raise is improving
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries. These are an important mechanism to ensure
that peacekeeping mandates are informed by
knowledge of ground realities, and that expectations
are realistic and well understood. Such consultation is
also important throughout the lifecycle of a mission
and in planning transitions. Consultative meetings need
to be structured and scheduled well in advance. We
welcome the initiatives adopted in its presidential
statement of 26 August (S/PRST/2011/17) to improve
these processes. Mission-specific groups can also be an
important conduit to the Council; the core group on
Timor-Leste, of which we are a member, is a good
example.
My third point concerns interaction between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
While there has been good progress, there is much
more that can be done to achieve a more dynamic and
organic relationship between the two. We welcome the
participation of the PBC Chair and the chairs of the
country-specific configurations in Council meetings
and informal dialogues. We believe that the Council
could do more to draw on the expertise of the PBC,
particularly during the renewal of mission mandates.
We endorse much of what has already been said
by others, including about more open meetings; more
information on the work of sanctions committees; more
engagement
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations, such as the African Union; more use of
Arria Formula meetings and informal dialogues;
making draft resolutions and presidential statements
available to non-members at an early stage; and
enhancing efficiency through the better harnessing of
technology.
Of course, the Council’s efficiency and
effectiveness also depends in part on the performance
of us, the non-members. It is necessary for us to take
full advantage of the opportunities open to us; we
should do so actively and dynamically, but above all
we should have something to say. We would welcome
reforms to make these debates less formulaic and more
productive. They could include a better reflection, in
the outcome of meetings and the Council’s annual
report, of what non-Council members say. We welcome
Portugal’s initiative in the recent meeting on new
challenges to peace and security (S/PV.6668) of
allowing the briefers a chance to respond to the
comments from Council members.

11-61406

To conclude, we have here a very simple linear
equation. Increased transparency and consultation
increase effectiveness and further enhance the
legitimacy of this body in the eyes of all of us Member
States. That, of course, strengthens the Council’s
pre-eminent role in global peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing our appreciation to
Portugal, and to you in particular, Mr. President, for
your leadership and commitment to improving the
Security Council’s working methods, and for having
organized this debate.
Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
group of five small nations (S-5), but we would like to
suggest some additional ideas and proposals, focusing
on transparency.
In a representative entity such as the United
Nations, transparency should be a basic standard and a
permanent practice in all its bodies, including the
Security Council. We know that in order to effectively
promote international peace and security, the Council
needs a reasonable degree of confidentiality for some
of its analytical, deliberative and decision-making
processes. However, such confidentiality should be the
exception, not the rule. Beyond this, it is crucial to
cultivate a genuine willingness to share all information
that is not confidential through transparency and
disclosure processes that are systematic, timely and
easily accessible to all Member States. Better
transparency, apart from being a duty, would increase
the perception of the Council as a representative,
reinforce its legitimacy and enable it to draw on the
most relevant contributions of all Members of the
Organization, thereby improving its effectiveness.
Costa Rica recognizes that in the wake of the
presidential note of July 2006 (S/2006/507) and its
update of last year (S/2010/507), significant progress
has been made in transparency. In the written version
of this statement, we highlight the Council’s most
important advances, so I will not repeat them now.
However, I should add that from the non-governmental
point of view, the Security Council Report website has
contributed
fundamentally
to
well-informed,
systematic and rigorous monitoring of the activities of
the Council.

5

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

To sum up, we can say that the Security Council’s
transparency has improved. Nevertheless, the
improvements are not enough; they have not been
consolidated, much less duly formalized. As such, they
are at risk of paralysis or reversal. For example, while
the number of meetings open to all Member States has
increased, these are often preceded by informal closed
meetings where agreements are negotiated. The reports
by the presidencies assessing the work done during the
month of each presidency are extremely infrequent.
The Council’s annual report to the Assembly, due to its
enormous length, inadequate synthesis and total lack of
analysis, is rarely illuminating and is not released far
enough ahead of the debate on its contents. Special
reports on topics of particular relevance, as provided
for in the Charter, are strikingly absent.
In light of these and other considerations, I would
like to conclude with some specific suggestions. Many
of these are included in the annex to the draft
resolution that has been submitted for consultation by
the S-5, and Costa Rica considers them particularly
important. The list is included in my written statement;
I will simply cite as examples the importance of
regularizing the assessment reports made at the end of
each presidency; scheduling more frequent and
substantive consultations with interested Member
States as part of the process of drafting and preparing
draft resolutions and other work produced by the
Council; notifying Member States in a timely manner
about the development and final assessment, including
budgetary aspects, of missions established by the
Council; holding more frequent and more substantive
open meetings of the Council; and cultivating a more
open attitude towards external contributions.
Five years after the appearance of presidential
note 507, the Council is at a critical juncture where its
transparency and general working methods are
concerned. It must either rekindle its energy and
momentum in order to consolidate the gains achieved
so far and move forward with those that are still
pending, or remain stagnant and regress, with negative
results for both its effectiveness and its legitimacy. We
all know that the first is the only real option.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg warmly congratulates the Portuguese
presidency of the Council on its initiative in organizing

6

this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council, and on its commitment to
progressing towards greater effectiveness, increased
transparency
and
improved
interaction
with
non-members of the Council. I also commend Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the results achieved under its
chairpersonship this year of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.
Since the last open debate on this subject was
held in April 2010 (see S/PV.6300), the Security
Council has, commendably, continued to work on
applying many of the proposals in the 2010
presidential note (S/2010/507). We encourage the
Council to continue in this direction in order to, among
other things, further entrench new forms of informal
dialogue with non-member States of the Council and
parties concerned with situations on the Council’s
agenda; make more regular use of Arria Formula
meetings in order to strengthen interaction between the
Council and civil society and non-governmental
organizations, whose analyses and experience on the
ground may have particular relevance for the Council’s
deliberations; organize a meaningful number of open
Council meetings in order to assure direct transparency
in the Council’s deliberations for both non-member
States and the international community as a whole;
improve transparency in the deliberations of subsidiary
bodies of the Council, particularly the sanctions
committees, and encourage the chairs of those
committees to take every opportunity to seek the views
of non-member States that are actively interested in
their areas of activity and to keep them informed about
their ongoing work; and, finally, strengthen relations
with regional and subregional organizations on issues
of international peace and security, so as to benefit
more from their special expertise.
We also welcome initiatives aimed at better
preparing the Security Council to react to new threats
to international peace and security, particularly the
practice initiated by the United Kingdom of inviting
the Department of Political Affairs to brief the Council
on topics whose destabilizing potential makes them
worthy of attention. Luxembourg is also following with
great interest the work of the group of five small
nations, which has put forward concrete proposals for
making further progress in the Council’s working
methods. We broadly endorse those proposals.

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

Allow me to raise a subject particularly dear to
me in my capacity as chair of the Guinea countryspecific
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC): the importance of encouraging
ever closer relations between the Security Council and
the Commission. Guinea’s case is special in the sense
that Guinea is the only country on the PBC’s agenda
that is not also on the agenda of the Council. The
PBC’s support of Guinea, aimed at consolidating peace
and helping democracy take root there, is nonetheless
relevant to the Council’s work.
Beyond the specific situations of the countries
that are on the agendas of both the Council and the
Commission, the latter’s experience and expertise can
be helpful to the Council, whether on questions of the
links between peacekeeping and peacebuilding and the
transition through the various post-conflict phases, on
preparing for elections in fragile States, or on subjects
of regional significance, such as combating
transnational crime and drug trafficking in West Africa.
The Peacebuilding Commission can also offer an
integrated
and
holistic
perspective
on
the
interdependence between security and development, a
subject that the Council took up on 11 February, on
Brazil’s initiative (see S/PV.6479). The PBC can help
the Security Council not to lose sight of the absolute
necessity of bettering socio-economic conditions in
post-conflict countries in order to make sustainable
peace viable.
Luxembourg, a founding Member of the United
Nations, has never been a member of the Security
Council. We are therefore particularly attentive to the
interaction between member and non-member States of
the Council, and between the Council and the other
main organs of the United Nations, especially the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. But the continuing improvement of the
Council’s effectiveness is of interest to all of us who
have subscribed to the Charter, which stipulates in
Article 24 that the Council acts in the name of all
Member States to ensure the rapid and effective
response of the Organization to preserve international
peace and security. Our credibility and that of our
Organization depend on it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark,

11-61406

Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. I will deliver an
abbreviated version of the statement circulated in the
Chamber.
There has been considerable improvement in the
Council’s working methods in recent years. We
underscore the need for regular informative briefings to
non-members of the Council. Interactive wrap-up
sessions at the end of each presidency would enhance
information-sharing and openness. The Brazilian
presidency held such a meeting, for which we thank it.
We encourage other Council members to consider
organizing such briefings in the future.
The annual Finnish workshop aims at giving new
members of the Council an in-depth orientation to the
practice, procedures and working methods of the
Council, in order to help new members to hit the
ground running. The workshops also serve the wider
membership, as their reports are distributed as official
documents of the Council.
The Security Council report is another initiative
that has greatly contributed to information sharing and
increased openness about the work of the Council.
Efficiency in the Council’s work is very
important. Conflicts today are more complex and the
Council’s agenda is increasingly stretched. There is
scope for improving the quality of open debates by
ensuring that outcome documents reflect input from all
participating countries. Concept papers could direct the
focus of debates to questions on which the Council
would like to consult the larger membership.
Lately the Council has increasingly been using
video links to receive briefings from the ground. This
is a welcome development and we encourage the
Council to continue developing the practice further.
The Council should improve its cooperation with
other United Nations bodies. In addition, troop- and
police-contributing countries should be more closely
engaged at all stages of decision-making for
peacekeeping operations.
The Council should continue to actively seek
ways to improve its ability to prevent conflict and to
solve long-term conflicts on its agenda. Good
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission and
other partner organizations, such as regional and
subregional organizations, the Bretton Woods
institutions and others, is instrumental in that
endeavour.

7

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

The Council has made good progress in
developing cross-cutting issues, such as women and
peace and security. The Council should now
systematically link country-specific situations and
horizontal themes, and follow up on requests for
thematic information when handling reports on
country-specific situations.

in scope, size and nature from traditional inter-State
conflicts, notably international terrorism, civil
conflicts, weapons of mass destruction and
transnational organized crime. The potential impact of
those challenges on the international community as a
whole has led to an ever-increasing interest on the part
of non-member States in the Council’s work.

The Nordic countries welcome the significant
progress achieved in enhancing due process for the
listing and de-listing procedures of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson. We recommend that fair and clear
procedures be extended to all sanctions regimes.

Responding to that growing interest, the Council
has undertaken commendable efforts to improve its
efficiency and transparency and to interact more
effectively with other parts of the United Nations
system. The Council’s adoption, at the initiative of
Japan, of presidential note S/2010/507 and the panoply
of measures it recommends bear witness to the
Council’s resolve in this matter. Those efforts deserve
to be pursued and expanded. In this regard, my
delegation would like to offer the following thoughts.

We call on the Council to continue on a positive
reform path and to hold annual open debates on this
issue. In this context, we would like to emphasize the
importance of presidential note S/2010/507, and we
urge the Council to fully implement the innovations
contained therein.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
having organized this debate on the Security Council’s
working methods, with which you bring to a close a
rich and intense month of November for the Council
under the presidency of Portugal.
No one can deny the gradual improvement in the
Council’s interaction with non-member States and
other international and regional actors or the wealth of
information available about the Council’s work. They
are unprecedented. That progress can be attributed to
the Council’s will to infuse its work with more
openness, transparency and interaction; to the growing
legitimate interest of non-member States to be involved
in and informed about the Council’s work and
decisions, which it undertakes on behalf of the entire
international community; and to advances in new
information and communication technology, which
have made the dissemination of information faster and
easier, fostering greater access.
Year by year, the Council has come to consider
new situations and to address multiple challenges that
directly affect international peace and security. The
Council has begun to face challenges that are different

8

First, the Council’s increasing use of open and
interactive debates is an overall positive development.
At the same time, the Council must retain the
discretion to decide on the format of meetings, based
on the sensitivity of the matter under consideration and
an objective assessment of the impact of a given format
on the Council’s ability to consider the issue.
Second, the practice of the Council presidency to
hold informative briefings for non-members on the
monthly programme of work gives non-members an
opportunity to interact directly with the presidency of
the Council. The practice should be maintained and
expanded.
Third, consultations with troop- and policecontributing countries are important not only because
they respond to a pressing need but also because they
promote efficiency. We must take advantage of those
countries’ experience and expertise at the various
stages of designing and implementing mandates for
peacekeeping operations.
Fourth, given that the maintenance of peace is the
primary function of the Council, it is important to
make as much use as possible of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and to encourage it to bolster
its collaboration with troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat.
Fifth, the Council’s interaction with regional and
subregional organizations is an added value for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

Council has made significant progress in furthering
such interaction in recent years.
Sixth, while we welcome the increased number of
open thematic debates, we believe that they should be
narrowly focused and that the views of non-member
States should be taken into consideration.
Seventh, the Council has involved the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
its
country
configurations in its debates on an increasingly regular
basis. It is important to strengthen that practice because
peacebuilding is not only built into peacekeeping
mandates, but it is also an element of conflict
prevention that helps to prevent relapse into violence.
Eighth, no effort must be spared in the
development of preventive diplomacy. My delegation
is pleased to note that this theme has gained relevancy
in recent times, both within and outside of the Council.
During our term in the Council, my delegation will
make every effort, together with the other members, to
strengthen the Council’s conflict prevention activities,
especially in Africa.
Ninth, the Council’s annual report to the General
Assembly has notably improved and is now more
substantive and analytical. We encourage its continued
improvement and welcome the practice launched four
years ago whereby the presidency of the Council
requests the viewpoints of United Nations Member
States well before consolidating the report.
My tenth and penultimate point is that the
monthly assessments made available to all Member
States by the Council presidency are a valuable source
of information on the work of the Council. The practice
of presenting those reports at the end of each
presidency should be reinforced to preserve their
relevance and timeliness.
My final point relates to the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, which plays a crucial role in improving the
Council’s working methods. It should strengthen its
interaction with non-members of the Council and work
towards evaluating the implementation of note
S/2010/507 and possible additions thereto, bearing in
mind the views of all United Nations Member States.
In the ongoing endeavour to improve the working
methods of the Council, my delegation considers it
necessary to integrate both the requirements for prompt
and effective action to maintain international peace and

11-61406

security, and the support of the international
community for measures taken. That is a difficult task,
to be undertaken with pragmatism, open-mindedness
and awareness that the Council acts on behalf of the
entire international community.
I began by thanking the Portuguese presidency. I
wish to conclude on a more personal note and to
congratulate you personally, Sir, for the tact,
effectiveness and the ease with which you have
conducted the deliberations of the Council this month.
You have set a good example for a new member
preparing to return to the Council next year.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Morocco for his very kind words,
which have likely been exaggerated by friendship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Before
we begin to consider the implementation of
presidential note S/2010/507 on the working methods
of the Security Council, I believe that a triple
manifestation of gratitude is both necessary and just.
First of all, my delegation thanks Portugal for having
taken the initiative to convene this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council and for the
excellent concept note (S/2011/726) it has distributed.
We welcome the opportunity to speak on a subject of
such importance to us all. We also thank Belgium and
Japan for having convened similar open debates during
their respective presidencies of the Council.
We are fully aware of the difficulties and
understand that organizing open debates on this subject
is not an easy task and that a certain resistance must be
overcome. But it is worthwhile. The working methods
of the Security Council may not always be the hottest
issue on the current international agenda, but there is
no denying that it remains relevant for all of us in our
daily work at the United Nations.
Secondly, we wish to thank the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, and especially the four countries that have
chaired it since 2006: Japan, on three separate
occasions; Slovakia; Panama; and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Their excellent work led to the milestone
presidential note S/2006/507 and its 2010 update. We
are further indebted to Japan for updating the

9

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

handbook on the working methods of the Security
Council in December 2010.
Thirdly, we would like to recognize the important
role played in this matter by the group of five small
nations — Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Singapore and Switzerland (S-5) — first by submitting
a draft resolution in March 2006 containing a list of
concrete measures for the Council’s consideration, and
most recently by submitting in March a second draft
resolution with additional measures, which was revised
in June. The S-5’s continued contribution to this matter
has been outstanding.
The members of the Security Council have
committed themselves to implementing the measures
contained in note 507. Some are already being
implemented; these include those related to the
Council’s monthly programme of work, such as the
publication of the preliminary forecast, the briefings by
the incoming presidency and the ongoing updates to
the programme of work.
Other measures could be implemented more
effectively and in a more consistent manner; these
include the measures contained in paragraph 28 of the
note on open debates; paragraph 44 on draft
resolutions, presidential statements and press
statements; paragraph 59 on informal interactive
dialogues; and paragraph 65 on the famous Arria
Formula.
We agree with the fives-5 that note 507 must be
continuously updated and enhanced through additional
measures. Its most recent draft resolution on working
methods, which was submitted to us all in its letter of
25 March, contained a list of measures that the Council
could use as a guide. I would like to express Spain’s
support for some of these measures, in particular the
following three: briefings by the outgoing presidency
on the implementation of its programme of work; the
establishment of a working group on lessons learned
that would be responsible for analyzing suggested
mechanisms aimed at enhancing implementation of the
Council’s decisions and proposing mechanisms for
improving it; and the inclusion of a specific section in
the annual report of the Council to the General
Assembly on the implementation of its working
methods.
We should like to propose an additional measure
that was not included in the list drafted by the S-5. We
consider it important to provide updated information

10

on the composition of the groups responsible for
preparing the initial drafts of resolutions. We
encourage the distribution of those initial drafts, to the
extent possible, before they are passed on to informal
consultations of the whole. I know that is an ambitious
proposal, but if it were put into even partial practice it
would certainly enhance the transparency of the
Council’s work.
It is a fact that note 507 contains no specific
measures regarding the veto. Such measures appear,
however, in the S-5 list. My delegation is in favour of
including those measures in future updates of the note.
It should not be a problem for the permanent members
of the Council to commit to implementing those
measures, which are supported by the overwhelming
majority of Member States. For example, the following
two measures are aimed at limiting the use of the veto:
an explanation should be provided for the reasons for
resort to the veto, equivalent to an explanation of vote;
and resort to the veto should be avoided in cases of
genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. It would not be an obligation to
produce a result, but it would be, at the least, an
obligation of conduct.
In conclusion, we believe that we should maintain
our current approach to improving the Council’s
working methods. We are in favour of the regular
convening of open debates, perhaps every two years, as
proposed by the representative of Australia, and of
updating presidential note 507 periodically, perhaps
every four years. It is our hope that the members of the
Council, permanent and non-permanent alike, will
commit to considering and eventually to implementing
new practical measures as a result of today’s open
debate.
Moreover, Spain believes that it is the collective
duty of all Member States to contribute to improving
the working methods of the Security Council in order
to make it more transparent, inclusive, efficient and
effective. I would like to conclude by reiterating the
thanks offered by the Ambassador of Morocco to you,
Sir, for the excellent work of your presidency this
month.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation endorses the statement delivered

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of
the States members of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I congratulate you once again, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
commend you for having organized this important
debate to review developments in the implementation
of the measures set out in the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document
S/2010/507 of July 2010. Those measures were
proposed to boost the effectiveness and efficiency of
the Council’s working methods and to achieve more
transparency, which is the aspiration of all United
Nations Member States, in accordance with the Charter
principles related to the mandates and prerogatives of
the Council in maintaining international peace and
security. I take this opportunity to once again
congratulate
Azerbaijan,
Guatemala,
Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo on becoming new non-permanent
members of the Council for the next two years. We
wish them great success in their work and in the
Council’s deliberations.
In our view, reforming the working methods of
the Council is a major component of comprehensive
reform. Security Council reform would ensure
equitable
geographical
representation
for
all
continents, especially Africa, which is home to 54
countries. It is worth recalling that some 67 per cent of
the items on the Council’s agenda involve Africa.
Given that today’s meeting is focused specifically
on procedural questions that are necessary to enhance
the Council’s capacities, we wish to highlight some
elements of the final document of the sixteenth
Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Bali in May (see s/2011/407, annex I). In
particular, that document refers to improving the
Council’s working methods and to implementing the
measures set out in presidential note 507, in particular
the publication of the daily programme of Council
deliberations in the Journal of the United Nations and
making it available to all. In addition, the monthly
programme of work should be circulated at the
beginning of every month for consideration by all
Member States. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
of some Member States, when presiding over the
Council, to ensure that all Member States are informed
about the programme of work by keeping them abreast
of items on the Council’s monthly agenda in a
transparent and objective manner.

11-61406

In regard to the briefings and information offered
by Secretariat representatives and subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council, we call for the texts of those
briefings to be distributed among all countries. Copies
of the slides or other visual material that are sometimes
used during the briefings should also be distributed.
Council documents, especially reports of the
Secretary-General on peacekeeping operations, should
be circulated in advance, before the Council considers
them, in all official languages of the United Nations.
Very often, a version of the report is distributed to
Council members only, but is not circulated as an
official document to all Member States until the day of
the meeting and occasionally even thereafter.
In regard to meeting formats, we are mindful that
the number of public meetings and open debates is
growing every day. However, we all agree that most
Council meetings involve consultations behind closed
doors, in which only Council members, some
Secretariat representatives and other staff members
participate. Nevertheless, in the interests of objectivity
and transparency, the country concerned should be
allowed to participate in those consultations. We
reiterate the importance of enhancing consultations and
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations, with which we must
organize consultative meetings. This is consistent with
the provisions of paragraph 170 (a) of the Outcome
Document of the 2005 World Summit (resolution 60/1)
on the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals, in which the relevant regional organizations are
invited to participate in both open and closed Security
Council meetings, whenever needed.
We recall the three rights of all Member States
under the Charter and the Security Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, specifically rules 37
and 39 regarding the participation of all Members in
public meetings. We welcome the efforts of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, but we still hope that its
activities, conclusions and recommendations on
reforming the working methods of the Council will be
included in the annual report of the Council to the
General Assembly so that all Member States might
participate and contribute to those recommendations
and conclusions.
In conclusion, we are very mindful of the
importance of coordination and complementarity

11

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

among the various organs of the United Nations when
required, such as coordination between the Presidents
of the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Under no circumstances,
however, should we undermine the exclusive mandate
and prerogatives of those organs with respect to the
objective consideration of agenda items and the
measures taken in that regard.
The President: I give
representative of Malaysia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr.
Haniff
(Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for your
concept note (S/2011/726, annex), both of which are
valuable in their own right and demonstrate Portugal’s
continued commitment to greater openness and
transparency in the work of the Security Council under
your presidency. My delegation wishes to associate
itself with the statement made by the representative of
the Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Malaysia firmly believes that the reform of the
Security Council is important to ensuring that the
Council reflects today’s global realities and becomes a
more effective and competent body in addressing
various challenges and threats to international peace
and security. In that regard, we are of the view that the
principles of transparency, more frequent interaction
with non-members, consistency and efficiency should
be applied to the entire spectrum of the Security
Council’s work, including in the implementation of its
resolutions.
My delegation notes with much appreciation the
ongoing implementation of several measures contained
in document S/2010/507 to enhance the efficiency and
transparency of the Council’s work. We hope to
participate in more interactions like today’s meeting,
which we believe will provide the necessary impetus
for their implementation.
Allow me to first share my delegation’s views on
transparency of the work of the Security Council, in
particular on sanctions. Malaysia welcomes the further
improvement of the procedures and working methods
of the Security Council with regard to the sanctions
framework. However, while we maintain the highest
respect for the primacy of Council resolutions, the
rules of natural justice dictate that resolutions issued
under Chapter VII powers should be mindful of the
inherent right of individuals and entities to notice, to
be heard and to be represented. As such, while

12

assistance should always be rendered to third-party
States that have been inadvertently affected by the
imposition of sanctions, the rights of individuals
affected thereby should also be safeguarded, in
accordance with principles of international law.
In that regard, Malaysia wishes to express its
deep concern about the process of listing entities and
individuals pursuant to various Security Council
resolutions. Our deep concern stems from the refusal
thus far on the part of certain sanctions committees,
and by extension the Security Council, to share
pertinent information on sanctions actions affecting
Malaysia.
My delegation also notes that some progress has
been made in the transparency of some of the
procedures of certain sanctions regimes with the
incorporation of mechanisms that automatically de list
petitioners unless an express decision to retain them is
taken by the respective sanctions committee.
Nevertheless, we advocate that more should be done to
inject more transparency and fairness into the listing
and de-listing processes in order to ensure that both
processes are in compliance with the basic tenets of
natural justice and the rule of law.
In the rejection of requests for de-listing of
individuals, it is incumbent upon the respective
committees to inform the Member States or individuals
concerned of the reason why a de-listing request has
been rejected. It is not enough for the committee to
merely “make every effort” to provide reasons for
objecting to a de-listing request, especially in view of
the fact that significantly greater effort has been
exerted to establish the sanctions regimes and, further,
to place individuals and entities under them.
It would be detrimental to the Security Council’s
interests if requests for de-listing were rejected under
the guise of security, when the true motives for
rejection are political. The sanctions committees are,
after all, political bodies, as opposed to independent
and impartial judicial bodies. If, however, the sanctions
committees decide that transparency in decisionmaking is not possible for security reasons, then I fear
that the process will very much be subject to abuse by
members of the Security Council.
I would also like to briefly touch upon the issue
of encouraging greater interaction between the Security
Council and non-members and other United Nations
bodies. My delegation believes that the briefings given

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

to the Council by the Special Representatives, heads of
United Nations missions, Chairpersons of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the country-specific
configurations and of the Secretariat are inherently
useful, because they provide an account of what is
actually happening on the ground. As such, we would
encourage greater transparency in briefings made to the
Council and for non-members of the Council to be
allowed to attend briefings without the right to speak
or interact. That would not only generate greater
interest in many issues among the entire membership,
but would also afford non-members of the Council the
chance to understand subjects and the viewpoints of
the Council and minimize the political speculation that
can lead to misunderstanding on the part of
non-members of the Council.
Finally, Mr. President, I would like to commend
you for an exemplary stewardship of the Council for
the month of November, which in itself demonstrates
reform of the Council’s working methods. We have
observed, Sir, your briefings to members of the press,
your constant communications on the work of the
Council with non-members, and your deference to the
work of the General Assembly.
My delegation also appreciates the opportunity to
participate in two open debates this month. This month,
we have seen an increase in the transparency and
interaction of the Council, and we hope that this trend
will continue in the months and years to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): I thank Portugal for
convening this important debate, and I thank you
personally, Sir, for your leadership. Singapore fully
subscribes to the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland, who spoke on behalf of
the group of five small nations (S-5).
The call for improved working methods of the
Security Council and the reasons for that call have
worn a deep groove in the Council and the General
Assembly. Unless improvements are made, there is a
real risk that the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole will end up sounding like a broken
record to the rest of the world. To remain relevant, the
Council needs to ensure, through reform of its working
methods, that it is accountable, transparent, inclusive
and effective.

11-61406

However, this refrain has fallen on deaf ears.
Progress in working methods reform remains uneven
and slow. Some may argue that the Council should not
be marching to the tune of the General Assembly, as
the Council is master of its own procedures. However,
the effective functioning of the Council directly
impacts not just relations between the General
Assembly and the Council, but also each and every
Member State with a stake in international peace and
security. If the Council is to act for the benefit of the
wider membership, it should be willing to engage
members in open and honest dialogue and create a
virtuous cycle of feedback and effective decisionmaking.
In that spirit, we in the S-5 have set out in our
draft resolution specific suggestions on how the
authority and effectiveness of the Council could be
improved. I will mention one proposal that is closely
tied to inclusiveness.
The growing complexity of today’s global
challenges means that the Council must consider many
factors and actors, if it were to address any problem
comprehensively. When considering peacekeeping
mandates, for instance, there is a need to systematically
factor in peacebuilding considerations. The Council
could regularly invite Chairs of the country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission to
participate in relevant discussions. It would also be
good if the Council sought out Member States’ views
on their ability to implement Council decisions.
Some will point to the increasing number of open
debates in the Council as evidence of the Council’s
reformed working methods. But open debates in
themselves do not necessarily enhance the Council’s
accountability,
transparency,
inclusiveness
or
effectiveness. Given that outcomes are often
predetermined, it is difficult to see how open debates
can give Member States insight into the Council’s
deliberations or enable the Council to benefit from
Member States’ views on its work.
To be honest, the so-called open debates seem to
substitute for genuine dialogue between the Council
and the wider membership. Such suboptimal
communication between the Council and the General
Assembly cannot continue. If we are unintelligible
even to ourselves, we will not be able to send the
strong and coherent messages that the world is in dire
need of today.

13

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

It is clear that there are still many working
methods issues to be addressed. We need a sustained
and genuine dialogue between the Council and the
wider membership on working methods that can help
us reflect on where we are, review what has yet to be
done, and figure out what more we should do. The S-5
stands ready to engage constructively with the Council
on that important endeavour.
The world is undergoing a profound transition
and transformation. We are at an inflection point. The
Security Council needs to adapt to changing
geostrategic circumstances. The ultimate solution that
we all look towards is, of course, broad-based Council
reform, but working methods need to be improved now.
Otherwise, the Council and the United Nations both
risk becoming a broken record. In this wired and
networked age, the Council and the United Nations
should be working on a digital platform, not an analog
turntable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, I wish to express to you my gratitude for
convening this important meeting and for the concept
paper
distributed
earlier
to
facilitate
the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2010/507 on the working methods of the Security
Council. While associating my delegation with the
statement delivered by the representative of Egypt,
who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
let me share and emphasize the following points as
well.
The Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great
importance to reforming the working methods of the
Security Council with a view to strengthening the
Council’s role in promoting the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, particularly the maintenance of
international peace and security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as developing friendly
relations among nations and upholding the rule of law
in the international relations among States by taking
into account the interests of the general membership of
the United Nations.
One of the major concerns we have is the
excessive reliance on the unlawful use of force or the
threat of such use by powerful members of the Security
Council in order to advance their interests through
outdated practices, thereby continuing to endanger

14

international peace and security and undermine the
fundamental principles of the United Nations and
international law. The discussion of the reform of the
Security Council and its working methods would well
provide a platform for Member States to review and to
renew their commitments to the lofty principles of the
Charter and the main organs of the United Nations that
are supposed to promote peaceful international
relations among States.
As is correctly noted in the concept paper,
contained in the annex to document S/2011/726, the
lack of improvement in the three interlinked and key
areas of transparency, interaction with non-members
and efficiency in the working methods of the Security
Council continues to be the principle theme suggested
for discussion with the aim of identifying ways of
improving all those aspects. I wish to build on those
shortcomings through further elaboration and a few
practical suggestions, as follows.
First, according to Article 24 of the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council should act on
behalf of all Member States, but, in reality, Council
decisions not only reflect the wishes and the views of
the general membership less and less, but, in many
cases, do not even represent the genuine opinion of its
own membership.
Secondly, despite the requirements set forth in the
Council’s own decisions on its working methods,
including those contained in document S/2010/507,
which, for instance, call for consultation by the
Council with the broader United Nations membership,
in particular interested Member States, including
countries directly involved or specifically affected,
when drafting, inter alia, resolutions, presidential
statements and press statements, in many cases,
however, the general membership, even the countries
concerned, are kept totally uninformed of the
negotiations on resolutions or statements directly
affecting them, nor are their views even sought on the
Council’s outcome documents. That is also the case for
non-permanent members, which are frequently faced
with secretive negotiations among a few permanent
members on important issues.
Thirdly, the quick and unnecessary resort to
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and the
threat or use of sanctions in cases where no action is
even necessary are other disturbing facts that have

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

undermined the credibility and legitimacy of the
Council’s decisions.
Fourthly, the Security Council sanctions regime
needs to be reviewed. Sanctions should be imposed
only in strict conformity with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and should avoid exceeding
the Council’s authority or acting in breach of the
principles of international law.
In order to increase the transparency of its work,
achieve a balanced approach in its interaction with
non-members and improve the efficiency of its
working methods, the Council should seriously address
those shortcomings and take into consideration the
relevant provisions of the Charter, as well as the
resolutions that clarify its relationship with the General
Assembly and other organs of the United Nations. In
fact, the Security Council’s increasing encroachment
on the prerogatives of other main organs of the United
Nations, particularly the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary
bodies, as well as such technical bodies as the
International Atomic Energy Agency, is also of
particular concern to Member States.
The Security Council’s failure to adequately
improve its working methods and decision-making
processes has brought about a situation in which we
witness a decline in international public opinion’s trust
in that important organ. Undoubtedly, impartiality,
transparency and fairness are the key premises on
which the Security Council should base its approach in
discharging its Charter-mandated responsibilities.
Every effort should be made to render the Council
more democratic, representative and accountable. My
delegation stands ready to contribute to the
achievement of those goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Netherlands and
Belgium. First of all, I would like to thank Portugal, as
President of the Security Council, for having convened
this debate. It reminds me of a debate that I had the
honour to preside over in August 2008, which was
dedicated to the same theme (see S/PV.5968). We
would also like to express our gratitude to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to Japan for steering this agenda in
2011 and before.

11-61406

In recent years, real and encouraging
improvements have been made in the working methods
of the Security Council. Your concept note
(S/2011/726, annex), Mr. President, makes that very
clear, and rightly so. The debates on working methods
have already produced results. It is good to remind
ourselves that the Council today operates under new,
better and more transparent working methods than
before. So there has been movement, there is
movement and, hopefully, there will continue to be
movement, be it incremental and sometimes discreet,
but definitely movement. The Netherlands and
Belgium would like to commend both the permanent
members and the successive elected members of the
Council on their efforts in that regard.
The Netherlands and Belgium want to stress that
fact, because we do not want the further development
of better working methods to become hostage to a lack
of progress in the wider debate on Security Council
reform. In other words, we do not want the working
methods debate to come to a halt because there is no
movement or progress on the other chapters of the
Security Council reform agenda currently being
debated in the General Assembly.
In your concept note, Sir, you invite the wider
membership to come up with practical suggestions
aimed at enhancing transparency, efficiency and
Council interaction with United Nations members at
large that could make a difference in the day-to-day
Security Council business. The Netherlands and
Belgium would like to submit some very concrete
ideas, it being understood that none of those ideas, if
implemented, would encroach on the decision-making
power of the Security Council. The Netherlands and
Belgium wish to fully respect the powers of the
Security Council and its members, permanent and
elected, as set out in the Charter.
First, let us encourage the monthly presidencies
of the Council to take whatever action needed, within
their powers, in order to enhance the transparency, the
outreach towards the wider United Nations
membership and the efficiency of the Council. In
recent times, inventive and creative presidencies have
taken welcome steps in that direction, which deserve to
become more common practice. There are now more
public briefings, more public debates, more Arria
Formula meetings and more informal interactive
dialogues. That is much appreciated by the wider
membership. That modern approach to working

15

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

methods enhances not only interaction with Member
States, but also the potential to increase the Council’s
outreach towards regional organizations, civil society
and interested individuals.
Secondly, the Netherlands and Belgium see room
for further improvements when it comes to countryspecific debates. It is the task of the Security Council
to discuss challenges in specific countries. However,
sometimes, the country concerned is not included in
those discussions, when their [presence really matters.
A way to enhance the transparency and the
inclusiveness of the Security Council’s work would be
to invite countries regarding which issues are being
debated but that are not members of the Security
Council to contribute to Council debates of particular
importance and under a formula to be decided on an ad
hoc basis. By doing so, the Security Council would
give a fair and decent chance to countries to put their
point of view forward. After hearing such a country,
the Security Council can still discuss the issues at stake
in a restricted debate among its own members without
the country concerned having to be present. The same
goes for the Chairs of Peacebuilding configurations,
who could similarly contribute in an even more
effective way to the deliberations of the Council with
regard to the country on the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) agenda.
A similar reflection can be made with regard to
the need for increased interaction between the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat. That type of interaction would be
particularly welcome prior to the deployment and after
the return of technical assessment missions.
Thirdly, the notion of peace and security today
encompasses a far broader scope than it did 65 years
ago. In recent years, Security Council debates have
focused on climate change, international crime,
terrorism, piracy, diseases, natural resources and other
so-called “new” issues that affect international peace
and security. We would like to encourage the Council
to consult even more broadly than it has done so far.
Fourthly, the Netherlands and Belgium strongly
believe that there is potential for more inclusive and
more transparent working methods in the subsidiary
organs. Those organs prepare Council decisions and
can thus only benefit from external advice at their
level.

16

Let me give one example. The Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, currently under German
chairmanship, has granted access to the Chairs of PBC
configurations, because issues such as child soldiers
and gender-based violence against children are, all too
often, common practice in countries on the agenda of
the PBC. That practice of granting access to a
subsidiary organ should be generalized and should be
adopted as a general rule by all subsidiary organs, as
appropriate.
The Netherlands and Belgium have taken on an
active role in the debate on wider Security Council
reform. I believe that our statement of last Monday
during the first exchange of views during the eighth
round of intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform clearly underlined our common strong
commitment to Security Council reform in all its
aspects.
Improving the Security Council’s working
methods is clearly one aspect of the ongoing
negotiations in the intergovernmental negotiations in
the General Assembly, just as it is an issue under
consideration by this Council.
(spoke in French)
Finally, as others have done before me, I would
like to congratulate the President on the way he has
chaired this Council throughout November. He has
handled this very heavy task with a great deal of
authority and elegance.
The President: I thank the Ambassador for his
kind words. I now give the floor to the representative
of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I join the Belgian
Ambassador in paying compliments to the President of
the Council for the past month and particularly for
promoting this open debate today.
New Zealand has long maintained that, in
addition to changes to the composition of the Security
Council, there is an equally pressing need for wideranging reform of its working methods. As the Belgian
Ambassador emphasized, one reform should not be
hostage to the other. This stems from our belief that,
just as the Council derives its authority from the
Charter, it must be accountable to all the 193 Member
States that adhere to that Charter. The values and
principles it must uphold are our values and our
principles; the global peace and security it upholds is

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

our peace and security; and its successes and indeed its
failures in fulfilling its mandate profoundly affect us
all.
For the overwhelming majority of Member States
that are not members of this Council — the faces
pressed against the window — its working methods
affect our ability to understand and contribute to its
work. In turn, they directly affect the effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Council itself. All States have a stake
in ensuring that those working methods are transparent,
inclusive and effective, and when they are discussed,
we all have a right to have our voices heard and
listened to.
New Zealand therefore welcomes today’s debate,
the fourth on this topic since 1994. Since then,
significant improvements have been made to Council
working methods, most notably through presidential
notes S/2006/507 and S/2010/507. We commend those
welcome changes. Today’s discussions provide an
opportunity to review progress and to highlight areas
where further improvements can be made. In the
interests of time, I will focus on just four.
First, we acknowledge the significance of the
measures in note S/2010/507, but we still need more
consistent and meaningful implementation of those
measures. Such implementation would go a long way
towards enhancing the transparency, inclusiveness and
quality of Council deliberations. Achieving that,
however, requires that we challenge the Council’s
traditional culture and achieve a major shift in
longstanding mindsets.
Achieving that means that, whenever possible,
Council meetings, regardless of format, must be open,
and that there must be a clear and compelling reason —
preferably one that is publicly stated — when that is
not the case. It means making participation in such
meetings more meaningful and providing genuine
scope for non-members to contribute to Council
deliberations throughout the decision-making process.
It also means achieving more timely, consistent and
meaningful interaction with those non-members that
have a legitimate stake in its deliberations, particularly
troop- and police-contributing countries and countries
that are actually on the Council agenda. One way of
achieving that would be to make greater use of
innovative Council meeting formats, such as informal
interactive dialogues.

11-61406

It also means sharing draft documents with
non-Council members sooner and more frequently and
giving affected parties greater opportunities for input
in the preparation of those documents. It means
stimulating
more
substantive
and
interactive
discussions between Council members themselves. And
above all, it means making transparency and
inclusiveness a reflex action. Transparency and
inclusiveness should be the norm for the Council’s
work, not the exception.
The cultural shift required for the more consistent
and
meaningful
implementation
of
the
recommendations in note S/2010/507 will take time,
but it would help significantly if there were a more
systematic process for monitoring progress in that
implementation. As a first step, the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters should
consider developing a concrete action plan that
establishes clear goals and benchmarks for
implementation. Such a plan could form the basis of
regular progress reports, perhaps as part of the
Council’s annual report to the General Assembly.
Ideally, those reports would be informed by, and would
in turn feed into, future open debates in the Council
itself.
Secondly, we need to review current Council
conventions that inhibit the optimal and equitable
distribution of tasks and responsibilities. For example,
the conventions under which the permanent five (P5)
alone determine the Chairs of subsidiary bodies, under
which chairing roles are allocated to elected members
only, and under which the P5 always lead on countryspecific resolutions all lack any obvious justification
and should be discontinued.
Thirdly, we must ensure that the Council more
effectively draws on the expertise of, and coordinates
its activities with, relevant external actors. We urge the
Council to build on recent positive steps to increase
meaningful interaction with the Peacebuilding
Commission, particularly with the Chairs of countryspecific configurations and with regional and
subregional organizations. Consideration should also
be given to expanding that interaction to other relevant
actors. Such interactions need not impinge on the
Council’s powers and prerogatives. Indeed, properly
handled, they have the potential to augment the quality
and legitimacy of its deliberations.

17

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

Fourthly, we need to reconsider the existing
practice regarding use of the veto. New Zealand’s
views on the veto are well known, and they have been
consistent since we and others forced a vote on its
inclusion in the Charter in 1945. The veto is a truly
awesome power. Greater transparency regarding the
circumstances in which its holders would contemplate
its use and in explaining its actual use would help
reassure other States that its holders are wielding that
power responsibly.
Agreement on an informal code guiding the use
of the veto would be a welcome initiative. It was
described by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Spain as obligations of conduct, and we agree.
Those entrusted with the privilege and
responsibility of serving on the Security Council,
whether as permanent or non-permanent members, can
effectively discharge their duties only with the support
and cooperation of all other Member States — those
same States that elect non-permanent members and
whose adherence to the Charter underpins the
Council’s authority and its legitimacy. We
non-members — the “P-178” — have much to
contribute to the Council’s work, and we have every
right to expect transparency, meaningful opportunities
for participation and, above all, effective decisionmaking from the Council.
New Zealand acknowledges the genuine
improvements made in the Council’s working methods
since the first open debate, in 1994, and, again, we
compliment those responsible. It is in all of our
interests that we now move to complete that work by
seeing today’s discussions translated into more
meaningful action and into more consistent practice.
After all, this is not just a Council for its five
permanent members. It is not just a Council, pro tem,
for its non-permanent members. It is our Council, too.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
As I believe members know, I decided to speak
last in this open debate in order to be able to bring into
my statement suggestions and comments that were
made here today.
I think that the wide participation in this debate is
evidence that the issue of the Security Council’s
working methods is indeed a matter of interest for us
all. While it is up to the Council to adopt its own rules

18

of procedure, questions regarding its efficiency,
transparency and interaction with the general
membership concern all Member States.
That is why debates such as this one, open to the
wider membership, are of crucial importance. They
help the Council to assess regularly how its practices
match those aims, while presenting us with an
excellent opportunity to collect invaluable inputs from
the wider membership on ways to improve it further.
Enhancing
transparency,
efficiency
and
interaction with non-members of the Council is our
collective goal. This is a substantive concern, not a
formal one. The question is how to make the Council
more operational and effective, with a better use of its
time and resources and with the full engagement and
participation of all its members, and how to strengthen
its global influence as a principal body which acts on
behalf of all States Members of the United Nations by
bringing it closer to them. The question is, ultimately,
how to underline the Council’s authority through
enhanced
accountability,
through
a
better
understanding of its decisions, and through a more
open, participatory and efficient decision-making
process.
In recent years, much has been done by the
Council on the issue of working methods, as has been
repeatedly stated today, including through its Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Note 507 (S/2010/507) reflects
an important set of substantive improvements in
Security Council practice. Portugal commends the
efforts of Council delegations leading to the adoption
of that important document last year. In particular, we
would like to underline the leadership of Japan in this
meticulous enterprise.
Now it is important to ensure that those collective
efforts were not made in vain. We must intensify our
commitment to monitoring the implementation of the
new agreed practices on methods of work and assess
their impact on the intended goals of enhanced
transparency, efficiency and interaction with the United
Nations membership.
There is always room for improvement, and we
welcome in this regard the input of all Member States.
Allow me also to recognize the leading role of the
group of five small nations in their tireless efforts to
present us, in recent years, with useful thoughts and

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

proposals aimed at improving the Security Council’s
working methods.
On the issue of transparency, the Council, in our
assessment, during the past year continued the trend of
holding more public meetings. Briefings were regularly
made in public, giving the opportunity also to
non-members of the Council to benefit from useful
information on various situations on the Council’s
agenda. While consultations are useful in order to
better prepare Council decisions, some effort still has
to be made, in our view, not to resort so often to
consultations, instead leaving consultations for when
they are really needed, as informal and reserved closed
settings — which they are indeed — to help build
consensus and speed up decision-making.
Monthly briefings by the Presidents, including
wrap-up meetings, should be encouraged. This point
was also made by the representatives of Guatemala,
Egypt, Costa Rica and Spain, referring to the recent
example set by Brazil. We intend to follow this practice
and hold, as announced in the Journal, an informal
meeting tomorrow at 4.30 p.m. with the wider
membership, as a wrap-up of the Portuguese
presidency. These are useful practices to enhance both
transparency and interaction with the wider
membership, and it is a positive development that these
are becoming regular practices.
A more active role on the part of Council
Presidents should, however, be encouraged, so as to
enhance the visibility of the Council, including in their
regular contacts with the press. The contribution of the
presidencies in preparing more informative monthly
assessments should also be nurtured. Assessments are
useful instruments that will increase awareness of the
work of the Council once they are circulated among the
wider membership. They should provide useful insights
from the perspective of the presidencies, not mere
factual descriptions. More thought should be put into
improving the analytical aspect of the assessments, as
they are the source of the introduction to the Security
Council’s annual report. This point was also made by
many delegations here today, including Switzerland,
Egypt, Japan and Morocco.
On the issue of efficiency, some improvements
were made in consultations, where a considerable part
of the Council’s work takes place, as reflected in the
Council’s annual report: shortening the scripts and the
use of videoconferences are some of the positive

11-61406

measures taken in this regard. Greater conviviality,
interaction and informality in such an informal setting
only add to efficiency, and some efforts has been made
this year by Council members in that regard.
Nevertheless, some work also has to be done as
regards the unbalanced workload in the monthly
agenda. Many months are overloaded, with several
overlapping reporting deadlines and mandates
requiring extension at the same time — a situation that
requires some rethinking of how the Council can better
deal with recurrent matters without that exercise
absorbing most of its time, leaving little space on its
agenda for it to react to emerging crises and, most of
all, to exercise its role in the area of conflict
prevention.
Some thought is being devoted to this issue in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, as was noted by the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the start
of this debate. I take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Ivan Barbalić for his leading role as Chair
of the Informal Working Group.
Overall, with respect to the day-to-day internal
work of the Council, more effort should be put into
improving the exchange of information among all
members, promoting wider participation and initiative
in its internal decision-making process. In our view,
this would enhance not only the Council’s efficiency
but also its legitimacy as a principal organ of the
United Nations; this matter was raised by a number of
delegations here, including that of India.
Further efforts also have to be made as concerns
public meetings from the perspective of their
efficiency. Statements by delegations are usually too
long. Open debates in particular take too much time.
Further efforts must be made to focus our
interventions, both Council and non- Council, and
abide by the time suggested. Concept papers on
questions to be addressed are useful tools in this
regard.
Turning to interaction with non-members of the
Council, in informal consultations the Council
continued to avail itself of the possibility of holding
interactive dialogues, which continued to prove very
useful in that different actors were heard in an informal
setting, with the aim of helping the Council in its
decision-making process. This trend should be
encouraged. Arria-formula meetings also continued to

19

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

be organized. These new formats may be very
beneficial to the Council’s work, promoting interaction
at an informal level, enhancing dialogue and improving
information exchange. In our view, they could be used
more frequently. Tour d’horizon meetings with the
Department of Political Affairs are now being held
regularly and have proved to be useful instruments
from the perspective of conflict prevention, and I must
thank the British presidency for having introduced
them. Meetings with Special Representatives of the
Secretary General have also proved beneficial to the
Council’s work, as highlighted by some delegations
here today.
Debates, in particular open debates, could
facilitate greater interactivity. When the Council
decides to hold an open debate, the goal is to listen to
the wider membership and, if appropriate, reflect the
relevant inputs in the ensuing outcomes, when there are
any — not speaking first, deciding on the outcome and
then listening to the wider membership. I think that
there is undoubtedly room for improvement here, as
well as in terms of increased interactivity, greater focus
and shorter statements — giving real meaning to the
very concept of Council open debates. This point was,
as will be recalled, underlined here by some
delegations, including those of Mexico, Slovenia and
Morocco.
What more can we do? Surely, we can continue to
intensify the implementation of note 507 in all its
aspects. The Secretariat has a central role to play in
supporting presidencies and in reminding delegations
to use different tools agreed in that note.
I also would like to highlight some useful
suggestions put forward here today. On the annual
report, more analytical information, as well as
information on Council working methods, could be
requested. In our view, we could take more benefit
from the presentation of the annual report to the
General Assembly, and in this sense we welcome the
decision of the President of the Assembly to devote the
debate at this session entirely to the Council’s annual
report. But we think that these presentations could
improve as well, by focusing on specific aspects of the
Council work that were more salient during the
precedent year. Once again, more leeway could be
granted to the presidencies in drafting their
introduction to the report.

20

More work has to be done to establish a closer
Council relation with other bodies, such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, especially in the informal
work with the chairs of the country-specific
configurations and the President of the Economic and
Social Council. We agree with those delegations —
Brazil, Luxembourg and Switzerland — that referred to
the usefulness of such interaction. The need for further
reflection on the role of the Military Staff Committee
was also encouraged.
Some important suggestions were also made as to
the need for more transparency in the work of the
subsidiary bodies, the selection and independence of
the panels of experts, and the need for more
inclusiveness in the process leading to the election of
the chairs of the subsidiary bodies. We need also to
give further reflection to the implementation of
presidential note S/2006/507 concerning the work of
subsidiary bodies, which was the outcome of several
years of work in the former Working Group on
Sanctions. Relevant statements, including those of
Jordan, Liechtenstein, New Zealand and Spain, touched
upon the use of the veto, making substantive
contributions to this debate.
I wish to make one final remark to highlight the
importance of this debate. The number and complexity
of situations that the Council has to follow require an
increasingly demanding managing capacity of its
programme of work. However, in today’s world, with
new threats and challenges to peace and security
emerging, the Council has to look ahead be able to
anticipate crisis and devote enough time to conflict
prevention. And, to that end, it needs to work
continuously on its working methods to increase its
efficiency and to be able to fully exercise its
responsibilities.
I personally found this debate extremely useful,
and I thank all delegations for their interest in this
matter and their relevant contributions, which
encourage us to pursue our efforts to always improve
the working methods of the Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. Before adjourning the meeting, however, and as
this is, I hope, my last meeting as President of the
Council, I wish to make two very brief but heartfelt
remarks.

11-61406

S/PV.6672 (Resumption 1)

The first is to Movses Abelian and the Security
Council secretariat for the extremely professional,
knowledgeable, kind and even affectionate way in
which they supported us this month. They are indeed
not only the sixth permanent member of the Security
Council, but truly indispensable. We are very grateful
for all the support Mr. Abelian and his team have given
us.

11-61406

My second remark is one of deep appreciation for
our interpreters. They are extremely professional
people who permanently show enormous dedication
and great patience in dealing with our idiosyncrasies. I
thank them all very much indeed.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

21
