UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

255r

COUNCIL

Q$S@
MEETING:

17 AUGUST

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/255 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16692). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.255 1

.
:;

<

i”..

,

,*I,

ti0T~
.:/ ..
:’
Symbols of United’Nations
documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Men&k$~such
a symbol indicates a reference to a United
I
Nations document.
01
-. ‘C
’
Documents of the Security Council’(symbo1 S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
I

I

’

I

h

‘.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
De&ions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2551st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 17 August 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
Presidenr:

Mr. LCandre BASSOLE

(Burkina

Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Kasemsri (Thailand), Mr. Alleyne (Trinidad and Tobago)
and Mr. Silovic’ (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Faso).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from rFrench):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Afghanistan, Guyana, Kenya and Togo in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2551)

of the agenda

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16692)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Okeyo (Kenya) and
Mr. Adjoyi (Togo) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

was called lo order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): In
my capacity as President I have received a letter dated
17 August from the representatives of Burkina Faso,
Egypt and Zimbabwe which reads as follows:

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16692)

“We, the undersigned, members of the’.Security
Council, have the honour to request that during its
meetings devoted to consideration of the item entitled ‘The question of South Africa’, the Council
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, to Mr. Lesaoana Makhanda, representative of the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania
(PAC).” [S/16704.]

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at the previous
meetings [254&h to 2550th meetings] on this item,
I invite the representative of Algeria to take a place at
the Council table. I invite the representatives of Argentina, Benin, Congo, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Indonesia,
Kuwait, Mongolia, Nigeria, Qatar, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

If I hear no objection,
agrees to the request.

I shall take it that the Council

It was so decided.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/16700, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted on 17 August by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India,
Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru and Zimbabwe.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Muiiiz
(Argentina),
Mr. Ogouma
(Benin),
Mr. Samory
(Congo), Mr. Velazco San Jose’ (Cuba), Mr. Char
(Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Alatas (Indonesia), Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait),
Mr.
Nyamdoo
(Mongolia),
Mr. Onobu (Nigeria), Mr. Al-Kawari (Qatar), Mr. von
Schirnding
(South Africa), Mr. Wijewardane
(Sri

5. The first speaker for this meeting is the representative of Trinidad and Tobago. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
1

t

6. Mr. ALLEYNE
(Trinidad and Tobago): Mr. President, I thank you and through you the members of the
Council for having acceded to my request to participate
in the debate. I intend to speak as briefly as possible on
the matter before the Council.
:
.:

12. We are aware that the regime envisages establishing a different, separate constitutional
system for
the African majority, based on tribal origin and so constructed as to complement the bantustan system of socalled homelands for the territory’s 10 African tribes.
The African majority will thus be formally converted
into and dubbed tribal “minority
groups’*.

7. Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, upon your
assumption of the presidency for the current month.
With your wide diplomatic experience and your outstanding qualities, I am confident that you will ably and
successfully guide the Council during August.

13. Fragmented, separated from their families, relegated to eking out an existence in the arid, infertile and
isolated bantustans, labouring under appalling conditions with inferior wages in the mines or living precariously in the townships which border the white
cities, the African majority are relegated to the status
of migrant workers in their own land, relegated indeed
to the status of minority groups and dispossessed of
their patrimony.

8. I should like also to take the opportunity to express
to Mrs. Kirkpatrick
of the United States my appreciation of her capable handling of the affairs of the Council
during the month of July.

14. We all recognize that one of the reasons for the
regime’s giving limited political rights to the Coloured
and Asian population groups is to justify conscripting
them into the defence force. Viewed in the context of
the recent non-aggression pacts which certain States in
southern Africa have been coerced into signing with
Pretoria, and the regime’s latest attempt to impose on
Namibia an independence settlement which would bypass the United Nations plan adopted in Council resolution 435 (1978), this strategy takes on particularly sinister overtones.

9. ‘The matter before the Council is not one affecting
two great Powers able in their own right to defend their
interests. Nor, contrary to statements made here, is this
an unwarranted intrusion into the domestic affairs of
South Africa. The parties affected have no other reasonable recourse but to the General Assembly and the
Security Council. In their own native land, in what is in
effect their own nation, they are the victims of a brutal
regime that has deprived them of all those rights that are
held most dear by our international
institutions. The
latest action by the Government of South Africa seeks
to entrench a political, economic and social system
inimical to the interests of the black African in all of
southern Africa.

15. We are witnessing the evolution of a refined system of apartheid, built upon a strong, deep and carefully designed foundation. The Pretoria regime is taking
precisely calculated steps to give it an economic and
military stranglehold on the entire southern African
region. The implications
for the peace and stability of
Africa, and especially the southern part of the continent, are extremely grave.

10. Eight months ago the General Assembly rejected
the “constitutional
proposals” of the Pretoria regime
and declared them to be contrary to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 38/Zf of
15 November
19831. In spite of the almost universal
opprobrium of the international community, and heedless of the-effect which these proposals will have on a
tense-indeed,
tinder-dry-internal
political situation,
the regime has gone ahead with their implementation.
Elections to the tricameral legislature will take place
over the next two weeks, and the three houses are
scheduled to meet on 3 September.

:: .

16. It is essential that those best able to influence the
regime do not allow themselves to be hoodwinked by its
protestations of good intent and desire to reform. It is of
paramount importance that the international
community refuse to remain an impotent observer of this latest
and extremely dangerous stage in apartheid’s
evolution.

11. There are those who maintain that the limited
political representation given to the so-called Coloured
and Asian people under the “new constitution”
is the
beginning of the end of apartheid, and they imagine that
in due course the entry of the representatives of the
African majority into government will be facilitated as a
result of the white minority having learned to work with
other races. In the view of my delegation, this assessment is unrealistic, ignoring as it does the long record of
repression and intransigence of the Pretoria regime. We
view the so-called “new constitution”
as a deliberate
process further to entrench white supremacy by polarizing the other population groups, thereby fragmenting
their concerted opposition to apartheid and therefore
further cementing the rigid apartheid structures of
separate development.

17. My delegation urges all members of the Council to
support the draft resolution rejecting the so-called new
constitution.
Such a unanimous message to Pretoria
would serve to check its overweening confidence and
be a great source of encouragement to those within
South Africa who are courageously resisting the structure about to be imposed upon them.
18. For half a millennium,
black Africa has borne
more than its full share of suffering. Nothing but the
concerted action of all the Member States of the United
Nations, acting through the Security Council, can give
hope to this beleaguered people.
19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
The next speaker is the representative
2

from

French):

of Qatar, whom

I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

sive authority in the country, since it maintains that
minority’s privileges. As a ploy, it gives to 2.7 million
so-called Coloured and to 800,000 persons of Indian
origin the right to vote for segregated Houses that have
no genuine authority and are completely
under the
domination of the white Parliament, thus denying the
humanity of the indigenous African people-the
overwhelming majority-who
remain deprived of the right
to vote and of taking part in any way in governing the
country. What is the meaning of such a constitution and
such elections?

20.

Mr. AL-KAWARI
(Qatar) [interpretation
from
Thank you for calling on me to speak,
Mr. President. I am pleased to congratulate you on your
assumption of the stewardship of the Council for the
month of August. You are guiding our proceedings with
your well-known ability and competence.

Arabic]:

21. I also wish to thank the representative of the
United States for the excellent way in which she discharged her responsibilities as President of the Council
last month.

27. The implementation
of this “constitution”
and
the holding of such “elections”
are not related only to
the internal affairs of the country, since apartheid and
the violation of fundamental human rights run counter
to international
law. The United Nations must therefore condemn this situation and put an end to it, because its perpetuation will exacerbate tension and conflict in South Africa. The Council cannot sit idle in front
of such a situation, and it behoves all its members to
shoulder their responsibility
and not place any obstacles in the way of the Council’s achieving an effective
decision.

22. This is my first opportunity to participate in the
debate of the Cbuncil since I began my termof office at
the United Nations last May. I am privileged that the
topic under discussion is an issue of common deep
concern for us as well as for our African friends and the
other Member States, because it involves a flagrant
violation of human rights and a crime against humanity:
apartheid.

23. That crime of apartheid has been condemned by
the United Nations in several resolutions that have
been met with defiance and disregard by the racist
regime in Pretoria, which has flouted the international
community’s
collective condemnation
of its policies
and practices. The “constitutional
proposals” and the
parliamentary
“elections”
do not represent a retreat
from .the policy of apartheid, nor do they improve it.
They actually entrench this repugnant policy and reaffirm the domination of the white minority, as well as
deprive the vast majority of the citizens of the country
of any participation in the government, in contrast to a
democratic society where all citizens have the same
rights and duties.

28. In supporting the right of all the people of South
Africa to participate in governing their country without
any discrimination,
my delegation urges the Council to
adopt the draft resolution submitted by eight. of its
members [S/16700]. We hope that the Council will do
so, because’the white minority Government will not
cease to challenge the will of the international community unless convinced by decisive action, that the States
on whose political support it has so far relied-even
when flouting that will and repudiating the principles
of the Charter and relevant international
covenantshave finally decided to take a stand on the side of right
and justice and to join in the collective will of the
international community as spelt out in resolutions on
apartheid adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

24. Ever since it has participated in the work of the
United Nations, Qatar has condemned the policy of
apartheid. My delegation has always denounced apartheid and rejected discrimination
in South Africa by one
segment of the population against another, thus depriving 23 million Africans of the most fundamental
rights and guaranteeing to the white minority exclusive
rule and monopoly over all the resources of the country. This disregards the noble principles of the Charter
of the United Nations adhered to by the members ofthe
international
community,
as well as the instruments
and covenants at present constituting contemporary
international law.

29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
30. Mr. ALATAS (Indonesia): Sir, may I first express
my delegation’s sincere appreciation to you and to the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to participate in the present deliberations on a question
of acute concern to all of us. May I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month, and to
assure you of my delegation’s high regard for your
qualities of statesmanship and diplomatic skill, which
will certainly be indispensable for the success of our
common efforts.

25. In keeping with this unwavering position, my
country supports all efforts towards the implementation of the rights of the majority of the people of South
Africa, and, basing itself on the principles of the United
Nations and the right of peoples to self-rule in complete
equality, it condemns the constitutional manoeuvres of
the white minority rule.

3 1. The Council has been convened urgently to consider and to act on yet another in the long series of legal
frauds presented to the world by the racist Pretoria
regime.

26. The “new constitution”
of South Africa is designed only for the white minority, which seeks exclu3

..

-.
-.
.. ..
’
:
._
::.
:

32. For decades the Council and the international
community at large have sought to compel South Africa
to abandon its inhuman policy of nparrheid. Pretoria’s
response has invariably been one of arrogant defiance
and repeated resort to devious and fraudulent manoeuvres designed to entrench further an abhorrent,
institutionalized
form of racial oppression and discrimination. not only in South Africa itself but also in Namibia. which it continues to colonize and to exploit.
33. In a few weeks time, the Pretoria regime intends to
put the final touches to the creation of a three-chamber,
segregated legislature for the white minority, the socalled Coloured people and people of Asian origin. The
elections scheduled for 22 and 28 August are a prelude
to the bringing into force of the Constitution Act of
1983. These steps are being touted as “enlightened
constitutional
reforms” which would purportedly lead
towards broader participation by certain sectors of the
population in the country’s political process.
34. However, the world cannot be deceived by this
constitutional
hoax, which will bring neither greater
democracy nor surcease from the tyranny of racist
oppression to the overwhelming majority of the indigenous African people,
35. Indeed, ever since the so-called constitutional reforms were first proposed, and subsequently endorsed
by the exclusively white electorate in South Africa last
year, they have evoked universal condemnation by the
General Assembly of the United Nations, the Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity. And
quite significantly, this conspiracy has also been rejected by the so-called Coloured people and people of
Asian origin themselves, as well as by their genuine
representatives,
because they have correctly recognized it for what it is: a classic expression of the colonial
device of divide et impera.
36. A closer scrutiny of the proposed constitutional
changes fully reveals their insidious nature. First, the
tricameral legislative system with 178 white members,
85 Coloured members and 45 Asian members is simply
a pseudo-parliament,
since not only do the whites retain an automatic majority but the President has absolute powers, including the power to convene and dissolve it. Secondly, it is demeaning, as it attempts to
co-opt the so-called Coloured and Asian peoples as
accomplices and surrogate implementors
of the system of apartheid. Thirdly, it is wholly non-representative, because the indigenous black majority is totally
excluded. In substance, therefore, the changes proposed by Pretoria represent nothing more than a further
refinement of the already discredited policy of bantustanization dressed up in quasi-legal form.

.:.
.‘.-_

37. The implications of these changes are indeed farreaching and there can be no doubt as to what they will
be. They will not only lead to increased strife and

division within South Africa itself and throughout
southern Africa as a whole, but will also inevitably
aggravate the threat to international peace and security.
38. In view of these potentially disastrous deveiopments, the Council must take a clear and unequivocal
stand. The Council has no alternative but to condemn
this latest manoeuvre by categorically
rejecting the
scheduled elections and the imposition of the so-called
new constitution. Further, all unilateral actions by the
regime against the majority should be considered null
and void and likewise rejected unanimously.
To do
anything less would seriously erbde the credibility and
authority of the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole. We are confident that resolute action
now would provide the much-needed support and encouragement for the African majority in their legitimate
struggle against colonial oppression and racial discrimination.
39. Apartheid has been universally recognized as a
crime against humanity. It is the very essence of human
degradation and a violation of the most fundamental of
human rights. Apartheid therefore cannot be reformed
or improved upon by incremental measures. It should
be eliminated in its totality. For it is only by building a
new non-racial, democratic society based on majority
rule that lasting peace and social justice can be established in South Africa and on the African continent as a
whole: My delegation expects that all Governments,
including those that have continued to lend credence
and support to the Pretoria rCgime, will not shirk their
moral duty and political responsibility to join in a common endeavour to secure this objective.
4;. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the’representative
of Togo. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
.
statement.
41. Mr.
ADJOYI
(Togo)
[interpretation
from
French]: Sir, I am particularly pleased, as I am speaking
for the first time under your presidency, to extend to
you my heartiest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the current month.
This is a tribute you fully deserve because of your
personal qualities and your diplomatic skills. You represent a country with which my own country has close
bonds-of friendship and co-operation. We are sure that
your qualities guarantee the success of the work of the
Council.
42. 1 should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
whose wisdom made it
possible for the Council to enjoy a relatively peaceful
month of July.
43. Finally, I should like to express my appreciation
to the Council for giving me this opportunity to speak
on the question of the so-called constitutional reforms
in South Africa which has been placed before the Council by the Group of African States.

44. “In the common quest to realize the ideals and
objectives of the Charter, we must never lose sight of
the quality of the world we are seeking to build and of
the ultimate ruison d’&tre for all our activities: the
individual human being, for whom the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims the right to a social
and international order in which human rights and fundamental freedoms can be fully realized.“’
Those words of the Secretary-General
which I have
just quoted are particularly
relevant as the ,Council
considers the thorny problem of the strengthening
of apartheid through the so-called constitutional
proposals.
45. By placing this matter before Council, the Group
of African States wishes once again to alert the international community to the gravity of the development
of the system of apartheid and to invite it to take action
before it is too late. The so-called constitutional
reforms are aimed at a single objective, namely, to systematize and further entrench the policy of apartheid.
They are but an act in a drama which is moving inevitably towards a tragic outcome: the black man, who is
already deprived of his rights, will become a non-being.
46. How can we reach any other conclusion when
analysing these alleged reforms, when we see that the
“constitutional
reforms” are aimed at allowing the
Coloured people and the people of Asian origin to participate in the political life of the country, whereas
23 million Africans constituting the overwhelming majority of the population are excluded from such participation. Each racial group, excluding the 23 million
Africans, will be able to manage its own affairs, but
their nature will be determined by the President of the
State. Under the new system of constitutional
representation, 130 representatives of the Coloured people
and of the nationals of Asian origin will sit across from
178 whites, which clearly means that the whites will
continue to impose their laws, first on the second-class
citizens which the Coloured and Asians will become,
and then, of course, on the blacks.
47. One may wonder what logic could give 2.8 million
Coloured and 800,000 people of Asian origin in South
Africa the right to elect representatives, whereas the
23 million blacks are deprived of that right.
48. The apartheid system has its very own logic, since
it is based on racial domination. Hence it becomes easy
to understand that the goal of the white minority in
Pretoria is to transform two thirds of the territory into
an area belonging to the whites, in conformity with the
1936 Land Act. One can also understand the policy of
bantustanization,
with the creation of allegedly independent bantustans, the better to control the blacks
while taking away their South African nationality. At
the present time the 23 million blacks occupy only
13 per cent of the land, 87 per cent of which remains in
the hands of 5 million whites.

49. After having made the black South African a foreigner in his own country as a result of this policy
of bantustanization,
the Pretoria authorities are now
turning their attention to the Coloured people and those
of Asian origin-who
are not covered by the Race
Classification Act and the 1936 Land Act-in order to
control them, too, by making them second-class citizens in their service, in particular in the army, where
they will be able to use them to annihilate their blackskinned fellow citizens.
50. It is important that these Coloured ‘people and
people of Asian origin, who are South Africans, not be
deceived. The solidarity that has always existed between blacks and Coloureds must continue if the goal of
creating an egalitarian social order is to be attained. The
Coloured brothers and those of Asian origin and the
white friends who have contributed to the struggle for
freedom and justice in South Africa, their homeland,
must remain vigilant and not fall into the trap of these
new South African manoeuvres.
5 1. Nationals of Asian origin must not forget-as was
so rightly pointed out by the representative of India
[254&h meeting&the
important role that some of them
have played in the struggle against racism. We shall
always remember how Mahatma Gandhi, the father of
the Indian nation, worked against oppression in South
Africa.
,52. When on 2 November 1983 the apartheid regime
had the so-called constitutional reforms approved by an
exclusively white electorate, the international
community was not deceived. It reacted, and the General
Assembly by an overwhelming majority and without
opposition adopted on 15 November resolution 38/l 1,
which, inter aliu,
“Rejects the so-called ‘constitutional
proposals’
and all insidious manoeuvres by the racist minority
regime of South Africa further to entrench white
minority rule and apartheid”.
53. My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will also carry out its responsibilities
and adopt a resolution also rejecting these constitutional
measures
aimed solely at strengthening the policy of apartheid,
which it has already condemned. By taking this stand
the Council would remind everyone that the ultimate
ruison d’dtre of all our activities is mankind, regardless
of race, and that by signing the Charter of adhering to it
we, the peoples of the United Nations, have determined
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person”.
54. As the President-Founder
of the Rally of the
Togolese People and President of the Republic, General
Gnassingbe Eyadtma, said:
“Togo cannot compromise with the situation of
injustice and oppression prevailing in that region
where a regime unworthy of man and of our times,

,.,

.

‘.. .

one which is contrary to all rules of morality, is
maintained at the ,price of untold violence against a
people whose only crime is the colour of their skin.”

That was said by the representative

of France.

62. The representative of another veto Power said
that if the Council were to move for South Africa’s
expulsion,

55. It is time apartheid came to an end, and my delegation is convinced that if all States truly wished it, the
death-knell of apartheid could soon be heard in South
Africa. We hope that all States will assume their responsibilities.

“It would make it difficult, if not impossible, for
the Organization to explore and exploit the recent
statements made both here and in South Africa which
hold out some hope of change in the right direction.”
[Ibid., paw. 95.1

56. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Guyana.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

That was the representative
63.

57. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): Sir, it is with particular
pleasure that I see you, the representative of friendly
and non-aligned
Burkina Faso, presiding over the
Council in the month of August. Your well-known diplomatic skills, your efficient manner and your unequivocal commitment
to policies based on the principles of equity and justice guarantee that the work of the
Council during the month of August will be effectively
and successfully concluded.

The representative

of the United

of the United

Kingdom.

States said:

“We are heartened, indeed, by some encouraging
words in this chamber voiced by the representative of
South Africa. On 24 October [1800th meeting], he
himself implied that the South African Government
was responding not in a vacuum but in reaction to
world events, not the least of which has been the
condemnation
of South Africa’s apartheid
. . .
policies within this international
Organization.”
[Z808th meeting, para. 56.1

58. I must also take this opportunity
to express to
your immediate predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
my delegation’s appreciation for the very capable manner in which she conducted the business of the Council
in the month of July.

Later on he said:
“My Government believes that this kind of all-ornothing approach would be a major strategic mistake,
especially at a time when we are hearing what may be
new voices of conciliation out of South Africa. These
new voices should be tested.‘* [Ibid., paw. 61.1

59. -Ten years ago the Council held an important and
profound debate on South Africa’s relations with the
United Nations. I should like to invite members of the
Council to return with me to three statements made in
the course of that debate. On that occasion some members of the Council demanded South Africa’s expulsion
from the United Nations. I recall that debate not out of
any intention on my delegation’s part to invite a revival
of the question of expulsion. I wish to make that very
clear. I do so rather in an effort to situate the current
debate in an historical context, which, I believe-and
I say so with all the humility of which I am capablecould be helpful in our present analysis of the situation
regarding South Africa.

64. That was 10 years ago. After the expressions of
optimism made by South Africa and its Western friends
in the Council regarding the possibilities, and indeed
the imminence, ofchange in southern Africa, it could be
useful for the Council, as it considers the question of
the so-called constitutional
reforms in South Africa,
to examine the extent to which that optimism has been
justified by subsequent events. If this examination
proves that that optimism was misplaced and unwarranted, then I suggest that a special responsibility now
devolves on those who in 1974 encouraged this feeling
of optimism,
who, incidentally,
have been the ones
preventing any action by the Council in respect of
South Africa.

60. Speaking in the Council on the occasion of that
debate, the representative of the racist minority rCgime
said: “We shall do everything in our power to move
away from discrimination
based on race or colour.”
[1800th meeting, para. 104.1

65. For purposes of brevity I shall not deal with the
various actions taken by the Pretoria regime between
1974 and the present time, which in any case are well
known to all of us, and we all know the verdict of those
years. The current reality is a piece of draft legislation which it is contemplated will enter into force very
soon and which represents a new debasement of the
condition of South Africa’s black, Coloured and Indian
populations, for that would be the result of what has
been euphemistically
described as South Africa’s constitutional reforms.

61. Members will recall that the draft resolution requesting expulsion [S/f 154.31 attracted three vetoes.
The representative of one veto Power said:
“our world is developing and the situation of Africa is
developing.
It has changed since last year in the
immediate vicinity of southern Africa. There are new
factors appearing and those who are stubbornly opposed to change must take them into account.”
[1808th meeting, parn. 80.1

66. I place special emphasis on members of the black
population, the overwhelming majority in South Africa,
6

whose denationalization
will be effectively ratified by
these so-called reforms and for whom any prospect of
participation in the internal political process is eliminated, at least for the time being.

concern for human rights. However, apartheid, despicable and inhuman as it is, involving the large-scale
and systematic dehumanization
of the overwhelming
majority of the people of South Africa. does not provoke similar responses-either
because its victims are
predominantly
black or because of the profit motive
involved, or out of strategic considerations or some
combination of these factors. Whatever the reason, it is
indeed a sad commentary on the nature of the commitment which some States profess to have to the maintenance of certain values that the apartheid policies of the
Pretoria regime should find the encouragement they are
finding in the attitudes of some Western States.

67. In a real sense, therefore, this debate is not simply
about South Africa and the attempts of the Pretoria
regime to maintain the supremacy of white minority
rule and apartheid. It is more than that, in the view of
my delegation. It is also a debate about the Organization itself, and its resolve and effectiveness in dealing
with large-scale human degradation such as is taking
place in South Africa. In particular it is also about those
of its members who have permitted the indecency of
racism to reach the enormous proportions we are now
witnessing in southern Africa while assuring the international community that change is around the corner.

72. A legislative travesty such as the so-called reforms we are considering may serve to remove blacks
from participation in the political process, but there is
no legislation that can cause the nationalist sentiment
of South Africa’s black majority to disappear. There
can be no legislation against black anger, which these
measures do so much to further stimulate. The Council
will recall, as it looks back over the past seven decades
of black protest in South Africa, how fitful, diffident
and even moderate that protest was in its early days. It
was the obstinacy of South Africa’s ruling cliques, rebuffing black demands at every turn, that forced the
black majority of South Africa into positions of greater
militancy and toughness. The constitutional
measures
we are now considering only lead to more anger and
alienation.

68. Our preoccupation
with apartheid is of long
standing; it is almost as old as the Organization itself.
Over the years we have examined, both in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly, every facet of
that system and its effects upon the oppressed population. The Assembly has consistently called for specific action to be taken by Member States acting individually, as well as by the Council, in order to prevent
the spread of the scourge that apartheid represents and
to exert pressure on the Pretoria regime for introducing
change in its policies.
69. A number of States have taken positive action in
their own ways, according to their possibilities, for the
application of pressure upon the Pretoria regime. But
this has not been enough to achieve the purposes intended. While condemnation
of upartheid has been
world-wide, there has unfortunately never been a solid
international consensus on the need to do something
concrete about it. And this lack of consensus has been
systematically exploited by South Africa.
70. The Council has consistently been called upon to
take certain kinds of actions against South Africa because of its racist and aggressive policies. Those calls
have always enjoyed the support of an overwhelming
majority of Member States, but there have always been
a few to prevent the Council from acting in the manner
requested. What has most helped sustain South Africa
and the continuation of apartheid is the regime’s conviction that in the last resort its perceived economic and
strategic value will prevent its Western friends from
taking action which will help make difficult the chances
of survival of apartheid. And those Western States
concerned have done or said little to shake that conviction. Quite the contrary: by their attitudes and actions
they have encouraged such a conviction and helped
make possible excesses such as we are witnessing now
in South Africa.
71. Some States are not too small for their own internationally recognized efforts at national reconstruction
to attract external scrutiny, with significant commitments of energy and resources, all under the banner of a

73.’ There is still time to channel those feelings into
avenues consistent with peaceful change, if the Pretoria
regime were interested in such a process. But for the
time being, since it is excluded from political participation, South Africa’s black majority will express itself in
the only way left open to it. The Pretoria regime cannot
drive the majority of its population into a legal limbo,
fuelling their anger in the process, and wonder at the
consequences. There will be more Sharpevilles and
more Sowetos, each more intense, perhaps, than the
preceding. Many will fall, but in falling they will also be
handing over the torch to others who will carry forward
the fight for human dignity.
74. These constitutional
reforms underscore the
pressing need for this Council to take early action for
the dismantling of the hateful apartheid system. The
horizons of hope to which South Africa pointed in 1974
have long since been darkened by the very actions of
the Pretoria regime itself. What is the pretext now?
What else do we now wait for?
75. In the meantime, I should like to join my voice
to those of delegations which preceded me here in
expressing support for a decision by the Council rejecting the so-called constitutional
reforms and calling
on States not to accord any recognition whatsoever to
’ the result of the so-called elections to be held later in the
month of August.
76. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
The next speaker is Mr. Lesaoana Makhanda,
7

French):

to whom

the Council has addressed an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

narliament. Together. the whites. so-called Coloureds
and people of Asian origin currently number 7.8 million, or 27 per cent of South Africa’s total population.
Looking carefully at the four-to-two-to-one
ratio of
representation worked out by the ruling Nationalist
Party, it becomes quite evident that effective power will
lie in the hands of the current white minority rulers.

77. Mr. MAKHANDA:
Allow our delegation, Sir,
which is speaking here on behalf of the discriminatedagainst, dispossessed, oppressed, exploited and struggling masses of our country, Azania, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of August. We are confident that your
leadership qualities, characterized by your diplomatic
skills, will ably guide these deliberations and facilitate
the efforts of the Council to arrive at a just and humane
decision.

83. It will also be noted that the new constitution
totally excludes the indigenous African majority. Their
exclusion is “justified”
by the establishment of 10 socalled independent bantustans, where they must “exercise citizenship and political rights”. Already, some
10 million Africans have been affected by evictions and
expulsion into the bantustans. The 10 envisaged bantustans will eventually cover only 12.7 per cent of the
total land area of South Africa. The remaining 87.3 per
cent has been declared “white South Africa”, where
the indigenous African, the rightful owner, has been
arbitrarily declared a foreigner.

78. May I also join those who before me expressed
their appreciation and admiration to your predecessor,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick
of the United States, for the
manner in which she guided the deliberations of this
Council last month. Again with your permission, Mr.
President, my delegation wishes to express its guarded
satisfaction at the position taken by the United States
representative when she spoke in exercise of the right
of reply yesterday [2549rh mecfing]. We take note of
that position,

84. The system, under the new constitution,
which
will be effective as of 3 September, is designed to work
in such a way that even if all the so-called Coloured and
Asian-origin members of parliament combined with a
white opposition amounting to as much as 49 per cent
of the white chamber, they could not stop a white
chamber majority of only 51 per cent based on the
25 million Afrikaaners from controlling the Government. Real power, therefore, will always remain in the
hands of the Nationalist Party, the present ruling party.

79. Last but not least, our thanks go to our brothers
and sisters in the Group of African States, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the socialist States,
and to all others who have stood with us during this
debate. To all of them we say, if I may quote a brother
who was in a liberation movement which has now succeeded, “The voice of the people is the voice of God,
and it will always triumph.”

85. Moreover, straightforward
majority rule by the
proposed and envisaged combination
of whites, socalled Coloureds and people of Asian origin is also
excluded. Each race group will run “its own affairs”.
What constitutes their “own affairs” is also defined,
and it includes culture, schooling, art, recreation, community planning and social welfare. Everything else, by
definition, is of “common concern”. It should be noted
that the so-called Coloured and Asian members of parliament will not be allowed to introduce any subject in
their own racial chamber unless the new constitutional
act is accompanied by a certificate from the State President saying that the subject matter deals with the “own
affairs” of the population in question.

80. On 2 November 1983, the white-only electorate,
representing one fifth of the total population of Azania,
voted in a referendum on the constitutional
proposals
worked out by the Pieter Botha wing of the ruling allwhite Nationalist
Party. Needless to say, since the
passage of the then so-called constitutional
proposals,
much discussion and controversy, both inside and outside of Azania, has been engendered.
81. The new constitution, officially called the Republic of South Africa Constitution
Act, provides for a
t&racial three-chamber parliament consisting of a 178member house of assembly for whites, an 85-member
house of representatives for so-called Coloureds-a
term used in apartheid South Africa for persons of
mixed race-and
a 45-member house of deputies for
people of Indian origin. Here it might be interesting
to note that if somebody says that he is a member of
the house of representatives one automatically
knows
that he is a Coloured, and if somebody says that he is a
member of the house of deputies one automatically
knowns that he is of Asian origin.

86. In essence, the so-called Coloured and Asian
members of Parliament will be allowed to discuss only
those “own affairs” issues approved by the State
President, who will always be a member of the majority
party in the white Chamber. For instance, the so-called
Coloured and Asian members will not be able to discuss
the Group Areas Act, which affects them directly and
which constitutes a key pillar in the application of
apartheid, because it is not considered as, and does not
fall within, the “own affairs” category. Consequently,
the so-called Coloured and Asian Chambers will be
mere talking shops, discussing those topics approved
by the State President.

82. Whites, so-called Coloureds and people of Indian
origin, voting on separate voters’ rolls, will elect members of pariiament to serve in three separate houses of

87. Another aspect of the new constitution that has
received much attention is the powers bestowed on, or
8

vested in, the State President. The State President, to
be elected by an electoral college, will be the mist
powerful person in apartheid South Africa. The electoral college will comprise 50 white members, 25 socalled Coloureds and 13 people of Asian origin. The
white collegians thus outnumber the others by 30 per
cent, thereby ensuring that the State President will
always be white and from the majority white party-in
this case, the racist Nationalist Party.

function of government. In the same vein, Alexis de
Tocqueville refers to a “general law-which
bears the
name ofjustice-and
which is not peculiar to any group
of people but accepted by a majority of mankind.”
91. It is this universality ofjustice which is reflected in
the declaration on human rights in the Charter of the
United Nations and which it is the heavy responsibility
of the Security Council to protect froni dishonour. The
Governments of the Member States of the United Nations have different structures, SOit is not the structure
of the South African Goiremment that is at issue but its
nature-that
is, the basis of its structure: its disregard
for the individual as the universally accepted denominator in government and its emphasis on race. Given
that proposition, it is irrelevant that the new constitution excludes the majority of the people-the
Africans.
An additional, fourth Chamber would still be based on
racial Iines. It would still emphasize the group over the
individual. The State would still define the individual,
thus imposing forced allegiance by the individual first
to a group, rather than to a principle common to all
mankind.

88. The State President will have the pow&r and
authority to appoint any number of cabinet ministers
and deputy ministers and to preside over the Cabinet;
dissolve Parliament or any House of Parliament; proclaim or terminate martial law; declare war and peace;
decide what are the “own affairs” of a particular population group-and
his decision about this may not be
tested or commented upon in a court of law-and dictate to the Houses of Parliament what legislation they
may or may not discuss. Any bill on “own affairs”
introduced in a House must be accompanied by a certificate from the State President saying that it deals with
the “own affairs” of the population group in question,
The State President may also remove or transfer people
in the service of the State. The control and administration of black affairs will also be vested in him. In
addition to all these and other far-reaching powers, the
State President will be in control of all revenues of the
Republic. We might see this in relation to the scandal of
the slush fund the former Prime Minister, John Vorster,
was involved in, and its repercussions.

92. As stated above, there are those who argue that
the new constitution is a step in the right direction,
that it will eventually transform itself into an instrument of democratic government based on respect for
the individual.
The inherent racial foundation of the
constitution,
however, invalidates such a prediction.
Arguments of the various groups discredit this prediction and clearly indicate that the conflict between race
and individual as a basis for a just government cannot
be ignored.

89. Given that the so-called new constitution in no
way alters the bantustanization
policy of the apartheid
regime, but, rather, institutionalizes
it; given that
power will perpetually remain in the hands of the Nationalist Party, the architects of aparrheid under the
new constitution: given that the so-called Coloured and
Asian members will be incapable of introducing any
change not approved by the racist Nationalist
Party,
it is obvious that the new constitution is a mere fraud
and reflects no change whatsoever in the substance of
apartheid. On the contrary, the so-called new constitution entrenches and institutionalizes
apartheid. Thus it
is not a recipe for “gradual” change or “a step in the
right direction”.
It might well be said that it is a step to
the right. It simply represents white supremacy in a
more subtle guise.

93. Among people of Asian origin, objection to participation is based on the constitution’s
restriction to
narrow Indian concerns, to the exclusion of the greater
concerns in the African and Coloured communities.
The objective of those favouring particibation,
on the
other hand, is to discredit the constitution with a negative vote because of its racial nature.
94. Similarly, the so-called Coloureds favouring participation also object to the non-integrated political parties and to the exclusion of Africans, and those that
favour a boycott argue that the constitution entrenches
apartheid and divides the “politically
black” Coloureds from identifying with the African majority. It is
this general rejection of the racist basis of the constitution that provided Botha’s opposition to a referendum
for so-called Coloureds and people of Asian origin.

90. The general focus of debate on the new South
Africa constitution by its apologists in the international
community has been, and continues to be, on its structure rather than on its nature. The emphasis has been
on the sovereignty of the State rather than on the sovereignty of the people. And yet the foundations of
democracy are the sanctity and dignity of the individual. In that respect we may reflect on the sentiments
expressed in the American Declaration of Independence as self-evident truths: “that all men are created
equal . . . with certain unalienable Rights, that among
these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.”
To establish and protect these principles is the main

95. The overwhelming
approval of the new constitution by whites simply reinforces the arguments advanced by the so-called Coloureds and people of Asian
origin for and against participation,
which is that it
perpetuates white domination. The difference between
the “No” vote and the “Yes” vote is based on the best
means of perpetuating that domination, with the “Yes”
vote depending on the new structure to do it better than
the old.
9

96. It is the exclusion of the African majority from
this structure of government that has become the common focus of attention. To blacks, however, it is the
racial basis of this structure that is objectionable, and it
is that basis which guarantees its failure, and will continue to do so. It is rejected because the individual is
only a statutory entity. Its foundation is therefore laid
on racial prejudice, the exclusion being only one facet
of that prejudice.

103. The new political provisions exclude 24 million
Africans, who thereby cease to be citizens. The others,
whoare supposedly involved in the system, are actually
on the mere fringe of society and are reduced to the.role
of puppets. Actually, within the framework of the new
programme as contemplated,
very clear information is
given. The white Parliament will be called a chamber of
assembly and will retain its 178 seats. The so-called
Coloureds will elect, on the basis of a separate list, an
85-member house of representatives;
those of Asian
origin will elect, also on the basis of a separate list, a
45-member chamber of deputies. Under the provisions
of those proposals, the role of the house of representatives and that of the chamber of deputies is a mere
fiction, because all they can discuss is their own affairs.

97. As for the oppressed, exploited and dispossessed
people of Azania and the custodian of their true aspirations, PAC, until the real problem ii addressed-that
of
the land, ‘that of non-racialism, and that of supremacy of
the individual-any
constitution will be meaningless as
regards our struggle for national liberation.

104. It is important that the Council show firm determination to thwart the increasingly cynical, Machiavellian initiatives taken by the Pretoria racists. This, of
course, can be done only if certain States which are
known to have influence over the apartheid regime
abandon the ambiguous position they have taken and
show the world that their abhorrence of apartheid is
genuine and sincere. For it is from that ambiguous
position that the racist r6gime draws strength in its
oppression of the martyred people of South Africa.

98. The South African representative’s statement to
this body yesterday noted: “Prejudice is not inclined to
yield to reason” [254&h meeting, para. 781. Since the
new constitution is based on prejudice, it can therefore be assumed that it cannot be changed through
reason. What then are the alternatives? To the oppressed, exploited, dispossessed, and the discriminated against masses of Azania, the answer is obvious.
99. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of BURKINA
FASO.

105. Only thus, in otir view, will true change take
place in South Africa.

100. Since 1946, the United Nations has had before it
the issue of the policies and practices of apartheid. The
so-called constitutional
reforms recently introduced by
the racist regime of Pretoria are a mere variation of
those policies and practices of which Pretoria is a past
master.

106. The General Assembly has set the tone by
adopting resolution 38/l 1 of 15 November 1983 on the
question we are currently considering.
107. When all attempts at legitimate opposition to the
dilatory manoeuvres-of
the Racist rCg&e have been
severely repressed, the Council cannot and must not
remain deaf to the appeals of the Democratic Front
to the international
community.
It must, through unequivocal decisions. help the people of South Africa in
their just struggle to put an end to apartheid and to
create a truly democratic South Africa. It must go far
beyond the position adopted by the General Assembly,
unless it is felt that the majority of the population in
South Africa is so black that it is difficult to pity it.

101. During its thirty-eighth session, the General Assembly exposed the true nature of the so-called constitutional reforms. It not only rejected them, but clearly
identified the conditions which, if they were to exist,
would lead inevitably to ajust and lasting solution to the
explosive situation maintained by Pretoria in South
Africa. These conditions are, among others, the total
and final elimination of apartheid and the creation of a
democratic non-racial society based on majority rule.

108. For its part, Burkina Faso is determined to support this oppr&sed people by all possible means so that
freedom, justice, equality and human dignity may be
the best shared values of the world.

102. Today, it is once again up to the Council to make
itself heard. It is important for the future of the just
cause of the oppressed people of South Africa that it
succeed in this. It can do so if each of its members
makes an objective and honest appraisal of the situation
as it prevails in South Africa and speaks one and the
same language: the language of freedom, the language
of justice and of equality, the language of human dignity. Such an evaluation would lead to the revolting
conclusion that the major goal pursued by racist South
Africa through the so-called constitutional reforms is to
perpetuate the domination of the white minority, and in
order to succeed in this it is trying desperately but
stubbornly to break the unity of the oppressed majority
by instigating internal conflicts and by killing politically
the indigenous Africans.

109.

I now resume my function

as PRESIDENT.

110. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): On behalf of the eight
non-aligned members of the Council that have sponsored the draft resolution
contained in document
S/1670&Burkina
Faso, Egypt, India, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru and Zimbabwe-i
should like to
inform the Council that we have been engaged in consultations with regard to the text of the draft resolution,
as you yourself, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council are aware.
10
I

111. I wish on behalf of the sponsors to inform the
Council that as a result of these consultations we have
agreed to make a few changes in the text of the draft
resolution that was circulated yesterday. First, we have
agreed to delete the second preambular paragraph.
Secondly, in the original fifth preambular paragraph,
now the fourth, the expression “apartheid
armed
forces” has been changed to read “armed forces of the
apartheid regime”. Also in the same paragraph, the
word “aggression” has been changed to read “aggressive acts”. Thirdly, in the last preambular paragraph,
the words “and conflict” have been deleted, as has the
last clause in that paragraph-namely,
the words
“thereby exacerbating the threat to international peace
and security”.

its policy of constitutional
reform. The limited scope of
the constitutional
proposals themselves seemed to
warrant such wariness on the part of world opinion.
First of all, these proposals did not emanate from a
body representative of the people of South Africa as a
whole. They were endorsed by a referendum in which
only the white electorate took part, to the exclusion of
other groups. The basic flaw of the constitution, however, lies in the fact that it utterly fails to address the
most pressing, all-important
issue: the disfranchisement of South Africa’s black majority. The new constitutional framework does not remove the elaborate
maze of laws on which the structure of apartheid rests,
nor does it contain any provisions for an eventual
scheme of power-sharing with the black people of
South Africa. It is distresiing to note that the South
African Government remains stubbornly wedded to its
grand design of separate development,
which makes
South Africa’s blacks strangers in their own country
by depriving them of their South’ African citizenship
and relegating them to bantustans. Despite the obvious
bankruptcy of this concept and the fact that the international community has unanimously rejected and condemned the policy of bantustanization,
the Govemment of South Africa continues to proclaim that the
creation of the remote, congested and impoverished socalled homelands has already settled the constitutional
future of the blacks.

112. Those are the changes which the sponsors have
agreed to make in the draft resolution that is now before
the Council. It is their hope that the spirit of accommodation shown by them in accepting those changes
will evoke a positive response from all members of the
Council and that the Council will now be able to adopt
this draft resolution by an overwhelming majority, if
not, indeed, by unanimity.
113. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall
call on those members who wish to speak in explanation
of vote before the voting.

118. Perhaps it could be argued that the new constitution, although it fails to take into account the legitimate
aspirations of the black majority of the population,
represents a small step in the right direction because,
for the first time, it involves two other groups, the
Coloureds and the Asians, in. the political process.
From this point of view, the constitutional reforms have
sometimes been interpreted as a first tentative sign of
change which, if carefully fostered, could open the
doors to power-sharing for other groups as well and
which might ultimately lead to the gradual elimination
of apartheid. Unfortunately,
a closer examination of
the constitution makes it difficult to be optimistic in this
regard. For even though the Coloured and the Asian
people will be enabled to cast their ballots for the seats
in their chambers of the envisaged tricameral parliament, the new constitution severely limits their political
gains. Clearly, the constitution has been drafted with a
view to perpetuating the political domination
of the
white minority and sustaining the apaitheid system.

114. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): As this is my
delegation’s first intervention this month, may I start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency. We are confident that your diplomatic skills and
experience will continue to guide the Council in the
discharge of its difficult task.
115. May I also on this occasion express my appreciation for the exemplary and able manner in which
your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick of the United
States, conducted the business of the Council during
the month of July.
116. At the request of the Group of African States. the
Council has convened to discuss-the new South African
constitution,
which will take effect on 3 September
after parliamentary
elections later this month for the
Coloured people and the people of Asian origin in
South Africa. The system of institutionalized
racial
segregation and oppression, known as apartheid, has
been the object of perennial debate in the Council and
other bodies of the United Nations and has been condemned in countless resolutions. The repeated appeals
of the United Nations to South Africa to abolish this
abhorrent system, however, havegone unheeded as the
South African Government persisted in its racial policies in defiance of the expressed will of the international
community.

119. Against this background, the opposition of South
Africa’s black leaders to the coming elections and the
widespread suspicion, voiced by many speakers in this
debate, that the new constitution has been designed
further to entrench the system of apartheid, becomes
understandable. As long as the majority of South Africa’s people remains excluded from genuine participation in the process of political and economic decisionmaking, the Government of South Africa must be held
responsible for the continuing explosive situation in the
country and its dangerous consequences for the peace
and stability of the entire region.

117. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the international community adopted an attitude of deep scepticism when the South African Government introduced
11

120. Surely it is not up to the Council to pass judgement on the legal validity of a Member State’s constitution or electoral processes. However, the Council
is fully entitled to demand the abolition of the policies of
apartheid and the establishment in South Africa of a
society in which all its citizens can participate freely in
the determination
of their future and enjoy their internationally recognized human rights. My Government
cannot but disapprove of a constitution which denies
those rights to the great majority of the people in South
Africa and falls far short of the fundamental reforms
necessary to bring peace and stability to South Africa
and its neighbours.

South African Government.
Just as it voted last November for the resolution before the General Assembly, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution now before us [ibid.], in spite of our doubts
concerning the competence of the Council in the matter
and our reservations with regard to some of the language in operative paragraphs 1 and 2.
129. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
1 shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/16700.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

121. In this spirit, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution introduced by Burkina Faso,
Egypt, India, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru and
Zimbabwe [S/16700]. As we have afftrmed time and
again, there is no alternative to the complete abandonment of apartheid and the establishment of a multiracial, truly democratic society in which all the people
of South Africa, irrespective of race or colour, enjoy
equal rights.

In favour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France,
India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Zimbabwe.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

122. The Netherlands will support initiatives in the
Council which would increase the pressure on the
South African Government to embark upon a process
of meaningful reforms leading towards this goal.

and

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions [resolution 554 (1984)].
130. Mr. SCHIFTER
(United States of America): My
country’s deep commitment to equal rights for all, irrespective of race, is firmly anchored in law, in our dayto-day practices and in our people’s basic views of
society and government. So is our adherence to the
principle of universal franchise.

123. Mr. LOUET
(France) [interpretation
from
French]: I should like most warmly to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of August. You may rest assured of the
complete co-operation of my delegation in the performance of your difficult task.

13 1. It follows naturally that we have on repeated
occasions in the United Nations most emphatically
expressed our strong opposition to all forms of racial
discrimination,
including, in particular, racial discrimination as practised in South Africa. Our justification
for thus expressing ourselves on what at one time may
have been deemed a matter of internal affairs of a
sovereign nation is that through the Charter of the
United Nations we have pledged ourselves to promote
and encourage human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or
religion.

124. I should be grateful if you would kindly transmit
to the representative of the United States, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, our appreciation of the remarkable manner in
which she conducted the proceedings of the Council
last month.
125. As everyone knows, France categoricaily condemns the policy of apartheid of the South African
Government. We seek its abolition and the establishment in South Africa of a just society based on equal
rights and respect for the dignity of every man and
every women.

132. The Charter’s pledge, stated briefly and succinctly, was elaborated on by the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. It is in that document that we can find
express provisions dealing with circumstances such as
those which the resolution now before us has once
brought to our attention, namely, the denial by South
Africa of the basic rights of citizenship to a majority of
the people of that country on grounds of race.

126. Viewed in the context of this moral imperative,
the changes made to the South African constitution are
at best a rearrangement within the apartheid system.
But the system itself and its very foundations remain
unchanged.
127. The vast majority of the inhabitants of South
Africa continue to be treated as foreigners in their own
country because their skin is black. The policy of forced
resettlement of populations and the creation of bantustans has been pursued relentlessly.

133. We value most highly the standards laid down in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We note
that article 21, paragraph 3, provides as follows:

128. That is why France continues, as it has done in
the past, to condemn the policy of apartheid of the

“The will of the people shall be the basis of the
authority of government; this will shall be expressed
12

signing the Charter a Member State has necessarily
agreed to allow its actions towards its own citizens to
be examined for their conformity with universally accepted standards of human rights. It follows that we do
not believe that the fact that racial discrimination
is
enshrined in the Constitution
of South Africa withdraws the matter from United Nations scrutiny.

in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by
universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by
secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.”
The foregoing section must be read in conjunction with
the first paragraph of article 2 of the Declaration, which
reads:

137. The point I have just made is relevant because of
the problem of selectivity to which I referred earlier.
We believe that the fact that provisions of the Constitution of South Africa have here been subjected to
examination and have been condemned should be remembered the next time that the defence of domestic
jurisdiction
is raised to shield an alleged human rights
violator from scrutiny within the United Nations system. As Mrs. Kirkpatrick
stressed in her remarks yesterday [2549th meeting], we believe that the principle
that Governments should derive their authority from
the consent of all the governed, as expressed in free
elections, has equal applicability
and equal relevance
everywhere.

“Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms
set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of
any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status.”
134. As I have said, we value the principles of govemment set forth in the Universal Declaration most highly.
We deeply believe in their universality,
their applicability to all Members of the United Nations. Thus, if
we were called upon to vote on a draft resolution which
stated that a country acted in violation of the Universal
Declaration, if that country deprived its citizens or a
portion of its citizens of the right to participate in
genuine elections to choose its government, and if such
a draft resolution were placed before an appropriate
United Nations forum, we would vote “yes”. It follows, with reference to the facts of the case before us,
that we would vote for a draft resolution presented in
the proper forum that found that South Africa violated
the Universal Declaration when it ehose its Govemment through a voting system not providing for universal and equal suffrage.

138. I have thus explained our position with regard to
the facts of racial discrimination
which underlie the
situation that has been the subject of discussion in the
Council. As I have made clear, we would have been
prepared to join others in registering our opposition to
racial discrimination
in South Africa by voting for an
appropriately worded draft resolution in an appropriate
United Nations forum. The resolution on which we
have voted does not in our view meet that test.

135. It is our view that the Universal Declaration-as
its name implies-calls
for universal application.
We
most certainly do not support its selective application,
holding one country up to its high standards and totally
ignoring violations of its most fundamental precepts in
others. It is for that reason that I have quoted verbatim
the text of the provisions of the Declaration which, we
believe, are here being violated. Anyone familiar with
political conditions around the globe will recognize
that, though South Africa is indeed guilty of one form of
violation of article 21 of the Universal Declaration,
some of its severest critics violate the very same article
in other ways. This is not to say that the fact that South
Africa is not the only violator of article 21 excuses its
violation. But it is to say that the application of simple
principles of fairness would require us to cast a wider
net.

139. In our view the Security Council is not the appropriate forum in which this matter should be considered. In making this observation I am not raising a
mere technical point. On the contrary, I am raising a
fundamental question about the present-day operations
of the United Nations.
140. The United States wants to see the United Nations attain the goals set for it by the framers of the
Charter. But that can be done only if the Organization
acts within the framework provided by the Charter and
if its pronouncements
fairly and accurately set forth
statements of the relevant facts, free of hyperbole and
other inappropriate emendations.
141. Under Article 24 of the Charter it is the responsibility of the Security Council to maintain international
peace and security. My Government holds to the view
that the severe threats to regional security which have
existed in southern Africa are today being effectively
dealt with by a growing number of States in that region.
An opportunity now exists for sustained progress in
curbing violence, negotiating mutually acceptable solutions and pressing ahead with the urgent agenda of
peaceful change. Under the circumstances, no issue is
posed which is appropriately within the purview of the
Council.

136. The Council has found that South Africa is acting
in violation of the Universal Declaration
notwithstanding the fact that the procedure under which the
violation takes place is enshrined in the basic law of
that country. We agree that the United Nations may
enter such a finding and express its views thereon even
though the procedures complained of are expressly
authorized by domestic law, be it a Constitution,
statute, other legislative enactment or executive decree.
In other words, we do not believe that Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter can be interpreted to render the
Universal Declaration a nullity. We believe that by

142. Just as positive change in South Africa can reduce the risks of violent regional confrontation, so too
13

can strengthened regional security promote a positive
climate for change within South Africa. Thus, turning
to the substance of the operative portion of the resolution now before us, it is the view of the United States
that a process of change for the better is under way in
South Africa. It is in that context that my Government
sees the constitutional
developments in South Africa.
We have not endorsed and do not endorse those constitutional developments,
nor do we believe that current changes in that country are adequate as a solution
to its problems in that they do not deal with the fundamental issue of the political role of black South Africans. Sponsors of this resolution have argued that by
expanding the franchise to include persons of Asian and
so-called Coloured descent the South African Govemment is foreclosing the further extension of the franchise to a majority of South Africans and thereby entrenching apartheid. We understand this concern, but
we do not share it. It is our hope and expectation that
this constitutional change is a first step. Though further
steps are not guaranteed, they are also not excluded. It
is for that reason that we do not find ourselves in
agreement with the basic tenets on which the resolution
is based.

view be to encourage attainment of this goal through
appropriate measures taken in appropriate forums.
146. The purpose of any pronouncement
bv the
United Nations should be to contribute to a peaceful
solution of the problem with which it deals. Our focus
should at all times be on the fate of the people we seek to
assist, not as an abstract concept but as men, women
and children of flesh and blood, each of whom is entitled to protection and enhancement of his or her
human rights. Our objective should not be the formulation of resolutions which are ends in themselves but to
effect improvements
in the lives of those individuals, including, importantly,
improvements that affirm
their dignity as human beings. My country is deeply
committed to this objective. It will therefore continue
to pursue it in all its efforts to improve the conditions
of life in southern Africa.
147. In the light of the views I have here expressed,
my country’s position on the draft resolution on which
we have voted was best reflected in an abstention.
148. Mr. MARGETSON
(United Kingdom):
May I
first of all join the other speakers in this debate in
congratulating you, Sir, most warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.

143. Let me say that I was very much impressed by
the profound remarks of the representative of Guyana
just a short while ago. He reminded us of statements
made during a debate on South Africa 10 years ago. It is
difftcult during a period of social change in a country to
determine with certainty the direction of that change
and the speed at which it is occurring. Our own view
remains that there are reasons for hope of peaceful
change for the better.

149. May I also join in thanking the representative of
the United States, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
for her distinguished presidency of the Council during the month
of July.
150. My Government shares the desire of the sponsors of the draft resolution on which we have just voted
to see an end to apartheid, which is a practice that we
condemn strongly and unreservedly. This is a matter of
public record on which I do not need to expand beyond
reminding members of the Council that the Prime Minister of my country made our abhorrence of apartheid
very clear to the South African Prime Minister when
she saw him recently.

144. The hope I have just expressed-the
hope for
further progress in South Africa towards the goal of
equal rights-is
not based on mere wide-eyed unjustified optimism. Ours is a multi-racial society. Though
we are in important ways different from South Africa,
we have faced some similar problems, problems we did
not resolve overnight. But under decisions rendered by.
the Supreme Court of the United States, and under laws
enacted by our Congress, we embarked, about 40 years
ago, on a process of eliminating all vestiges of legally
authorized racial discrimination
in all parts of our country. That process began slowly-in
the view of many
participants, much too slowly-but
as time passed the
pace accelerated, and in the end the barriers fell at a
speed not anticipated as recently as 20 years ago. For
once the barriers started falling, it was not only the legal
barriers- that fell; as a new generation grew up, that new
generation was characterized by a new outlook and a
new commitment
to human brotherhood.

151. My delegation must, however, reserve its position both as regards the issue of the new South African
Constitution
and on certain aspects of the resolution
which are of a more general nature.
152. My Government’s
position on the new South
African Constitution
was fully explained during the
General Assembly debate at its thirty-eighth session, in
November 1983. We hold to the view that it is for those
in South Africa to judge what is best for them. But we
have made very clear on many occasions that we are
looking for progress towards constitutional
arrangements which are acceptable to the people of South
Africa as a whole. We share the concern expressed in
this resolution about the absence of any provision in the
new Constitution for the black majority. This is a serious shortcoming. It would, however, in our view, be
wrong to make a final judgement now about the new
arrangements. For this reason my Government
has

145. Our own history and our knowledge of the evolution of democratic
institutions
in other countries
strengthen our view that this year’s broadening of
South Africa’s franchise is not the end of the road. We
shall continue to encourage attainment of the ultimate
goal of universal, non-discriminatory
suffrage in South
Africa. The role of the United Nations should in our
14

consistently declined to take a position -on these which
might put at risk prospects for facilitating the process of
change in South Africa which we would all like to see.

resentative of the United Kingdom, to the effect that
he is against apartheid, and the deeds of the United
Kingdom.

153. My delegation is also unhappy about some of the
language in the text of the resolution before us. It is, for
instance, not our view that the new Constitution has
transformed South Africa into a country for -whites
only. Nor do we accept that the references to the legitimacy of the struggle relate to armed struggle or extend
to the use of force. It is also our view that only the
people of South Africa can determine their future
and that it is not for outsiders to prescribe solutions,
nor to determine the validity or otherwise of internal
arrangements.

160. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
I call on the representative of the United States, who
wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
161. Mr. SCHIFTER
(United States): Our decision
not to respond to the remarks of the Soviet Union was
one that had been thought through. It was our intention
to deal with the very profound human problem that is
before us. As we have indicated, we are deeply concerned about the lives of people in southern Africa,
men, women and children; not, as we said, an abstract
concept, but people of flesh and blood.

154. For these reasons my delegation abstained on the
vote.

162. We did not want to divert and, in a way, cheapen,
that particular concern by engaging in a verbal boxing
match.

155. Mav I add that. for mv delegation, this debate
has been-notable
for some -impre<sive’ and moving
speeches. But 1 greatly regret that on such an occasion,
when I would hope that all of us in the Security Council
could seek to emphasize our common position towards
apartheid,
the representative
of the Soviet Union
should have chosen to inject, very strongly, a note of
East-West conflict.

163. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom, who
wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
164. Mr. MARGETSON
(United Kingdom):
I am
afraid that I was unable to hear everything that was
interpreted in my ear-piece during the right of reply of
the representative of the Soviet Union because he was
speaking so extremely loudly. Nevertheless, I did hear
that he referred to my country as being the “younger
brother” of the United States. I can only suppose that
he has, yet once more, got his history wrong. I need say
no more.

156. My country does not approach the subject of
apartheid from the point of view of East-West relations. It would be cheapening to the subject to do so,
and furthermore I believe it is not respectful to the
countries of Africa, which are so closely concerned
with this matter, to do so.
157. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretationfiom
Russian]: I can understand that the representative of the United States did
not take the risk of speaking in reply to the Soviet
delegation, and asked his junior partner to stand in his
stead. The representative of the United Kingdom has
said here that we should all be united when we deal with
the question of apartheid.

165. I think he seems to be confusing the relationship
between my country and the country whose representative is seated to my left with that between his country
and the country whose representative is seated to his
right.
166. If I could make just one very obvious point,
I think that the Soviet right of reply proved my remarks
completely, to the hilt.

158. Yes, representative of the United Kingdom, we
are all united here; we should all be united in putting an
end to investments in apartheid representing billions of
dollars, investments which benefit the investors. These
investments in apartheid, moreover, have been made
by the United Kingdom.
Yes, representative of the
United Kingdom, all of us here-or almost all of usagree that we must put an end to trade with the upartheid regime, but the United Kingdom for some reason
does not care to agree with that point of view and
continues to trade with the apartheid regime.

167. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call now on the representative of Algeria.
168. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) (interpretation from
French): After the Security Council’s adoption of a
resolution strongly rejecting the new constitution proposed by the Pretoria regime and declaring it null and
void, along with the elections scheduled for the end of
August, I wish to say on behalf of the Group of African
States that we are very pleased indeed. We consider
that the Council has now, like the General Assembly,
affirmed that the ideology of apartheid is the main
obstacle to peace and stability in South Africa and in
southern Africa as a whole. Any initiative, constitutional or otherwise, which forms a part of that ideology
cannot create conditions for sincere dialogue among the
communities concerned, and cannot create conditions

159. Yes, representative of the United Kingdom, almost all of us agree that it has long been high time for
sanctions against the apartheid regime, but your delegation, along with the delegation of the United States,
has constantly blocked the adoption of such sanctions.
That is the difference between the words of the rep15

for genuine democracy in South Africa. That is the
point that needs to be stressed.
169. The Council, like the General Assembly, has
thus reminded the Pretoria regime that 24 million Africans cannot be deprived of the citizenship which is their
fundamental right. To try to confine those 24 m.illion
Africans to so-called bantustans is as inadmissible as
the Nazi policy of concentration camps.
170. Thus. the Council’s message is clear, and we
know that this evening the South African people are
delighted with its decision, especially because-and
this is by no means the least important point-it
reaffirms the legitimacy of their struggle to eliminate
apartheid. This gives them a glimmer of hope and
shows that they will have support, support which will
be greatly appreciated. It is regrettable only that some

members of the Council deemed it necessary to abstain
in the vote, notwithstanding
the concessions made by
the sponsors of the draft resolution. We note, however,
that in their statements, these delegations reaffirmed
their opposition to apartheid.
171. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The Council has thus conduded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting

rose at 6.20 p.m.

NOTE
’ OfJicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 1 (A/38/1), p. 3.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nation\. Sales Sectton. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGULR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

9&61313--February

1993--2,050
