S/2019/44

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 January 2019
Original: English

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2429
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2019 and requested me
to report, every 90 days, on its implementation. The report provides an update on and
analysis of the conflict, the political situation and the operational environment in
Darfur for the period from 4 October 2018 to 3 January 2019. It outlines activities
undertaken in accordance with the indicators of achievement for the benchmarks for
the mission’s exit and highlights the main challenges to the effective implementation
of the mandate. It also provides an update on the progress made by UNAMID in
implementing the recommendations contained in the special report of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
on the strategic review of UNAMID (S/2018/530).

II. Conflict analysis
2.
The security situation in Darfur has remained relatively stable, except for
intermittent clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) faction in Jebel Marra that resulted in civilian
displacement. No major episodes of intercommunal violence were reported. Incidents
of crop destruction, which often spark local-level confrontations, were also on the
decline. The reduction in the number of incidents of intercomm unal violence
corresponds to the overall decrease in counter-insurgency operations and associated
militia mobilization, in addition to the concerted efforts of UNAMID, the United
Nations country team, national and local authorities and communities to resol ve
disputes and pursue peaceful coexistence. Nevertheless, the root causes of
intercommunal conflict remain unaddressed: this includes land disputes, which also
affect internally displaced persons returning to their places of origin occupied by
others. The seasonal cattle migration from North to South Darfur during the harvest
season also raises potential for a spike in intercommunal violence in some parts of
the region.
3.
The reporting period saw some progress in the Darfur peace process. Together
with the Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional Council (SLM/TC), the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and the Justice and Equality Movement

19-00334 (E)

160119

*1900334*

S/2019/44

(JEM/Gibril), which are non-signatories of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
renewed their unilateral cessation of hostilities on 9 November, until 8 February 2019.
On 6 December, SLM/MM and JEM/Gibril signed a pre-negotiation agreement with
the Government, supported by UNAMID. Meanwhile, the implementation of the
Doha Document itself remained slow and beset with challenges.
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups
4.
Clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA/AW continued to occur
in central, western and southern Jebel Marra. On 4 October, Government forces
attacked SLA/AW elements in Lango, near Golo, Central Darfur, followed by another
clash on 6 October that killed one SLA/AW combatant and a Fur civilian in the same
area. On 12 October, Government forces raided SLA/AW positions in the Gur
Lambung-Gubbo area near Kass, South Darfur. The announcement by the
Government on 20 October of its renewed commitment to a ceasefire led to a brief
pause in hostilities, but the situation remained tense, as, on 5 November, the
Commander of the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), Mohamed Hamdan, ref erred to a
possible launch of military operations to dislodge SLA/AW.
5.
Fighting resumed on 11 November, when SLA/AW forces ambushed an RSF
convoy travelling from Jawa to Deribat, South Darfur, killing seven RSF personnel
and injuring eight others. In retaliation, the Sudanese Armed Forces attacked Deribat
market on 12 November, which resulted in the deaths of two children and one woman,
as well as the displacement of civilians to the neighbouring mountains. That action
provoked SLA/AW to shell a Sudanese Armed Forces base in Deribat with mortars,
on 15 November, killing one Sudanese Armed Forces soldier and injuring two others.
In addition, on 12 November, in the vicinity of Golo, SLA/AW allegedly abducted
three members of Military Intelligence in the Manabu area, killing two of them, and
the Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA/AW clashed at Kauri village on 15 November,
which resulted in the death of one Sudanese Armed Forces soldier and injuries to two
others, and again in Komobai and Fuju villages on 21 November, with several
casualties reported on both sides. On 24 November, SLA/AW claimed that
Government forces attacked the Sabun El Fagur area between Gubbo a nd Gur
Lambung, South Darfur. According to the internally displaced persons in the area,
Sabun El Fagur and nearby villages were burned by Government forces. On
25 November, Government forces attacked Daya village in the south-west of
Rockero, Central Darfur, which was followed by another clash between a Sudanese
Armed Forces patrol and SLA/AW elements on 16 December in the same area,
resulting in the deaths of two Sudanese Armed Forces soldiers.
6.
Meanwhile, SLA/AW continued to suffer from fragmentation over issues
pertaining to the peace process and field command. The military pressure from the
Government, coupled with the increasing shortage of supplies, appears to have had a
debilitating impact on the cohesion of the movement. From 12 to 31 October,
disagreements between SLA/AW groups triggered a series of incidents of infighting
in Jokosti, Daya and Jebel Gheit in the vicinity of Golo and Dar al-aman near Rockero
in Central Darfur. Those internal clashes resulted in the deaths of eight SLA/AW
fighters, including the movement’s political and legal adviser. In addition, there have
been reports implicating SLA/AW in criminal activities, including robbery, looting,
animal rustling and the ransacking of local clinics, indicating its desperate need for
sustenance supplies.
Intercommunal conflicts
7.
Although no major intercommunal clashes occurred during the reporting period,
there were 2 incidents of violence, resulting in 3 fatalities, compared with 6 incidents
and 18 fatalities in the previous reporting period.
2/16

19-00334

S/2019/44

8.
In North Darfur, farm destructions occurred in Kunjara, Tha ‘alibah, Haskanita
and Susuwa, all within the vicinity of Tawilah, and increased tensions were reported
between farmers and pastoralists at Gallab and Kolgay. In Tawilah, throughout the
months of October and November, the large presence of migrating animals belonging
to the Shataya, a subclan of the Northern Rizeigat, resulted in an increase in farm
destructions and criminal acts against Zaghawa farmers in the area. On 4 October,
incidents of farm destruction by grazing migrating animals were also reported in the
Tagali Magali mountains and the Sharafha and Umboji areas. Incidents of crop
destruction occurred in Bilalah Juruf farming area in Korma and Jomar East village,
surrounded by nine nomadic settlements, on 1 and 31 October and on 4 November.
Local sources reported the involvement of former border guard elements in the
extortion, harassment and intimidation of farmers in the area, who reportedly
pressured them not to report those incidents to RSF, indicating remaining tensions
between the former paramilitary groups.
9.
In Central Darfur, crop destructions occurred in the Arkis farming area and Thur
on 1 and 16 October, 6 and 13 November and 1 and 4 December. In West Darfur,
following the destruction of several farms in Jemmeza Nabagaya village by
Nawaybah herders on 9 October, the Sudanese police intervened, and compensation
was paid to farmers. Those developments notwithstanding, in what seemed to be a
retaliation, over 20 armed Nawaybah herders attacked the farmers on 25 October,
injuring eight, including three women. The police arrested one perpetrator following
the incident.
10. In South Darfur, a Massalit farmer in the Donkey Abiad area was killed on his
farm by a member of the Fallata tribe on 6 October, which led to an escalation of
tensions between the two communities with a history of conflict. On 15 October, a
Fallata group attacked a commercial vehicle, killing two members of Massalit
community, fuelling further tensions and threatening to derail the implementation of
a peace agreement that both tribes signed in July 2018.
Violence against civilians and human rights violations
11. Both the number of crime-related incidents and the number of human rights
violations declined during the reporting period. Internally displaced persons were
affected by 48 crime-related incidents, which led to three fatalities, and other civilians
were affected by 111 crime-related incidents, resulting in 14 fatalities. In comparison,
during the previous reporting period, internally displaced persons and other civilians
were affected by 181 and 376 crime-related incidents, respectively, leading to the
deaths of 34 internally displaced persons and 91 other civilians. The incidents
reported in the past three months included murder (10 cases), armed robbery
(14 cases), attempted robbery (1 case), assault/harassment (35 cases), burglary/breakin (15 cases), looting (2 cases), abduction (1 case), arson (1 case), shooting (20 cases),
attack/ambush (3 cases), threat (2 cases), others (1 case) and livestock theft (6 cases).
12. The areas most affected by violence were around Golo, Nertiti and Thur in
Central Darfur, Kass in South Darfur, and Sortony in North Darfur, all located in the
greater Jebel Marra. The Fur community are the main victims of crimes against
internally displaced persons and other civilians. SLA/AW elements were also
involved in five criminal cases: rustling camels from herders in Komombai, South
Darfur, on 4 October; assaulting local Fur farmers and stealin g their farm produce in
Kurambe, North Darfur, on 18 October; robbing a commercial vehicle of passenger
belongings in an area south of Thur on 18 October; and rustling camels in Maylo and
ransacking local clinics in Tarib and Kauri villages, all in the vicinity of Golo, on
2 November.

19-00334

3/16

S/2019/44

13. While the Sudanese police assumed responsibility for the security of internally
displaced persons camps in Salam, Dereige and Otash in South Darfur, following the
closure of UNAMID community policing centres in those camps, security in some
camps remained a matter of concern, in particular in Kalma, where violent
confrontations continue over return issues, with the involvement of SLA/AW
elements.
14. There were 75 new cases of human rights violations and abuses involving
140 victims, including 32 children, compared with 90 cases involving 173 victims,
including 21 minors, during the previous reporting period. Violations of the right to
life accounted for 7 cases involving 10 victims. Violations of the right to physical
integrity (assault) accounted for 25 cases involving 62 victims. Arbitrary arrests and
illegal detention accounted for 8 cases involving 30 victims. Abductions accounted
for four cases involving five victims. UNAMID confirmed the occurrence of 46 cases
of human rights violations and abuses involving 78 victims, while the remaining
29 cases involving 62 victims are yet to be verified owing to various challenges
including access restrictions. Of the 75 documented cases, 21 cases involving
55 victims were reportedly perpetrated by the Sudanese Armed Forces, Military
Intelligence, the National Intelligence Security Services and RSF. Seven cases
involving seven victims were reportedly perpetrated by civilians, while 45 cases
accounting for 73 victims were allegedly perpetrated by armed men. Two cases
involving five victims were attributed to the SLA/AW rebel movement. A total of
20 suspects were arrested in 43 reported cases.
15. The threat of sexual violence remained significant, restricting women ’s freedom
of movement to undertake livelihood activities around camps for the displaced and in
areas of return, including during flight for those displaced because of the conflict in
Jebel Marra. During the reporting period, there were 31 incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence. Those incidents included conflict-related sexual violence in
the form of rape involving 34 female victims, including 19 minors. Conflict -related
sexual violence was committed mostly in Jebel Marra, notably in the context of
confrontations between Government forces and SLA/AW.

III. Political situation
16. Against the backdrop of economic downturn and ongoing efforts by the
Government to reduce public expenditure, the Walis of North, West and Central
Darfur appointed their new cabinets on 18, 23 and 24 October, respectively, each
composed of five ministers and one chair of the High Council of Peace, a reduction
from eight ministers in the previous formations. The ruling National Congress Party
held 50 per cent representation in the new cabinets, while other political parties and
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur signatories, including the Liberation and Justice
Party, the Justice and Equality Movement/Dabajo, the National Liberation and Justice
Party and the Democratic Unionist Party were also represented in the new state
governments. The Chairman of the High Council of Peace positions were occupied
by representatives of armed movements that signed bilateral peace agreements with
the Government and acceded to the national dialogue document.
17. On 8 October, the Council of Ministers submitted the draft electoral law to the
parliament (consisting of the directly elected National Assembly and the Council of
States, indirectly elected by state legislature) for further deliberations. While the
National Congress Party and its affiliates welcomed the draft in anticipation of the
elections in 2020, many opposition political parties rejected the amendments, arguing
that the process was not inclusive and that provisions did not allow for free and fair
elections. A total of 34 political parties that had participated in the national dialogue

4/16

19-00334

S/2019/44

also expressed reservations about the draft electoral law and submitted a memo to the
Speaker of the parliament detailing their objections to the draft law. However, on
21 November, the parliament approved by majority the bill on the new electoral law,
despite the withdrawal of the 34 political parties and movements from the
proceedings. Key features of the new electoral law include, inter alia, the appointment
of the nine-member national electoral commission by the President with the
endorsement of the National Assembly; the election of the President, the National
Assembly, the state legislative councils and Walis directly by the people; and the
reduction of the number of National Assembly members from 42 6 to 300.
18. On 4 December, a total of 294 members of the parliament, belonging to
33 political parties, introduced a bill requesting amendments of the constitution to
allow President Bashir to run for a third term and to allow the President to dismiss a
Wali for a number of reasons, including disloyalty and disobedience to the President.
On 11 December, the bill was tabled before the National Assembly and Council of
States. The parliament formed an emergency committee headed by the Deputy
Speaker of the National Assembly to examine the proposed changes.
19. On 19 December, the leader of the National Umma Party and Chair of the Sudan
Call coalition, Sadiq Al-Mahdi, returned to Khartoum from his self-imposed exile
since 2017 in Cairo and, later, in London. His return coincided with the anniversary
of the declaration of independence of the Sudan in 1955, which he claimed was in
response to popular demand for political transformation in the country.
20. On the same day, protests over the rising price of bread and other food
commodities took place in various states throughout the Sudan, including Khartoum,
River Nile, Red Sea, North Darfur, White Nile, Northern Kordofan, Al -Gedaref and
Port Sudan. In Atbara town, River Nile State, a National Congress Party offi ce was
burned down, while protesters attacked, vandalized and burned police stations and
public and private institutions in other areas. As protesters also called on President
Bashir to step down, the Government declared a state of emergency and ordered th e
indefinite closure of schools and colleges in the Sudan. Nevertheless, the protests
continued, on 31 December, including in Khartoum, where the police reportedly
resorted to the use of tear gas and live ammunition to disperse the protesters. In South
Darfur, on 23 December, the security forces also used tear gas to confront
approximately 300 students demonstrating in Kass. In West Darfur, the state security
services have been deployed to guard strategic locations, in particular banks, fuel
stations and government offices. In East Darfur, the National Intelligence and
Security Services arrested a total of 11 youth activists between 22 and 25 December,
subsequently releasing 4 of them. On 1 January, a group of 22 political parties and
opposition groups that had participated in the national dialogue process called for
President Bashir to step down and transfer power to a transitional government. The
protests continued in the first week of January, including in Khartoum and
Omdurmam. On 10 January, the Sudanese authorities announced that 22 people had
been killed by that date in a series of demonstrations.

IV. Humanitarian situation
21. Security improvements had a positive impact on the humanitarian situation
overall, although the clashes in the Jebel Marra area resulted in additional
displacement and the suspension of humanitarian missions to several villages in north,
central and west Jebel Marra.
22. Since the beginning of 2018, approximately 16,000 people have been displaced
into camps and settlements in various localities in the greater Jebel Marra area. Of
those, 6,170 people arrived in Otash, 320 people in Bel el Sereif, approximat ely
19-00334

5/16

S/2019/44

4,000 people in Mershing and some 1,700 people in Kass camp and other settlements
in South Darfur. In Central Darfur, 1,890 people were displaced to Golo and Koron,
while 343 displaced people arrived in Thur and 295 people fled to Nertiti, and another
1,330 internally displaced persons arrived in Rockero. Humanitarian partners
conducted an inter-agency assessment in Nertiti and Thur on 15 and 16 October and
identified food, medicine and rehabilitation of water supply facilities as key priorities.
Internally displaced persons expressed concerns over harassment by armed groups
and looting of their belongings and requested protection.
23. Given the relative stability in most parts of Darfur, some people were reportedly
returning to their places of origin. A verification mission in October to Tawilah, North
Darfur, found 20,000 people who had returned to Tabrat, Martal, Khazan, Tunjour
and Dobo al-Omda villages. The returnees identified the need for provision of basic
services in the area as a priority.
24. On 5 November, the Wali of North Darfur announced the Government ’s plan to
convert the camps for internally displaced persons in Zamzam (hosting
120,864 persons), Abu Shouk (44,531 persons) and Salam (35,552 persons) into
permanent urban settlements for displaced families. According to the plan, each
family opting to settle in those areas would receive a 300 m 2 plot of land, and the
Government and local authorities promised to provide basic services in settlement
areas and address land issues. It was indicated that Abu Shouk, Salam and Zamzam
camps would be renamed Doha, Al Shatti and Zamzam towns respectively.
25. Above-average rainfall between June and September allowed for crop
development and pasture regeneration, contributing to the improvement of food
security throughout Darfur. However, the dire economic situation and government
austerity measures limited the availability of basic items, such as bread, to the most
vulnerable populations. Additionally, limited availability of cash in banks and
inability to transfer cash affected humanitarian operations in all parts of Darfur and
forced humanitarian partners to postpone activities such as the construction and
rehabilitation of water points and livelihood programmes.
26. In October, humanitarian partners supported a campaign against malaria in
Nyala, Kass, Buram, Edd al-Fursan, Rehaid and Birdi localities in South Darfur and
in El-Fasher, Mellit, Dar al-Salam, Tawilah and Sereif localities in North Darfur.
Vaccination campaigns were carried out for pentavalent, measles and tetanus toxoid
in Buram, Radom and Bileil in South Darfur and for measles in North and West
Darfur. Some 4,500 cartons of nutrition supplies were delivered to nutrition centres
in central Jebel Marra. In Otash camp for internally displaced persons in South Darfur,
humanitarian partners distributed mosquito nets for children, lactating mothers and
pregnant women among newly displaced persons and supported the construction of
150 household latrines. In Golo, Central Darfur, partners distrib uted 87 cartons of
nutrition supplies to children under five and pregnant and lactating women;
emergency shelter and non-food items to 1,700 households; and agricultural tools to
3,886 households.

V. Operating environment
Attacks and threats of attacks targeting African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, United Nations and humanitarian personnel
27. United Nations and humanitarian agencies continued to be a target of criminal
attacks throughout Darfur, although the frequency of such attacks decreased by 50
per cent during the reporting period. A total of 28 criminal incidents targeting United
Nations and humanitarian personnel were reported, compared with 57 in the previous

6/16

19-00334

S/2019/44

reporting period, including intrusion into United Nations premises, break-ins,
shootings, robbery and theft/attempted theft of United Nations property. On
14 October, unidentified perpetrators broke into the UNAMID camp in Nyala, South
Darfur, and stole three computer monitors. On 22 October, unidentified armed men
fired gunshots near the main gate of the UNAMID team site in Nertiti, Central Darfur,
and fled when UNAMID military personnel returned fire. On 25 October, unidentified
perpetrators broke into UNAMID camp in Ed Daein, East Darfur, although nothing
was stolen during that incident. On 29 October, criminals broke into a World Food
Programme warehouse in Ed Daein town and stole non-food items. On 2 November,
two UNAMID peacekeepers apprehended two men who were cutting the perimeter
fence of a UNAMID waterpoint at Graida, South Darfur. On 12 and 13 November,
25 desktop computers, 1 printer, 10 air conditioners and 1 refrigerator were stolen
from the UNAMID camp in El Geneina, West Darfur. Twelve other incidents of
theft/attempted theft of United Nations property b y unidentified perpetrators at the
UNAMID premises were recorded in El Fasher, Nyala, El Geneina, Zalingei, Umm
Barru, Nertiti, Kass and Graida. On 17 and 21 October, perpetrators broke into the
residences of two UNAMID national staff in Ed Daein town and stole personal
belongings.
28. During the reporting period, three cases of arbitrary detentions of UNAMID
national staff in Darfur were recorded. On 8 October, at Menawashei market, South
Darfur, the police detained a UNAMID national staff member, who was released on
9 October. Similarly, on 1 November, two UNAMID national staff members were
detained in Labado, East Darfur, and released on 4 November. Another national staff
member was detained by the National Intelligence and Security Services in El
Geneina, West Darfur, on 22 December, and remained in detention without charge at
the time of the present report.
Access restrictions
29. While UNAMID has cultivated constructive cooperation with the Government
on issues related to mandate implementation, its patrols attempting to verify incidents
of conflict or protection concerns were denied access in 7 instances by government
security services, compared with 18 in the previous reporting period, all on account
of the security and safety of peacekeepers or poor road conditions. Most of the
restrictions occurred in the greater Jebel Marra, namely, the areas of Nertiti, Thur,
Sarong, Golol in Central Darfur and Gur Lambung, Koro, Gubbo and Kass in South
Darfur.
Visas and customs clearance issues
30. The Government granted 496 visas, including 10 for military personnel, 147 for
police personnel, 65 for official visitors, 62 for contractors, 8 for civilian staff and 7
for dependents. A total of 63 visa requests were still being processed, while 185 visa
requests were pending beyond the normal approval period of 15 days, some since
April 2017. The Government continued to release food ration containers from Port
Sudan. While progress was recorded in clearing other shipments, 44 shipments
consisting of 39 containers and 16,959 pallets/packets were still in process.

19-00334

7/16

S/2019/44

VI. Progress towards the achievement of African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur strategic
priorities and exit benchmarks and indicators
Support for the Darfur peace process and the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur
31. There has been some progress in achieving a pre-negotiation framework to
arrive at the signing of a cessation of hostilities agreement and the resumption of
political negotiations between the Government and non-signatories of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. In the aftermath of the rejection by Sudan Call in
September of the proposal by the Chair of the African Union High -level
Implementation panel and chief mediator, Thabo Mbeki, to amend the 2016 Roadmap
Agreement for Ending the Conflicts in Sudan signed with the Government, the
Berghof Foundation held a meeting with Sudan Call in Berlin on 7 and 8 November,
at which Sudan Call discussed its participation in the national dialogue process and
issues pertaining to Darfur. More efforts continued, as the Special Envoy of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs on Counter-terrorism and Mediation in Conflict
Resolution of Qatar, Mutlaq al-Qahtani, held a consultative meeting in Doha with a
joint delegation of JEM/Gibril and SLA/MM to discuss the resumption of the Darfur
political process on 12 November. Qatar also held similar consultations with the
Government of the Sudan on 21 November.
32. On 22 and 23 November, the African Union-United Nations Joint Special
Representative held a meeting with the Darfur holdout movements in Addis Ababa to
consider ways of expediting the finalization of the pre -negotiation process. The
meeting was attended by the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Smaïl Chergui, and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Moussa Faki Mahamat. The non-signatory movements expressed their readiness to
enter negotiations with the Government of the Sudan on substantive issues and
initialled the draft pre-negotiation document.
33. On 6 December, in Berlin, the Government of the Sudan, JEM/Gibril and
SLM/A MM signed the pre-negotiation agreement to resume the peace talks in Doha.
The parties agreed that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur would serve as the
basis for the negotiations and that a new and independent implementation mechanism
would be established to implement a future agreement. The agreement further
stipulated that negotiations on substantive issues would be preceded by a cessation of
hostilities agreement, in accordance with the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel-led Roadmap Agreement and that UNAMID, Qatar and the
High-level Implementation Panel would work together to mediate further
negotiations.
34. The implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur continued at a
slow pace, owing mainly to funding constraints. The Voluntary Return and
Resettlement Commission, in collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), organized a workshop in Khartoum on 11 and 12 November to
strengthen coordination for sustainable voluntary returns and reintegration in Darfur.
35. On 9 December, the Implementation Follow-up Commission of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur held its 14th meeting in Khartoum. While
acknowledging that there has been progress with respect to provisions regarding
power-sharing, final security arrangements and the Darfur Internal Dialogue and
Consultation, the Commission underscored the urge nt need to reinvigorate the
implementation of the residual issues of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, in
particular those related to the return of internally displaced persons and the

8/16

19-00334

S/2019/44

reintegration of former combatants. In addition, the meeting recog nized that
development remained the most crucial aspect for sustained peace and stability in
Darfur and appealed to the international community to honour its pledges and support
the much-needed stabilization and development of the region.
36. The Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation Implementation Committee, in
collaboration with UNAMID, UNDP, Qatar, the European Union and peace studies
centres in the five states of Darfur, organized a two -day conference on 16 and
17 December in Nyala, South Darfur, for internally displaced persons to develop
recommendations for durable peace in Darfur. The participants presented nine
proposals to the Vice-President of the Sudan involving their safe return, the resolution
of land occupation and land ownership, the provision of basic services, compensation,
security and socioeconomic opportunities.
Protection of civilians
37. UNAMID integrated field protection teams carried out a total of 153 visits
throughout North, West and Central Darfur. In North Darfur, the mai n protection
issues were related to the presence of armed nomads and fears of possible crop
destruction by livestock. Similar protection issues were identified in West Darfur
which included land disputes that were eventually resolved through local conflict
resolution mechanisms. In Central Darfur, the teams found sexual gender-based
violence, allegedly committed by Government forces, in particular in Nertiti, Thur
and Golo, to be major protection concerns.
38. UNAMID uniformed personnel provided 189 round-trip escorts for
humanitarian partners delivering and monitoring assistance and conducting
inter-agency verification assessments and other operational activities. UNAMID also
continued daily escorts for water-trucking from Kube to the gathering site for
internally displaced persons in Sortony, North Darfur, and regular armed escorts for
humanitarian supplies between Sortony and Kabkabiyah. UNAMID also provided
security for the warehouses and assets of humanitarian agencies. The World Food
Programme, under UNAMID escort, distributed 42 metric tonnes of food and
69 tonnes of non-food items to people in need, including internally displaced persons,
throughout Darfur.
39. The military component of UNAMID conducted a total of 9,231 patrols, of
which 2,667 were for the protection of civilians, including 1,905 visits to villages and
860 visits to internally displaced persons camps. Protection of UNAMID personnel
and equipment patrols totalled 6,321. UNAMID police personnel also conducted
1,481 patrols, including 450 confidence-building patrols to internally displaced
persons camps, 177 firewood and grass collection escorts, 114 market escorts,
463 patrols to villages, 222 patrols to towns, 34 patrols to areas of return and
21 patrols along migration routes, with a particular focus on women and children
engaged in livelihood activities outside of their camps. Formed police units also
provided 41 humanitarian escorts to the camps for internally displaced persons in
Kalma, Dereige, Bileil and Otash, South Darfur.
40. UNAMID also undertook 17 security coordination meetings with the Sudanese
police, civil society organizations, internally displaced persons and community
leaders to support the implementation of community policing initiatives and enhanced
safety and security in the internally displaced persons camps. In addition, UNAMID
continued to support the Sudanese police in the implementation of th e standard
operating procedures, including through 13 training activities and joint assessments
carried out on police capacities and needs in October and November 2018. UNAMID
also assisted in the construction of three police stations in East Darfur and a handover
of 39 vehicles, 123 containers, office equipment and furniture.
19-00334

9/16

S/2019/44

41. In accordance with its human rights mandate, UNAMID undertook 48 human
rights monitoring visits to the camps for internally displaced persons, 27 field
missions, 15 visits to places of detention, including trial observations in five cases,
as well as 59 follow-up exercises on previously reported cases. UNAMID also
participated in 93 external advocacy meetings with Government authorities, local
communities and civil society partners, 14 workshops on conflict -related sexual
violence for women drawn from state institutions, women’s and children’s networks
and civil society groups, 14 human rights promotional and outreach activities in local
communities and two workshops for correction officers at the state prisons. However,
the ability of UNAMID to independently monitor and verify reported violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law remained a challenge, owing to
lack of access to Jebel Marra, in particular in Feina and Sabun el Fagur localities in
Central Darfur. Victims and witnesses interviewed reported serious human rights
concerns involving the Sudanese Armed Forces, Military Intelligence, the National
Intelligence and Security Services and RSF, including alleged indiscriminate killings,
sexual violence in the form of rape, arbitrary arrests and illegal detention.
Notwithstanding sustained and positive engagement between state authorities and
UNAMID, corroborating reports on human rights incidents in Central Darfur
continued to be a challenge, owing in part to lack of willingness by law enforcement
and judicial authorities to share information with UNAMID.
42. Pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 39/22 of 28 September 2018 on
the provision of technical assistance and capacity-building to improve human rights
in the Sudan and regarding the establishment of a country office for human rights
protection and promotion, a delegation from the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights visited the country from 2 to 6 December and held consultations with
various stakeholders, with a view to developing common ground for the establishment
of the country office before the departure of UNAMID. In another positive
development, on 10 December 2018, a new framework of cooperation was signed
between UNAMID and the National Human Rights Commission, paving the way for
increased cooperation and joint engagement.
43. UNAMID continued to support the Government’s efforts to strengthen rule of
law and criminal justice institutions in Darfur, including through support for capacity building and infrastructure rehabilitation. During the reporting p eriod, UNAMID, in
collaboration with the Sudan Public Prosecution Office, trained 25 prosecutors to
enhance their capacity to investigate serious criminal offences, including gender based violence and conflict-related sexual violence. UNAMID also trained, in
collaboration with the Sudan Judiciary, 50 rural court judges in Zalingei and El
Geneina to enhance their capacity to mediate intercommunal conflict. In addition,
UNAMID, together with the General Directorate of Prisons and Reform and El Fasher
University, trained 40 prison officers and conducted in-service training workshops for
298 prison officers on human rights approaches to sustainable prison management
and the application of standard operating procedures. UNAMID supported the
construction of a rural court in Nertiti, Central Darfur, and completed the construction
of a women’s dormitory in Kutum prison in North Darfur. Furthermore, UNAMID
and UNDP handed over to the Government a rural court in Masteri, West Darfur,
where internally displaced persons had been returning.
44. In 2018, UNAMID conducted specialized/technical training in investigations
and prosecution, dispute mediation, prison management and trial monitoring for 1,031
individuals, including rural court judges, prosecutors and judges of th e Special Court
for Darfur, prison officers and members of civil society. The training resulted in
enhanced performance of the participants in their various areas of intervention. There
has been an increase in the number of disputes, including intercommuna l conflicts
mediated and resolved by the rural court judges, and civil society participants are
10/16

19-00334

S/2019/44

better empowered to monitor criminal trials to see whether the fair trial guarantees
are being followed during the trial proceedings.
45. UNAMID also supported the construction of prosecution offices in Mornei,
West Darfur, Kutum in North Darfur, rural courts in Shataya in South Darfur and in
Abu Matariq in East Darfur and Nertiti in Central Darfur and infrastructure upgrades
of five prisons in Darfur, including Shalla male and female prisons and Kutum prison
in North Darfur, Ed Daein prison in East Darfur and Zalingei prison in Central Darfur,
as part of the efforts to improve access to justice. It increased the number of offenders
being prosecuted, including armed men in uniform, by the prosecutors.
46. Explosive ordnance remained a threat, with one incident resulting in the injury
of two boys during the reporting period. UNAMID carried out surveys, clearance and
disposal tasks in 29 villages, in addition to clearing 11 hazardous areas and destroying
3,032 explosive remnants of war and 234,018 small arms ammunitions throughout
Darfur, except for the Jebel Marra area, owing to access issues. Following UNAMID
clearance operations, four localities, namely, Kulbus in West Darfur, El Fasher in
North Darfur, Gorne in Central Darfur and Dimsu in South Darfur were confirmed by
the National Mine Action Centre as free of known explosive remnants of war.
UNAMID also organized risk awareness initiatives to 9,571 individuals v ulnerable to
explosive remnants of war, including 951 men, 1,201 women, 4,477 boys and
2,942 girls. Risk education and survey activities were carried out in Aljabel village,
South Darfur, Um Barru, North Darfur, and Zalingei, Central Darfur, in anticipatio n
of the return of internally displaced persons.
47. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), UNAMID conducted
16 field missions to South, Central, North and West Darfur to gather information on
grave violations against children and verified 11 incidents attributable to unidentified
armed men affecting 20 children. Of those, four were incidents of rape affecting six
girls; one involved the maiming of five boys; one the killing of three boys by
unexploded ordinance; one the maiming by gunshot of one girl and one boy, in which
another boy was abducted; while in another three boys were assaulted and injured.
UNAMID provided training to 339 peacekeeping personnel, comprising 44 females
and 295 males, on child rights and child protection and continued to roll out the
mission campaign entitled “Protect children/support efforts of UNAMID: no sexual
relations with minors”, aimed at maintaining zero cases of sexual exploitation against
minors by mission personnel. UNAMID also trained 208 host communities,
comprising community policing volunteers and community leadership, to promote
local ownership and create awareness on the protection of children.
48. UNAMID continued to prioritize the protection of women and girls through
patrols, the expansion of women’s protection networks, as well as regular visits to
villages and camps for internally displaced persons. The joint patrols by UNAMID
and the community policing volunteers to internally displaced person c amps and
adjacent local communities significantly reduced the incidence of criminality in
Darfur. It also led to confidence-building between the police and the local
communities and assisted in gathering and verifying information for e arly warning
system. However, protection of women in Jebel Marra has continued to be a major
challenge, and during visits by the women’s protection network, reports were
recorded of sexual and gender-based violence and robbery and physical assault of
women and girls, perpetrated mostly by uniformed personnel around internally
displaced persons camps in Golo, Nertiti, Thur, Rockero and other areas. On the basis
of those visits, UNAMID and the United Nations country team continued to engage
with national authorities and other stakeholders on the implementation of the national
action plan against sexual violence through capacity-building, promotional and
awareness-raising activities. Discussions continue between the Government of the
Sudan and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
19-00334

11/16

S/2019/44

Conflict regarding a possible framework of cooperation between the Government of
the Sudan and the United Nations on prevention of and response to sexual violence
in conflict.
49. During the reporting period, the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission, with support from UNAMID, demobilized 1,109
ex-combatants in Nyala, South Darfur. As part of the sharing of best practices,
UNAMID facilitated a study tour to the Republic of Rwanda for eight senior officials
of the Commission from 1 to 6 October, which included a series of field visits to
demobilization camps and reintegration sites and discussions regarding modalities of
financial support and service delivery to promote reintegration. The disarmamen t,
demobilization and reintegration commissions of both Rwanda and the Sudan agreed
to undertake joint programmes to replicate the former ’s best practices in the Sudan.
Mediation of intercommunal conflict
50. UNAMID continued to support the mediation of intercommunal conflict, as well
as dialogues between farmers and pastoralists, focusing on early warning, preventive
measures, capacity-building and efforts to address the root causes of conflicts, in
collaboration with Sudanese authorities and institutions, the United Nations country
team, native administration and community members, including women and youth.
Women’s participation in those efforts enhanced analysis of early warning signs and
the identification of potential hotspots, on the basis of threats that they encountered
during livelihood activities. UNAMID held 29 meetings in Central, North, South and
West Darfur with native administrations, local authorities and community leaders,
peaceful coexistence and agricultural protection committees and farmers and nomadic
herders to curb the recurrent crop destructions and prevent violence between farmers
and nomadic herders. Those regular meetings with various stakeholders contributed
to the prevention of incidents relating to crop destruction from escalating into violent
clashes, as reflected in the reduction in intercommunal incidents during the reporting
period.
51. In addition, UNAMID, together with the Ministry of Pr oduction and Economic
Resources, native administrations and local authorities, conducted 16 dialogue
forums for farmers and herders on seasonal migration issues in East and Central
Darfur, attended by 1,166 participants, including 394 women. They identified issues
pertaining to farming in migration routes, the absence of demarcation for migration
routes and the lack of social services along those routes, unilateral land occupation
and unresolved land issues as underlying conflict factors. In response to those inputs,
the local authorities have begun prioritizing the demarcation of migratory routes and
the provision of security and basic services along those corridors, with the assistance
of UNAMID and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

VII. Implementation of the reconfiguration of the mission
Uniformed personnel drawdown
52. In accordance with the plan and timetable to reduce the military strength of
UNAMID from 8,735 to 5,470 by 31 December 2018, the repatriation of 190 Egyptian
troops, 800 Ethiopian troops, 475 Indonesian troops, 310 Bangladeshi troops,
74 Pakistani troops, 25 Kenyan military police, 150 Tanzanian troops and
499 Rwandan troops has been completed. Five team sites have been closed and three
others have been handed over to the mission’s formed police units. The redeployment
of the formed police units also continued to the team sites in areas from which the
military personnel have withdrawn, as follows: the Egyptian units to Shangil Tobaya;
Burkina Faso units to Khor Abeche; Nepalese units to Tawilah, Jordanian units to
12/16

19-00334

S/2019/44

Saraf Omra, and Senegalese and Djibouti units to Kutum. The number of individual
police officers has also been reduced from 800 to 760. In the areas from which the
military component of UNAMID has withdrawn, internally displaced persons have
raised concerns regarding the decrease in security and livelihood escorts. UNAMID
intends to scale up its rule of law and livelihood-related services to address those
issues.
53. UNAMID continued to strengthen its internal processes to ensure that s upport
for non-United Nations forces complies with the human rights due diligence policy
on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces. During the
reporting period, UNAMID received 194 requests for the gifting of materials and the
provision of support to non-United Nations entities and granted approval to 18 such
requests, while one was rejected on the grounds of a substantial risk of possible
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. Administrative
processes relating to the closure and handover of 13 UNAMID team sites and
community policing centres to the Government of the Sudan were deemed to have
been in compliance with the human rights due diligence policy, on the basis of
available information, risk assessments and letters of undertaking from relevant local
officials to the effect that there were no grounds to believe that the recipients might
commit human rights violations. UNAMID and the United Nations country team are
scheduled to begin monitoring and verification visits to the vacated team sites in
January 2019.
Implementation of the transition concept
54. As the Office of the Joint Special Representative has relocated to Khartoum and
other senior leadership, including the Deputy Joint Special Representative , Force
Commander and Police Commissioner, together with their respective headquarters
and heads of substantive sections have moved to Zalingei, UNAMID concentrated on
the development and implementation of the transition concept to begin mandated
activities with the United Nations country team outside the greater Jebel Marra area.
The transition concept outlines the modalities of state liaison functions, including a
common approach regarding legal, administrative and financial procedures to carry
out four transition priorities, namely, rule of law (police, justice and corrections),
durable solutions for the displaced populations and host communities, immediate
service delivery for internally displaced persons and human rights promotion and
capacity-building. On 17 December, UNAMID and the United Nations country team
held an inaugural meeting of the mission programmatic activities approval committee
to grant approximately $14 million for projects to be implemented by 10 United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes. In addition, the Peacebuilding Fund
supported a joint initiative by UNDP and UNICEF to strengthen rule of law
institutions and support youth participation in peacebuilding activities, while
promoting durable solutions for internally displaced person s and returnees in Golo,
Jebel Marra.
55. Resource mobilization remains a challenge for the successful implementation of
the transition concept. It is important that, for the 2019/2020 fiscal year, substantial
funds are secured to implement activities through state liaison functions in the four
priority areas and facilitate the transition to the Government and the United Nations
country team before the mission’s exit.

VIII. Observations
56. For more than a decade, the United Nations and its partners have pursued a
sustainable peace in Darfur. Joint African Union-United Nations peacekeepers have

19-00334

13/16

S/2019/44

striven to protect the people of Darfur, and the two organizations facilitated peace
talks, together with other key bilateral and regional interlocutors, such as Qatar.
Humanitarian agencies continue to provide life-saving support. Darfur today has
never been more stable since the establishment of UNAMID, and the first hybrid
mission has begun preparations for its eventual exit.
57. Yet the fundamental issues that gave rise to the armed conflict in Darfur are not
fully resolved. While I welcome the pre-negotiation agreement between the
Government and some of the non-signatories of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur to resume talks, the peace process cannot be put to rest until they agree to end
the pursuit of military solutions and resolve remaining grievances on substantive
issues. A peace agreement, signed by all parties to the conflict in Darfur, will serve
as a shared vision and testament to bring forth a durable peace and a path to recovery
and reconciliation. I reiterate my calls to the Government of the Sudan and all the
non-signatories of the Doha Document to intensify their efforts towards the
commencement of political negotiations, on the basis of the Document, as soon as
possible.
58. In this regard, I am deeply concerned by continued reports of skirmishes
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction in Jebel Marra that continue to cause civilian casualty and displacement. I
urge both parties to cease hostilities immediately, recognizing that the conflict cannot
be eradicated through the use of force, and that continued fighting would only exhaust
communities that have already suffered from destruction and displacement. I reiterate
my call to Abdul Wahid al-Nur to join the peace process without conditions, which is
the only way out of the current predicament. I also call upon the Government,
notwithstanding its improved cooperation with UNAMID, to ensure that
peacekeepers and humanitarian actors are allowed access to people in need
throughout Darfur, in particular in the Jebel Marra area.
59. I am also troubled by continued human rights violations, in part icular sexualand gender-based violence in the form of rape, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrest
and detentions, including those reportedly perpetrated by government security
personnel targeting vulnerable populations, such as women, children and int ernally
displaced persons. I seek the cooperation of the Government to rein in those elements,
in particular within the armed forces serving in Darfur, responsible for such actions
and bring them to measures of justice and accountability.
60. A significant reduction in the intensity of intercommunal violence, coinciding
with the decline in counterinsurgency operations, underscores not only contributions
made by local authorities, UNAMID, the United Nations country team and other
partners to facilitate grass-roots mediation and reconciliation, but also resource
dimensions of armed conflict and their implications at the community level.
Continued clashes over access to land, water sources, migratory routes and other
scarce resources need to be resolved through local and national governance reforms,
including the security elements thereof, to cement the level of stability achieved to
date. UNAMID, in coordination with the United Nations country team, has supported
community stabilization initiatives to provide sustainable solutions to those drivers
of conflict, including efforts to mitigate crop destruction with a view to easing
tensions relating to seasonal migration and to establish or rehabilitate water resources,
local police stations and rural courts.
61. In this connection, the ongoing unrest associated with economic difficulty in the
Sudan is a cause for concern. I reiterate my appeals for calm and restraint, in addition
to a thorough investigation into violence that has unfolded in response to popular
demonstrations, including in Darfur. Testing periods require constructive efforts to

14/16

19-00334

S/2019/44

find solutions together, while safeguarding freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly.
62. Meanwhile, the reconfiguration of UNAMID is proceeding as scheduled, with
the relocation of mission assets to Zalingei, Central Darfur, and the repatriation of
military personnel and the redeployment of the formed police units. UNAMID and
the United Nations country team have also made progress in their collaborative efforts
to establish transitional working arrangements and ensure that the United Nations
system works as one. A successful transition that entails the development of sufficient
capacities for the rule of law and respect for human rights is critical not only for
stability in Darfur, but nationally and beyond its borders with neighbouring countries,
such as Chad and Libya. The slow implementation of the outstanding provisions of
the Doha Document is an alarming trend in that context. I urge members of the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and other donors to assist
in the mobilization of financial and technical resources for the reconstruction and
development in Darfur, as part of their commitment to sustain peace under the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.
63. A successful transition will also require a strong partnership between the
Sudanese authorities, the African Union and the United Nations system. Transitions
in other peacekeeping contexts have demonstrated that national and local ownership
in peacebuilding, coupled with the sustained engagement of the United Nations, are
the prerequisite for long-term stability and the prevention of conflict relapse or the
emergence of new risks and threats. It is time to recommit the whole United Nations
system, the Government of the Sudan, the African Union and other key partners to
the next stage of peace and development in Darfur. I also call upon the international
community to assist the transition, including by ensuring that the United Nations
country team has sufficient resources for its critical work during that period and after
the mission’s exit, to consolidate peace and prevent relapse into conflict.
64. In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude to the African Union -United
Nations Joint Special Representative, Mr. Mamabolo, the mission leadership and all
the personnel of UNAMID, the United Nations country team and humanitarian
partners who continue to work collaboratively on transition towards the exit of the
mission from Darfur. I also wish to commend former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and
Abdulsalami Abubakar and Ramtane Lamamra of the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel for their steadfast commitment to sustainable peace and
stability in the Sudan.

19-00334

15/16

S/2019/44

16/16

19-00334
