S/PV.7011

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7011th meeting

Thursday, 25 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerry/Mrs. DiCarlo/Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Canfin
Mr. Carrera
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Mushikiwabo
Mr. Esaw
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Supporting the Great Lakes Framework
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2013/387)
Letter dated 3 July 2013 from the Chargé d’affaires, a.i. of the United States
Mission to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/394)

13-40733 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1340733*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.7011

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Supporting the Great Lakes Framework
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2013/387)
Letter dated 3 July 2013 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the United States Mission
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/394)
The President: It is my pleasure to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, the Ministers and the
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. I think that their participation in this meeting
is an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
that is under discussion.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of Belgium,
Burundi, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, South Africa, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President of the
World Bank, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kim, who
is joining today’s meeting via videoconference from
Washington.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Pierre Vimont, Executive
Secretary General of the European External Action
Service, to participate in this meeting.

2

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/387, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I wish also to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/394, which contains a letter dated
3 July 2013 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the United
States Mission to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.
Before the Council is a statement by the President
on behalf of the Council on the subject of today’s
meeting. I thank all Council members for their valuable
contributions to this statement. In accordance with
the understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2013/11.
It is so decided.
It is now my enormous privilege to make a statement
in my capacity as the Secretary of State of the United
States of America.
Let me begin by saying how genuinely honoured I
am to be able to participate in this meeting at the United
Nations, presiding over the Security Council in our
role for this period, as the Secretary of State. It is also
a privilege to preside over a meeting of the Security
Council on a subject — a challenge — that is central to
the mission of this vital Organization, that is, realizing
the promise of peace.
For far, far too long, far too many lives in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the broader
Great Lakes region have been ravaged by targeted,
grotesque violence. They have been subjected to human
rights abuses, and the region has been disrupted by
dangerous instability.
The crisis that we are witnessing today underscores
what we already know: it is a stark reminder of what
fills the vacuum in the absence of good governance,
basic dignity and firm leadership that holds accountable
those who violate basic standards of decency.
It reminds — or it ought to remind — all of us of an
obligation that we all share: not only to end the killing,

13-40733

S/PV.7011

the raping, the forcing of children into combat, the
devastation and the fear, but the obligation to establish
a lasting peace and a climate of development. In
doing so, we can create the space for productivity and
partnerships, for greater opportunity for the citizens of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and for the birth
of a new generation of stability and of hope.

implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We particularly welcome the priority that
she places on including regional women’s groups, local
communities and civil society in the Framework peace
process as we seek to break the cycle of violence and
break down the barriers between humanitarian aid and
the people who are desperate for it.

We can actually prove to the world that all of us
working together — and, I might add, prove it at a
time when many people are doubting the capacity of
institutions to function and the capacity of political
leadership to solve problems — have the ability to
prove to the world that together, we actually can make
a difference.

The day before President Obama nominated me
to be Secretary of State, I met with Denis Mukwege,
who just a few weeks earlier had fled the Democratic
Republic of the Congo after an attempt on his life.
Denis has demonstrated the courage to stand up and
protect women and children from the weapons of war,
which too often people only talk about in a whisper.
The victims of these horrific crimes and humanitarians
like Dr. Mukwege, who protect and treat those people,
as well as all the people of that region, desperately need
a voice. I know — and the Secretary-General obviously
knows, because he chose her — that Mary Robinson
to being that voice as the region and the international
community address the full range of issues involved in
translating the broad principles of the Framework into
concrete benchmarks for implementation. I thank Mary
Robinson for what she is doing. We are grateful for her
continued public service.

The seeds of that promise have already been
planted. But our job does not end with the creation
of the Framework. It continues in the cultivation of
the seeds and in making sure that we implement the
Framework and that we create a vigilant, accountable
and cooperative effort in order to see those seeds grow
into a full-blown peace that is sustainable.
I want to recognize our partners in that effort.
First, I thank the Secretary-General for his personal
engagement. I thank World Bank President Kim for
the same kind of engagement and for their partnership.
President Obama and I are grateful to both leaders and
the institutions that they lead for the very novel United
Nations-World Bank partnership that has been created
which provides incentives for political progress through
projects that create stability and improve infrastructure.
Clearly, boosting regional commerce in the short term
is one path to realizing stability and security in the
long term. I think that we are all very hopeful that this
approach can succeed in the Great Lakes region and
perhaps even serve as a model for other areas, such as
Mali, the Maghreb and beyond.
Regrettably, we have no dearth of locations where
we are challenged and could use this kind of model
today. I would just say parenthetically that, in the
Middle East, the West Bank and Palestine, we are
beginning to look at a similar kind of model, and hope
that we can combine our efforts over the long term to
find new ways to build sustainable peace.
I want particularly to also thank Mary Robinson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region of Africa. She is a long-time friend and
somebody I have long admired, and I reiterate the United
States support for her work with regional leaders in the

It is also a great pleasure for me today to introduce
the United States Special Representative for the African
Great Lakes Region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, former Senator Russ Feingold. The suffering in
the Great Lakes, which we are going to debate and talk
about here today, is a high-level priority for President
Obama and for me, and it is one that we believe must
be met by high-level leadership. I had the pleasure of
working with Senator Feingold in the United States
Senate for 18 years. In my judgement, there was no one
in the Senate who was more trusted for his expertise in
African issues. He brings enormous intellect, passion
and courage to this challenge, and I am very pleased
that he has consented to take this on.
I also bring the greetings of former United States
Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice, who has
asked me to convey a warm good morning and hello.
We chatted briefly before I came here so I could get
the latest tips on exactly what to do and what not to do
today.
The United States joins every single participant
in this meeting in welcoming the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. It is a very important first

13-407333

S/PV.7011

step. But we also recognize that the progress which the
region has made since February is extremely fragile,
and the key question before all of us today is whether
the commitments prescribed in the Framework can be
and will be kept. Will they come to life, or are they
destined only to live on paper?
Let me underscore that the United States stands
ready to support the signatories and we will work with
them, with focus, energy and persistence, in order to
implement the Framework. But as President Obama
has said, there has to be follow-through. I want to
make it clear in that context that the United States is
deeply concerned about recent reports of resumed
external support to the Mouvement du 23 mars, as well
as of collaboration with the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda. So I want to be emphatic here
today. All parties must immediately end their support
for armed rebel groups. All Governments must hold
human rights violators and abusers accountable. We
must end the era of impunity, which, unfortunately, has
been rampant.
To this end, the United States welcomes the
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade, and
we support its mandate to neutralize all armed groups
and protect civilians so that peace can take hold. We
believe that it is now time for everyone in the region to
exercise restraint, to return to the constructive path that
they have set out for themselves, and to move forward
together so that we can address the root causes of the
conflict and end it once and for all. I believe that this
is doable. I believe that it is the absence of governance
and the absence of an international presence that have
created the vacuum that has permitted people to act with
the impunity with which they have acted. I know that
moving ahead is not easy. I know that it takes courage.
But we all have to accept that this is our responsibility.
So, as President of the Council at this debate and
as the representative of a nation that, like all others
represented here, has a stake in the stability of the Great
Lakes region, I want to urge all of us around this table
to take advantage of the unique opportunity that the
Framework provides. The United States respectfully
challenges all of those who have committed themselves
to the Framework to respect in turn the national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We cannot emphasize strongly
enough how critical it is that everyone foster cooperation
across borders. We challenge everyone to finalize the
benchmarks that are outlined in the Framework and to

4

adopt them during the plenary session of the General
Assembly in September. We strongly urge everyone
to formally include the voices that Special Envoy
Robinson has engaged — voices that have too often
been excluded, particularly those of women. And we
challenge the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
continue implementing reforms to its security sector
and to re-establish State authority, particularly in the
East. Finally, we pledge to join the Security Council,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, regional
Governments and the international community in doing
everything in our power to achieve a comprehensive
peace accord.
Every one of us here understands the complex
history of suffering in the Great Lakes region, but
we all have a responsibility — a universally endowed
responsibility — to ensure that a history of violence is
not going to be followed by a future of vengeance. The
only way to properly honour the millions of lives that
have been lost is through peace, and the only way to
achieve that peace is for the United Nations, all of the
countries of the region and all of the countries with the
capacity to step up and help show the way forward.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United States
for convening this debate, and Secretary of State John
Kerry for presiding. His presence is testament to the
importance the United States places on this issue.
Allow me also to welcome the appointment of
Senator Russ Feingold as the new United States Special
Representative for the African Great Lakes Region
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish him
success in the critical months ahead and hope that he
will continue to coordinately very closely with my
Special Envoy, Ms. Mary Robinson.
It is now five months since the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region was signed, and four
months since the Security Council adopted resolution
2098 (2013). Hopes were high that we could see an end
to the large-scale cyclical violence that had ravaged
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
over the past two decades, and derailed previous
peace initiatives. Peace would mean a new chance

13-40733

S/PV.7011

for development and lasting security for some of the
world’s most sorely tested people.
I am therefore deeply concerned about the current
hostilities between the Mouvement du 23 mars and the
Congolese armed forces. All parties need to return as
soon as possible to the Kampala talks. I have called
for maximum restraint, and I urge all Framework
signatories to jointly and individually respect their
commitments.
The lack of mutual trust in the region has thwarted
past attempts to find political solutions to the entrenched
problems that continue to drive the conflict. It is vital
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its eastern neighbours pursue constructive
dialogue.
At the national level, structural reforms within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will help address the
root causes of the violence. The Government has taken
initial steps towards army reform, decentralization
and national dialogue. It is essential to translate those
commitments into tangible results.
At the regional level, leaders must look beyond the
issues that divide them and work together to define a
common agenda for lasting peace and prosperity based
on trade, economic cooperation and mutual respect for
one another’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
provides a clear road map. My Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes region will continue to support the parties
to uphold the commitments that they have adhered to
under the Framework. My Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Mr. Martin Kobler, will support the political process
in the country, including support in implementing its
national commitments.
The prospects for durable peace in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain better
than they have for many years. But spoilers are active,
including armed groups and militias that have shown
little inclination to engage in a genuine peace process.
To address that threat, we are reinforcing MONUSCO.
The Force Intervention Brigade is an important tool,
but it is only one part of a comprehensive approach that
embraces security and development.

However, while the United Nations and the
international community can do much, we depend on
the Framework signatories to provide the essential
foundation.
All parties must avoid renewed hostilities and
achieve progress on the political track. Conflict and
lawlessness in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have crippled development and
entrenched extreme poverty and suffering. There are
appalling levels of brutal sexual violence. The region
needs security. But for there to be lasting peace, we
must also provide opportunity.
The United Nations system is committed to
promoting economic development in Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. Last
May, during my joint visit with World Bank President
Jim Yong Kim, the Bank committed an additional
$1 billion for better health and education services, crossborder trade and hydroelectricity projects, giving new
impetus to regional economic integration. I thank the
leadership and continuing engagement and commitment
of President Kim. I will work very closely with him
in other areas as well, to set the model of partnership
between the United Nations and the World Bank. That
is central to building the trust and interdependence that
are critical to the success of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
The current fighting in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo casts a grave
shadow. But we should not allow it to deter us from
our objective. It should make us even more determined
to lift people from the oppression of insecurity, human
rights abuses and poverty. I count on the Framework
signatories to work constructively with each other and
with my Special Envoy to develop benchmarks for their
commitments, which will inform the strategic road map
for implementation to be presented for endorsement on
the margins of the General Assembly general debate in
September. And I call on the international community
to use all the tools at its disposal — from international
criminal prosecution and sanctions regimes to
development assistance.
My Special Envoy, Ms. Robinson, has described
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework as
a framework of hope. I urge all signatories and the
international community to keep the hope alive.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and, once again, for his leadership.

13-407335

S/PV.7011

I now give the floor to Mr. Kim.
Mr. Kim: I would like especially to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, who is the leader of the entire
multilateral system. His strong, visionary leadership on
this issue is what is giving drive and impetus to our
work together. We look forward to continuing to follow
his lead and playing our role.
As a long-time resident of Massachusetts, I would
like to thank you for your leadership over decades,
Secretary Kerry. I also want to thank you for your
extremely generous mentorship and support of me
personally. Quite literally, I would not be in this job
without your support.
I also especially want to thank the SecretaryGeneral for appointing Mary Robinson as his Special
Envoy.
For the people in the Chamber who do not know, I
want to make a special point to make it clear that United
States Special Representative Russ Feingold is a person
who has been deeply committed to Africa. I remember
warmly my years of working with Senator Feingold
as he championed increased funding and support for
AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria programmes. Senator
Feingold is a true champion and friend of Africa.
It is an honour and a pleasure to take part in this
briefing. I thank the Council for the invitation, as I
recognize that our work at the World Bank Group has to
be aligned with political realities at the global, regional,
national and local levels. I shall focus my remarks on
the development aspects of peace and security in the
Great Lakes region, and outline what the World Bank
Group is doing to support the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
As the Secretary-General noted, we visited the
Great Lakes region together earlier this year. It was
the first time in history that the President of the
World Bank and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations had travelled together on mission. The choice
of our destination and the timing of our trip was not
an accident. The Secretary-General’s ground-breaking
work and the commitment of all the countries of the
region to the Framework Agreement provides all of us
with an opening to end violence, secure peace and lay
the foundations for more robust economic development.
Those foundations will make a difference in lifting
people out of poverty, creating jobs and providing
access to health and education.

6

The Secretary-General and I delivered one message
over and over during our trip, and I will repeat it now:
we cannot have development without peace, and we
cannot have peace without development. Conflict
not only stops development, it can reverse years of
development gains. The eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are a good example
of a tragedy with an immense human cost that has gone
on for far too long.
More than 3.5 million people are estimated to have
died since 1998. Another 4.7 million people lost their
homes. More than 2 million children cannot benefit
from education due to the destruction of schools. The
poverty rate is approximately 70 per cent. Overall access
to economic services, including energy, is very limited.
But let me also argue that long-term sustainable peace
and stability will not be achieved without addressing
the underlying key economic drivers of conflict and
instability. Those drivers of conflict spill across the
borders and therefore call for a regional approach to
address issues such as insecure and insufficient access
to land, population displacement and illicit exploitation
in the mining of high-value minerals and timber.
Moreover, those problems are compounded by rapid
population growth and a lack of economic opportunity.
On our trip together, the Secretary-General and I
demonstrated the commitment of the United Nations
and the World Bank Group to collaborate and bring
tangible benefits to the people of the Great Lakes
region and to pursue peace, stability and development
in a comprehensive manner within our national and
regional programmes. We were heartened by the
commitment of political leaders to implementing the
Framework. We were also heartened by the interest
in regional initiatives to promote development. That
leadership is essential for the success of the Framework
and for sustainable peace in the region. On our trip,
we committed to increase cooperation between our
institutions and with other partners, such as the
European Union, the African Development Bank and
the regional economic communities, to maximize the
impact of our efforts.
We will strongly support the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region and increase our collaboration with the United
Nations on the ground. We will use our convening
power to encourage greater investment, including from
the private sector in the region. I can also announce
that the World Bank Group will provide an additional

13-40733

S/PV.7011

$1 billion over the next 24 months for cross-border
development issues. Of that, about $500 million will
be for hydroelectric power projects to increase energy
access in several Great Lakes region countries,
about $350 million for transport linkages and border
management, and about $100 million for agriculture
and rural livelihoods targeted at refugees and internally
displaced persons. That is extremely important, given
that the region has approximately 1 million refugees
and more than 2 million internally displaced persons in
a situation of protracted displacement.
I would like to add that all of our assistance will
be informed by a gender perspective. We will provide
additional resources for programmes to address sexual
and gender-based violence, as well as assistance for
basic health services for vulnerable women and children
through networks of health centres. The economic
empowerment of women, as well as the promotion
and protection of their rights and increased voice, all
have important roles in reducing violence. We will also
expand our assistance for networks of regional public
health laboratories to allow countries to develop and
share specific expertise. That has been very successful
to date. I am pleased to inform the Council that in two
weeks our Board of Directors will consider the first
project under the initiative, that is, the Rusumo Falls
hydroelectric dam.
I am sure that progress in the areas just mentioned
will create significant economic opportunities and
help to generate jobs. I am convinced that the regional
approaches outlined will help to promote greater
cooperation and integration within the region and bring
tangible benefits to all Great Lakes countries.
We are under no illusion that this support will be
enough. Our assistance fits into a larger mosaic of
development for the region and will focus on leveraging
private-sector investment. We also understand that,
while large energy projects will be critical for the
long-term development of the region, we also need
to move as rapidly and as efficiently as possible with
smaller projects so that the people of the region feel the
tangible benefits of peace. Indeed, in coming months,
delivering on our promises related to agriculture, jobs,
cross-border trading, education and health care will
help determine whether those efforts will succeed. We
must deliver on our promises, and we must move with
as much urgency as we can.

All that work will stem not from the priorities made
in the World Bank Group headquarters in Washington,
D.C., or the United Nations Headquarters in New
York. It will be guided by the priorities set by African
stakeholders, and their emphasis on both quick wins
and medium- to longer-term results. I am pleased
that, last week, we were able to co-host a meeting
on regional approaches to development in the Great
Lakes countries with the African Union Commission
and the United Nations to further this agenda. At
the meeting, participants agreed on the importance
of those approaches. They also agreed to collaborate
immediately on several steps, including a mapping of
country priorities and partner assistance, as well as to
establish an accountability and follow-up mechanism.
A report of the meeting will be presented to the 11+4
summit in September.
Finally, when the Secretary-General and I travelled
to the HEAL Africa’s hospital in Goma, to visit women
who have suffered from the violence, and the healthcare workers who care for them, we heard many
painful stories. Those women’s stories must be heard
and must be remembered. Their words should steel us
for difficulties that are sure to come, and harden our
commitment to the Framework agreement, because
we must not let this continue. What happened to those
women has happened to the millions of people caught
in the web of conflict in the eastern regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and is a stain on all
of our consciences.
Outside the hospital, we also saw scores and
scores of women, and even girls, holding placards
with messages such as “We are tired of conflict”, “We
have had enough”, and “Peace, peace, peace, please”.
I want to assure the Council, as I assured the women
and girls we met, that the World Bank Group is in this
for the long haul. With the Secretary-General’s bold
leadership, we are determined to stay the course for
those women and all others who have been robbed of
economic opportunity by these years of conflict. It is
time for all of us to move together, to move quickly and
to deliver on our promises.
The President: I thank Mr. Kim very much for his
important and eloquent briefing, his creative leadership
with the Secretary-General and his willingness to
engage in a new partnership that we hope will be a solid
model for the future.
I now give the floor to Ms. Robinson.

13-407337

S/PV.7011

Ms. Robinson: I am honoured to speak to the
Security Council on this important occasion. I, too, thank
the United States for convening this ministerial-level
meeting, and Secretary of State John Kerry for presiding
and for providing a strong statement as President
(S/PRST/2013/11). Let me reiterate my congratulations
to Senator Russ Feingold on his appointment as the
United States Special Representative for the African
Great Lakes Region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I look forward to working very closely with him.
I also welcome the Secretary-General’s appointment of
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), Mr. Martin Kobler, with whom I
have established a very good working relationship.
As we have heard, this high-level meeting on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes takes place at a difficult time for the people
in the region. The latest round of fighting in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has had
devastating consequences yet again on the civilian
population, both for those living in and around Goma
as well as for the host communities and Governments
of the neighbouring countries. Many cases of death,
injuries, sexual violence against women and massive
displacements of population are still being reported.
That cannot be allowed to continue. The fighting must
stop immediately, and all parties should exert maximum
restraint to avoid a further escalation of the conflict.
As the Council is aware, I have now served as
Special Envoy for four months. Not a day goes by
without reports of killings, rape, sexual assault and
the displacement of people in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The reports are in the dry prose
of the code cables or the slightly more descriptive
style of journalists filing their copy. What strikes me
is the lack of outrage and horror at the daily toll. It
has become the accepted normal. But it is not normal
and not acceptable. We committed to zero-tolerance
to gender-based violence. Zero-tolerance needs to be
implemented as a fundamental value of the Framework
for Peace, Security and Cooperation for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. Like President
Yong Kim of the World Bank, I remember the rows of
people in Goma who lined the road holding pieces of
paper, mainly in French, which said: “No impunity”,
“Peace now”, “The fighting must stop”. That, in

8

essence, is the promise of the Framework, a promise of
peace, security, cooperation and development.
Sadly, there are credible reports of some activities in
support of armed groups by different signatory parties
to the Framework, which are contrary to the spirit and
intent of the Framework. As the Secretary-General
said, the Force Intervention Brigade, once it becomes
operative, will be an important tool with a robust
mandate, but it is only one part of a comprehensive
approach that embraces security and development.
The stark reality is that those who suffer the
most from the endless conflict and its atrocities are,
and always have been, the civilian population first,
particularly women, children and even babies.
As the Secretary-General said in his remarks, hopes
were high when the 11 countries and four important
regional and international institutions signed the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, on 24 February,
and when the members of the Security Council adopted
resolution 2098 (2013), in March. The Framework
clearly gives the ownership and the responsibility
to the leaders who signed it. I am personally very
encouraged to see that their commitment to it is strong
and resolute. If fully implemented, both the Framework
and resolution 2098 (2013) would help stabilize the
situation on the ground and, more importantly, would
pave the way to address the fundamental causes of the
cycle of conflicts in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes.
That is why I strongly believe that the signatories
and guarantors of the Framework and the international
community as a whole need to work intensively together
to accompany the leaders and the people of the Great
Lakes to transform what I call the “framework of hope”
into a tangible reality.
Despite the security and humanitarian challenges
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region are facing at the moment, I am
encouraged by the initial progress in several areas
and by the strong will demonstrated by the signatory
countries to contribute to the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Allow
me to share some of the positive political steps that
the signatories of the Framework and key international
institutions have taken since February.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

At the national level, in May President Kabila
established the national oversight mechanism, which
will oversee the implementation of the commitments
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the
Framework. I very much hope — and I made this
clear to President Kabila — that the national oversight
mechanism will include a large cross-section of civil
society in carrying out its mandate. At the same time,
national reforms that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has agreed to implement under the Framework
need to begin in earnest, and be supported by the
international community.
I would like to welcome the recent initiative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to
launch a mineral certification programme in an effort
to stop the illegal exploitation of minerals and prevent
armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo from benefiting from it. This is an important
first step, which deserves the full support of the
international community.
At the regional level, the first meeting of the regional
oversight mechanism took place in Addis Ababa on
26 May and established a technical support committee
mandated to develop the benchmarks and indicators of
progress for the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, among other tasks. The
committee is made up of senior representatives of the
signatory countries of the Framework, who have met
twice so far, on 24 June and earlier this week on 22 and
23 July, under the co-chairmanship of my Special
Adviser Modibo Touré and the African Union Special
Representative for the Great Lakes, Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra. Participants also included senior
officials from ICGLR, the South African Development
Community, MONUSCO and the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs.
I am glad to report that the committee has made
solid progress in developing benchmarks and indicators
of progress. These may still be improved, but they
are specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and
time-bound, with a clear indication of responsibilities.
In accordance with its immediate mandate, the
committee focused on regional benchmarks, but also
provided critical inputs for international benchmarks
and national benchmarks. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all the members of the Committee
and the leaders of the region who responded positively

to my request to each to appoint one of their closest
advisors to represent them in this work.
I will present the benchmarks developed by the
committee to the leaders of the region during the next
ICGLR summit, scheduled for 31 July in Nairobi ahead
of the next meeting of the regional oversight mechanism,
which, as the Secretary-General has said, should
formally adopt them in September here in New York.
In the meantime, I will of course continue consultations
with all those involved in the implementation process of
the Framework to ensure that the proposed benchmarks
meet their concerns.
Two significant regional meetings took place
recently, with positive outcomes that I would like
to share. The first was the regional consultation on
women, peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes Region, which I organized, in collaboration with
Femmes Africa Solidarité and the ICGLR, from 9 to
11 July in Bujumbura, Burundi. More than 100 women
leaders from signatory countries of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework attended the conference,
including the Gender Ministers of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi.
Members will recall that I made it clear from
the beginning that, as Special Envoy, I intended to
implement a top-down and bottom-up comprehensive
approach, whereby I will be working, on the one
hand, with political leaders and, on the other, with the
people of the region to encourage peace, security and
development. It was important to listen to the Great
Lakes women’s perspectives on the peace process, as
women represent the majority of the population of the
region and are, together with children, the first victims
of the ongoing conflict. I gave them the opportunity
to suggest possible benchmarks and indicators, which
were later submitted to the technical support committee
for consideration.
Perhaps I should explain that, not too surprisingly,
the technical support committee is entirely male in its
composition.
I will continue to encourage women-led
initiatives in the region through the establishment of
a communications platform, through which experts
and donors could provide technical advice and funds
to women’s projects in support of the “framework of
hope”.

13-407339

S/PV.7011

As President Kim mentioned, the second meeting
took place on 18 and 19 July, in Addis Ababa. The
African Union, the World Bank and my Office organized
a ministerial meeting on regional approaches to
development in countries of the Great Lakes in support
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The meeting was attended by Ministers of Finance and
Economic Planning and Ministers of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of countries of the
Great Lakes Region, regional economic communities,
partner countries, international organizations and civil
society organizations. This proved to be a very good
forum for discussion, building on the historic joint visit
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and World Bank
President Jim Yong Kim to the Great Lakes region in
May.
Participants noted that deepened regional
economic cooperation and integration and enhanced
regional infrastructure and trade could foster economic
inclusion and create opportunities, particularly for
disadvantaged groups, women and youth, as well as
strengthen political agreements by delivering tangible
results. They indicated a number of priority regional
interventions in energy and transport infrastructure,
agriculture, cross-border trade, economic development,
and social sectors. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Addis Ababa participants and also President
Jim Yong Kim for his commitment of $1 billion in
support of the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, which effectively turns it
into a Framework for peace, security, cooperation and
development.
All these steps, although they may appear minor
to the millions of people on the ground who are
eagerly waiting to see peace established and their lives
changing, are concrete affirmation of the determination
of the international community to try new avenues for
sustainable peace and stability and development in the
Great Lakes region.
I will soon come back to the Council with
further elements for the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, which will be
built on three critical pillars: political and security,
humanitarian and development. Elements of this
strategy will include sustained confidence-building
measures among leaders in the region, joint efforts with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for MONUSCO and international partners to support
the national dialogue process in Democratic Republic

10

of the Congo; cross-border development projects, with
a strong focus on civil society, youth and women’s
groups; and modalities to support difficult mediation,
building on the Kampala dialogue, within the limits
of my mandate, including strict compliance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.
I am fully aware of the challenges that the
Governments of the region and the Security Council
face in advancing peace in the Great Lakes region. My
role, I hope, will be a modest but catalytic contribution
to helping restore peace and build hope for the future
in a complex environment. But such a strategy and the
Council’s engagement with the Great Lakes region
will bear fruit only if all actors involved at the local,
national, regional and international levels push in the
same direction and if — let me reiterate — there is an
immediate cessation of hostilities in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I believe that there is some political momentum at
the moment. We need to create and encourage space
for dialogue, and support for tough decisions. We need
to tell each other the truth, quietly when necessary but
firmly, and stick to our commitments to the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework if we are to make
a real difference this time. I have been having frank
conversations with the leaders of the region and I intend
to continue to do so in the coming months, including
next week when I meet them in Nairobi. I encourage
the members of the Security Council to keep the Great
Lakes region high on their agenda and to maintain the
current momentum, including perhaps through a visit
to the Great Lakes region in the coming months.
Let me conclude by warmly thanking the Security
Council members, the Secretary-General and my
United Nations colleagues, as well as regional and
international partners, who have continuously
expressed and provided support to my work. I know I
can count on them to try to move the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework agenda forward, and I am
really grateful for that.
The President: I thank the Special Envoy for
her briefing and her work. I know that Special
Representative Senator Feingold is really looking
forward to working with her.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lamamra.
Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): At the outset, on
behalf of the Commisison of the African Union, I should

13-40733

S/PV.7011

like to thank the President of the Security Council for
the month of July, United States Secretary of State
John Kerry, and the members of the Council for the
invitation to take part in this important meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, Chair of
the African Union, regrets being unable to participate
in this important meeting, which takes place within
discussions aimed at implementing the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, signed in Addis
Ababa on 24 February.
The first commitment undertaken by the
international community concerns the role the Council
is expected to play with respect to the importance of
support for the long-term stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
Furthermore, the oversight mechanism calls on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, its neighbouring
countries, regional partners and the international
community to synchronize their efforts to promote
their respective commitments.
The
Secretary-General’s
excellent
report
(S/2013/387), which is before the Council today, aptly
portrays the dynamic in the region as well as the
challenges it entails.
The African Union views this high-level meeting
as a strong expression of the importance that the
Government of the United States and other Council
Member States attach to peace and security on the
African continent and to achieving a swift, lasting
solution to the crisis, particularly in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
commitment is evident through the unanimous support
of the members of the Council for the efforts of the
Secretary-General to implement the Framework. I
would note that the appointment of a Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
envisaged in the Framework has been made. In that
connection, I commend the quality of the working
relationship that Ms. Mary Robinson has established
with Ambassador Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, Special
Representative of the African Union Commission for
the Great Lakes Region. I also note and welcome the
adoption of resolution 2098 (2013), which adapts the
United Nation Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo(MONUSCO)
to the new situation and creates the Force Intervention
Brigade as requested by the countries of the region

and the African Union. The African Union is grateful
to South Africa, Malawi and Tanzania for their
contribution to training the Brigade, which is now in
the process of being deployed and operationalized.
I must point out, however, that instead of the
long-awaited agreement expected to result from the
negotiations that President Museveni of Uganda
continues to lead with authority and perseverance,
the region has been shadowed by significant military
clashes between the armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and elements of Mouvement du
23 mars (М-23). Those confrontations have cast a harsh
light on the path that lies ahead before the achievement
of a new era in the region.
The statements made today by Secretary of State
Kerry, the Secretary-General, Ms. Robinson and
the President of the World Bank, as well as those to
be delivered by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda—all three present here today—are an important
contribution to enlightening the Council with regard to
the political, security and humanitarian situation on the
ground, as well as on the status of the implementation
of both the Framework and resolution 2098 (2013), as
well as on the political process currently under way.
That portrayal of the realities on the ground, the issues
at stake and the perspectives for the future makes
more clear than ever the urgency and need for greater,
sustained support from the international community in
the Great Lakes region.
In that context, Ms. Robinson and Ambassador
Diarra are working together to create the conditions
for the efficient and systematic implementation of
the Framework. I know that the Congolese authorities
and the authorities of the States party to the regional
oversight mechanism have expressed their firm
determination to fulfil the commitments they have
made, to which they are attached. I also know that the
support of the entire international community for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries
of the region will be unwavering, as we can tell from
the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations as
well as by international financial institutions and other
development partners. The recent consultative meeting
on development approaches in the countries of the
Great Lakes region organized in Addis Ababa by the
United Nations and the World Bank is an integral part
of that commitment.

13-4073311

S/PV.7011

The African Union believes that the dynamic set in
motion by the Framework and by resolution 2098 (2013)
paves the way for the kind of new horizons for peace,
security and development that the region so desperately
needs, within a favourable regional and international
context. The diligence with which the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has established
the national oversight mechanism and the national
consultations that have been launched augur well. At
the regional level, the ongoing mobilization of the
authorities of the countries of the Great Lakes region
and the concurrent mobilization of the Southern African
Development Community also bears witness to their
shared determination to put an end to instability in order
to devote their resources and energy to development and
integration. The upcoming summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), to be
held on 31 July in Nairobi, which will be devoted to
issues of peace and to monitoring the implementation
of the Framework, should be able to account for all the
attempts and to undertake the necessary joint action
towards the region’s full realization of its potential.
This meeting of the Council, coming in the wake
of the inaugural meeting of the 11+4 mechanism,
co-chaired by the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the African Union on 26 May in Addis Ababa, is
a timely harbinger of a qualitatively different stage
in the international community’s collective effort on
behalf of the people and countries of the region. The
African Union welcomes that initiative and reaffirms
its commitment to play its full part in that welcome
effort to enhance peace, security, democracy and
development in the entire Great Lakes region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Kutesa (Uganda): At the outset, I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the United States delegation on
your leadership of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to thank you, Sir, for organizing and
presiding over this important and timely debate on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
Great Lakes region. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Special Envoy Mary Robinson, World Bank
President Jim Yong Kim and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, for their statements.
This debate is taking place at a time when eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is in deep crisis

12

again. The presence of a multiplicity of foreign
and local armed groups — including the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, the Forces nationales de
libération, Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and Mayi
Mayi militias — has exacerbated insecurity in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Within the framework of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the
region has been involved in efforts to find a peaceful
solution to instability in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, through both political and military
approaches. We are convinced that the political process
should be at the forefront of our efforts, with peace
enforcement measures complementing it. It was in
this context that the Great Lakes region conceived the
neutral international force, which the Security Council
then turned into the Force Intervention Brigade. In
that regard, Uganda welcomed the statement of the
Secretary-General of 18 July, in which he underscored
“the importance of pursuing a political solution to
address the root causes of conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo”.
We are also encouraged by the approach taken
by Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, and
appreciate her engagement in the political process,
including the Kampala peace talks. President Yoweri
Museveni, in his capacity as Chairman of the ICGLR,
has convened five extraordinary summits, including
four in Kampala, aimed at finding a lasting solution
to recurrent conflicts in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The sixth summit is due to take place in
Nairobi on 31 July.
These extraordinary summits were instrumental
in de-escalating the situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo last year, and in launching
the talks in Kampala between the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the M-23,
facilitated by my colleagues Crispus Kiyonga, Uganda’s
Minister of Defence, who is with me in this Chamber
today. We believe that the Kampala talks between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the M-23 provide the best opportunity for resolving
their differences. The political engagement of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the M-23 must be given priority in the search for a
durable and peaceful solution.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

The successful conclusion of these talks will no
doubt make a positive contribution to the national
consultations due to start in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are glad to inform the Council that since
December 2012, the talks have seen some progress,
with two key milestones. First, both parties reviewed
the peace agreement of 2009 between the Government
and the Congrès national pour la défense du peuple and
agreed on the status of its implementation, which was a
significant step in building confidence. Secondly, both
parties presented draft peace agreements in March,
consolidating them into one draft that is currently in its
second revision and subject to further negotiation.
While these developments are commendable,
renewed fighting raises serious concern over their
commitment to the talks. We call upon the Security
Council and its partners to encourage the parties to
expedite and speedily conclude the Kampala peace
talks. We also call on the international community
to provide logistical and financial support to ICGLR
mechanisms, such as the Joint Intelligence Fusion
Centre and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism.
Renewed fighting between the Congolese armed
forces and the M-23 is a major concern for the region
and the international community. Meanwhile, atrocities
committed by the Allied Democratic Forces, which
have links with Al-Shabaab, have grown in frequency
and intensity since the beginning of July. Over the
past three weeks, the ADF attacked Kangbayi prison,
captured Kamango town and ambushed a convoy of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These attacks
caused an influx of over 66,000 Congolese refugees
into Uganda. The humanitarian situation in the region
remains a matter of grave concern, as insecurity caused
by armed groups has led to large-scale displacements
of people.
While we deplore and condemn these attacks
by the ADF and other armed groups, these serve as
a grim reminder of the real challenges faced by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Uganda is particularly concerned about the possibility
of an imminent attack by the ADF from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is our expectation that the
new mechanism, combined with security sector reform
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will give it
the requisite capacity to deter foreign armed groups
from occupying and using its territory to destabilize
neighbouring countries.

We consider the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region to be a unique and important milestone
towards addressing challenges in the country and the
region. In our view, the following three elements of the
Framework are crucial. First, the Framework recognizes
a holistic approach the as best way to end instability.
Secondly, the Framework outlines commitments and
actions at the national, regional and international
levels, the implementation of which should be the main
focus. Thirdly and most importantly, it emphasizes
partnerships and collective efforts among the United
Nations, the African Union, the ICGLR and the
Southern African Development Community.
We therefore reiterate and underscore the need for
the expeditious implementation of the commitments
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Great
Lakes region and the international community. Uganda
is committed to playing its part. It is our experience
that regional-led initiatives, with the support of the
international community, have yielded better results on
the African continent.
We underscore the need to focus on the nexus
between peace and development in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is important to support
regional initiatives in key areas such as infrastructure,
energy, trade and agriculture, as both the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the World Bank Group
have emphasized. In that regard, Uganda welcomed the
visit of the Secretary-General and the President of the
World Bank to the Great Lakes region in May, and the
pledges they made.
In conclusion, for many years now Uganda and
the region have called for concerted efforts to address
the root causes of conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We have also called for support to the
Government to help it effectively exercise authority
over all of its territories as a way of dealing with
armed groups that have been destabilizing the country
and region. Now is the time to redouble our resolve
and efforts to effectively address the root causes of
the conflicts in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo in a comprehensive manner. The forthcoming
extraordinary ICGLR summit, to be held in Nairobi,
will review the situation in the country and the region,
as well as actions being undertaken, and make specific
recommendations to consolidate our efforts.

13-4073313

S/PV.7011

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Tshibanda N’tungamulongo (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Sir, on your appointment as Secretary of State of the
United States of America. I also convey the pleasure
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo at seeing
you preside over the Security Council at this critical
moment in its history and to thank you for having taken
the initiative to organize this special meeting of the
Council on the Great Lakes region, which for some
years now has been prey to cyclical rebellions that have
been incontrovertibly shown to bear the same genetic
imprint and to be characterized by massive human rights
violations, summary and extrajudicial executions, the
drafting of child soldiers, sexual violence and rape, the
pillaging of private and public assets, and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
By choosing to talk about the Democratic Republic
of the Congo at this specific moment, you have borne
witness to the importance that the Government of the
United States of America and the Security Council attach
to a return to lasting peace in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region.
I would also like to take the opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his personal
involvement in the negotiation, conclusion and
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region, concluded in Addis Ababa
on 24 February. The Framework Agreement and its
supporting resolution 2098 (2013) represent major
innovations in both the understanding of the crisis that
has affected the Great Lakes region since the second
half of the 1990s, and of United Nations traditional
peacekeeping doctrine.
The long-suffering populations of the countries of
the region consider the Framework Agreement and the
aforementioned resolution to be compelling evidence
of the international community’s determination to
help to find a sustainable solution to the instability
that has lasted far too long and for which my country
in particular has paid a heavy toll. The same is true
with respect to the recent joint visit to the region by
the Secretary-General, the President of the World
Bank and Ms. Mary Robinson, as well as the recent
appointments of Mr. Kobler as Special Representative

14

of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Senator Feingold as United States
Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is a sad, often overlooked reality that, because of
the ongoing conflict, my country has lost over 6 million
souls. The scale of the tragedy has no equal in the
history of humankind, and to face it with indifference
would risk the loss of our collective soul. Today’s
meeting forms part of the mutual effort to reaffirm
our humanity and to evaluate frankly and together the
implementation of the commitments made, with a view
to ending the tragedy in accordance with the important
Framework Agreement of 24 February and to identify
the remaining challenges so that, once peace is restored
once and for all, the region can devote its energy and
intelligence to the critical issues of fighting poverty
and improving the living conditions of the people.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
determined to shoulder its responsibility to ensure
the rapid restoration of peace and harmony in the
region. As proof, the day after signing the Framework
Agreement, the Congolese Government set out to fulfil
its obligations, which, incidentally, correspond to the
priority tasks identified 11 years ago. In that context,
we have not only accelerated security sector reform, but
promoted its institutionalization. The consolidation of
the infrastructure and personnel of the army, security
services and police; recruitment in the defence forces
of young Congolese from all provinces of the country;
the reopening of military academies; and the training,
with the assistance of bilateral partners, of special
forces and support units, with the primary aim of the
operationalizing the rapid reaction force are some of
the concrete actions recently undertaken with the goal
of creating professional and disciplined security and
defence forces that respect human rights in order to
more effectively defend our territory and bolster State
authority.
In order to strengthen that authority, especially in
the eastern part of the Republic, starting with Goma, the
national police, public administration and courts have
benefitted from prioritized capacity strengthening,
which has enabled the gradual resumption of control
of the situation. Decentralization, which is provided for
in the Constitution, is another step closer to realization
with the adoption of the necessary implementation
laws.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

The positive results achieved in reforming public
finance administration over the past few years are
evident in the continued stability of the macroeconomic
framework, which has just been usefully supplemented
by the implementation of measures to enhance the
business climate and the national mineral resources
certification scheme. This will effectively strengthen
economic growth, which nevertheless is already one of
the highest in the continent and has been consistently
so for nearly 10 years. Better still, the Government
has just undertaken a thorough review of the poverty
reduction strategy paper with a view to more inclusive
growth, reversing the time lost in efforts to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals and ensuring
greater credibility and effectiveness in the fight against
poverty.
On the political front, reconciliation and
strengthening national unity are more than ever
on the daily agenda. Thus, the national oversight
mechanism on the implementation of the Framework
Agreement has been entrusted to a competent and
experienced individual from the political opposition.
The Independent National Electoral Commission has
been completely reformed and a new, more seasoned
and more inclusive team has just assumed leadership
of that important institution supporting democracy.
The new Commission has already mastered its task and
prioritized the preparation of the electoral process with
a view to organizing, in the best possible conditions,
local, municipal, provincial, senatorial and provincial
gubernatorial elections.
Moreover, upon the initiative of the President
of the Republic, national consultations are to begin
in August. Their purpose is to endeavour together
to find ways and means to enhance national unity in
order to better cope with all of the challenges facing
the Congolese nation. In an effort to be inclusive, the
forum will gather together, in addition to national and
provincial political institutions, political parties of
all persuasions, civil society in all its diversity, and
a significant representation of women and youth. Its
preparation and administration has been entrusted to a
presidium consisting of the President of the Senate — a
leader well known to the opposition, on whose behalf
he was elected to his post — and the President of the
National Assembly, a functionary of the presidential
majority.
As proof of the presidium’s participatory nature,
the political opposition has recently prepared and

filed with the presidium and with the President of
the Republic a list of demands and proposals to be
addressed in the forum. For each of those reforms, as
for all other tasks of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo under the Framework Agreement, the terms
of reference or benchmarks have been or are being
developed and communications related to the matter
are under way with Ms. Mary Robinson and her team,
to whom we reaffirm our support and cooperation.
We will therefore be ready for the next meeting of the
regional oversight mechanism set to take place on the
sidelines of the next session of the General Assembly,
right here, in September.
While we are gathered here, the people of Goma
and Rutshuru are again living in fear and uncertainty
because of sporadic attacks carried out since the
adoption of resolution 2098 (2013). In defiance of the
latter, the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has launched
attacks on the defensive positions of the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
To conceal its inconsistent peaceful gesture,
that negative force is attempting to justify its crimes
through baseless accusations to discredit the FARDC,
the Force Intervention Brigade and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) by stating without
proof that they are collaborating with the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR).
United Nations officials have already responded to
these accusations.
For its part, the Democratic Republic of Congo
has categorically denied those allegations. It has sent
its response to the President of the Security Council,
with a request that it be distributed to all members of
the Council as an official document of the Security
Council. Careful examination of the documentation
that we have provided eloquently demonstrates the
policy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in that
area, as well as the scope, quality and effectiveness
of its efforts in the past five years to fight the FDLR,
which it would have completely neutralized had it not
been for the outbreak of the M-23 rebellion.
It should be noted that this positive assessment
has been certified by non-Congolese experts, who
could hardly be accused of complacency in that regard,
namely, MONUSCO and, most especially, those very
people who, today, by their accusations, seem to have
repudiated their own signatures.

13-4073315

S/PV.7011

It also should be noted that no country of the Great
Lakes region has advocated as hard as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the creation of the Force
Intervention Brigade, whose task is to neutralize all
negative elements, including the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, and for the Brigade to be
granted an offensive mandate.
It should be understood that the Democratic
Republic of Congo, whose population suffers more than
any other from the presence of foreign armed groups
on its territory, cannot maintain any collaboration
whatsoever with such groups, whose specialties include
murder, rape, all kinds of abuses, and the looting of
public and private property and natural resources. Any
such collaboration, if substantiated, would represent
instances of independent action on the ground, and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would unequivocally condemn them and stands ready
to unflinchingly punish them.
I take this opportunity to solemnly reaffirm that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has never waivered
from respecting and will continue to scrupulously
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other
States of the region and the sacrosanct principle of
non-interference in their internal affairs.
With regard to the involvement of certain elements
of the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) in human rights violations in Minova,
this case is being dealt with by the justice system and
any FARDC members whose guilt is established will
be severely punished, regardless of their rank. As for
recent allegations of the mistreatment of prisoners,
inhumane and degrading treatment, and the desecration
of the dead, investigations have just been launched to
establish the truth. Justice will be equally merciless for
the perpetrators of these acts, if confirmed. It should
nevertheless be underscored, with regard to these
allegations, that they are, to say they least, surprising,
because, while such human rights violations are known
to have been committed by the leaders of rebels groups
that were forerunners of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), this is the first time in 15 years of struggle
against various rebellions that regular army of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been the subject
of such accusations. That has something to say about
their credibility.
As is clear, the Democratic Republic of Congo is
significantly advanced in the implementation of its

16

commitments. It is therefore legitimate for us to expect
that other regional and international partners will make
the same effort.
The deployment on the ground of the Intervention
Brigade established under resolution 2098 (2013)
represents undeniable progress, which we fully
appreciate. Our aim now is to see the Brigade assume, as
quickly and efficiently as possible, the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Security Council, which include
monitoring and securing the border between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours
to the East on the one hand and, on the other hand,
neutralizing all negative forces, without exception.
That said, we recognize that military force cannot
alone solve the complex equation of peace in the Great
Lakes region of Africa, where the causes of conflicts
and disputes are interlinked, as well as home-grown and
external alike. In the light of the extremism of virtually
all of these negative elements, force is necessary, but
not sufficient. To be sustainable, the solution must
also involve sincere dialogue among all internal and
external parties and the exhibition of good faith when it
comes to the conclusions reached these parties.
That is why, for our part, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will remain actively involved in the
Kampala talks, facilitated by Uganda in its capacity
as current Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). However, we wish
to emphasize that, based on our experience of the
agreements reached in 2003, 2006 and 2009 with the
rebels— most of whom are now part of the М-23 — and
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, we are not ready to sign an agreement
that endorses impunity and reintegrates into the armed
forces persons subject to prosecution or international
sanctions due to mass violations of human rights, war
crimes, crimes of genocide or crimes against humanity,
as this would lay the foundation of a new breach of
peace and sow the seeds of instability.
To conclude, whatever the scars and horrors of the
suffering of the past, of which we are all aware and
which none of us would seek to understate, we cannot
lock us forever into a stance whereby no compromise
is possible. Without forgetting the past, we must focus
on reconciliation and cohesion within our States and
peaceful coexistence and cooperation between our
States. History and geography requires us to do so;
survival and sustainable development demand it.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

The Democratic Republic of the Congo will never
surrender a square inch of its territory or any part of its
sovereignty over its wealth. But it remains ready, today
as yesterday, to agree on a pact for peace, stability
and development throughout the Great Lakes region
and, in this context, to develop regional cooperation.
Others before us, in other regions, have lived through
challenges similar to those facing our region. And they
found a way, without forgetting anything, to renounce
the reckless thirst for revenge. Their prosperity and
ongoing entente cordiale should inspire us.
The peoples of the Great Lakes region of Africa
have, like those elsewhere throughout the world,
the right to peace and prosperity. In reiterating my
congratulations and thanks, I beg you to believe, Sir,
in the inexhaustible determination of His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to work towards a lasting peace
in the Great Lakes region, together with the Council,
the Secretary-General, his counterparts in the ICGLR
and the Southern African Development Community,
and all our other bilateral and multilateral partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): Let me begin by
thanking the United States and, you, Sir, for having
convened this most important debate in support of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, and
for the presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/11) just
adopted.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his informative briefing, and the
President of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong Kim, and
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa,
Ms. Mary Robinson, for their valued contributions
and statements this morning. Taken together, their
extraordinary efforts, exhausting travel schedules
and financial commitments to regional development
priorities amply demonstrate their sincere commitment
to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
that we are discussing this morning. It is a visionary,
comprehensive and inclusive strategy to end decades
of conflict and instability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also thank African Union
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra for his revealing
briefing on regional efforts undertaken towards finding
peace in the Great Lakes region.

I also acknowledge the presence of honourable
Ministers from countries of our region and from fellow
Council members.
Rwanda warmly welcomes the new United States
Special Representative for the African Great Lakes
Region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Mr. Russ Feingold, and the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and new Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
I wish to assure all of them, as a team, of Rwanda’s
full cooperation in the common pursuit of peace for our
region.
While Rwanda is very pleased to support the
presidential statement, we nonetheless would have loved
to see efforts of the region included in it, in particular
in support of the Kampala peace talks established under
the auspices of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. Indeed, we would like the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ms. Mary Robinson, to
play an active role in seeing through the Kampala talks
without any further delay so that we can move quickly
to pacify the Kivu region. Her engagement would be a
welcome and helpful contribution to moving forward.
We have gathered today out of a shared
determination to make peace in the Great Lakes region
a lasting reality. Having endured devastating conflict
within our own borders nearly two decades ago, the
people of Rwanda have worked tirelessly to rebuild
a peaceful and thriving nation, but we are also very
aware that our destiny is inextricably tied to that of our
neighbours. Let me put it in the clearest possible terms:
in order to secure long-term peace and prosperity for
Rwanda well into the future, we need a peaceful and
prosperous Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
long as conditions persist that allow more than 30 rebel
groups to roam in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo with impunity, or as long as men and boys
see nothing in their futures beyond crime, violence
and conflict, such a transformation will remain beyond
reach.
The Framework of hope, along with regional peace
efforts, opens a special door to the kind of profound
and necessary change that is needed for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for the region as whole.
Rwanda is eager to do its part and to live up to our
commitments as a neighbour and regional partner, as
well as through the Framework of hope.

13-4073317

S/PV.7011

Allow me to lay out some concrete actions that
my Government has taken so far in implementing the
Framework.
We have disarmed, interned and relocated away
from our border with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo more than 600 combatants of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) who had crossed into Rwanda
as a result of infighting in March. In his report
dated 28 June (S/2013/387), the Secretary-General
commended Rwanda for the positive role it played in
that regard. We have asked the United Nations to take
responsibility for those combatants. It is important
to note that Rwanda cannot bear that burden alone.
We invite the international community to devise and
implement a long-term solution for that group of former
combatants.
Rwanda has also worked with the United Nations
to accommodate approximately 70,000 Congolese
nationals who have sought refuge in Rwanda for more
than 13 years now, and to take the necessary steps to
ensure their safe return home as soon as possible. In
addition, as the Secretary-General mentioned in his
report on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, the Government of
Rwanda reported the presence of several high-ranking
M-23 members who had crossed the border from
the Democratic Republic of Congo to seek refuge in
Rwanda, including individuals sanctioned by the United
Nations. When M-23 leader General Bosco Ntaganda
surrendered to the Embassy of the United States in
Kigali on 18 March, Rwandan authorities offered to
facilitate his transfer to The Hague through the United
States and Dutch Embassies in Kigali.
We can all agree that the economic components
of the Framework must be implemented alongside its
political and security aspects. To that end, Rwanda
is working to boost regional cooperation through
enhanced economic integration and close collaboration
on cross-border trade with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and our other neighbours in the Great Lakes
region. Just last month, Rwandan mining authorities
seized 8.4 metric tons of smuggled minerals. They are
now in the process of returning them to the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as has been our
practice in the past. We are also exploring several other
opportunities for economic cooperation, including a
strategic bilateral project with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo on our shared Lake Kivu.

18

Finally, Rwanda supported and has been facilitating
the deployment of the Intervention Brigade. We have
done so because we believe that it could help pacify
the region and serve as a strong deterrent against the
multiple armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, thereby allowing MONUSCO
to carry out its responsibility to protect civilians and,
critically, create the space necessary to implement
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
facilitate other regional peace efforts.
As Special Envoy Robinson has stressed in the past,
the Framework is a shared endeavour, and its success
depends very much on each party living up to its
respective commitments. I would take the opportunity
afforded by today’s meeting in this Chamber to reiterate
Rwanda’s commitment to the Framework. Rwanda is
one of the 11 countries that makes up the expanded
joint verification mechanism, by which developments
in conflict-affected areas are examined thoroughly and
with transparency and accountability. We therefore
urge the Security Council to attach value to the work
of the mechanism, so that its findings can inform the
decisions we reach and the resolutions we agree to.
On the recent collusion between the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC), Rwanda remains seriously concerned.
The Security Council has received a letter from my
Government that includes details on that issue, so I will
not repeat the specifics here today. I would simply like
to say that it is a concern that needs to be addressed.
However, while Rwanda views any alliance between the
FDLR and FARDC as a threat to regional security, we
will not allow those disturbing developments to derail
our commitments to peace, as we have done in the past.
I cannot stress enough Rwanda’s goodwill
and ongoing support for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. We believe it offers a realistic
path to lasting peace and security for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region at large. But we must not veer off course and
we must understand that that vision is only achievable
alongside regional peace initiatives and a showing of
genuine political will on the part of all affected States.
Furthermore, the international peacekeeping force
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering
unchartered territory with the deployment of an
Intervention Brigade and unmanned aerial vehicles.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

United Nations peacekeepers must take great care to
respect all the relevant international laws and adhere
strictly to their mandate.
Since the consequences of instability in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo fall so heavily on
Rwanda, as has been the case during almost the whole
of the past 20 years, we are eager to take full advantage
of the historic opportunity for peace and security before
us. Despite the serious risks I have outlined, we can see
early and unmistakable signs of progress.
A plan without action is just words, and when it
comes to the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there have been enough words. There have been
enough speeches made and reports written. And there
has been more than enough grandstanding, especially
by unaccountable actors who seek profit and publicity
from the region’s misery. It is time for such forces to
move aside and allow the Framework of hope to move
forward. This is the time for accountable parties to
stand up and step forward. Now is the time for action.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the initiative of the United
States in organizing this Security Council debate on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region. The moment is particularly
significant, and your presence, Mr. Secretary, lends it
special weight.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special
Envoy, Ms. Mary Robinson, the President of the World
Bank, Mr. Kim and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, as well
as the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda, for their statements.
I thank them especially for their sincere commitment
to the cause of peace, security and cooperation in the
region.
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement to
be delivered by Mr. Pierre Vimont on behalf of the
European Union.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region have for too long been ravaged by
conflict. Millions have died — the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo just
cited a figure of 6 million deaths over the past 15 years.
Millions have been displaced and millions prevented
from living in dignity. And armed groups, notably the

Mouvement du 23 mars, continue to plague the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is no longer acceptable. Things must change.
We must break the cycle of violence. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework signed in the 11+4 format
in Addis Ababa on 24 February marks, we sincerely
hope, a defining turning point in the consolidation
of peace and stability in the region. That agreement
would not have been possible or its follow-up assured
without the support of the United Nations. I commend
the crucial role played in that regard by the SecretaryGeneral and his team. And we should also praise the
support that has been provided by the African Union,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community.
The Framework has one essential merit — it takes
into account the root causes of conflict. It rightly
emphasizes ownership by the countries of the region
of a process that must end the recurring violence and
pave the way for truly dynamic regional economic
development. We hope it will live up to the name given
it by Mary Robinson, inspired by the Irish poet Seamus
Heaney — a framework of hope, a framework that
can bring hope back to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region and erase the
memory of what Ms. Robinson just described as a lack
of horror at what is going on right now.
It is time for the Framework to be resolutely
implemented. In this context, we welcome the recent
initiatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The national oversight mechanism for monitoring
implementation of the commitments made under the
Framework is in place. The first national plans for
security sector reform, particularly of the army, have
been laid out. We also welcome the establishment of
a new Independent National Electoral Commission,
which paves the way for organizing provincial and local
elections. A professional and loyal national army that
can protect the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and promote human rights is also an
imperative.
In that regard, it is incumbent on the country’s
authorities to continue their investigations into
violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights, including sexual violence, committed
by elements of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo. The focused implementation
of the action plan signed on 4 October 2012 with the

13-4073319

S/PV.7011

United Nations, aimed at halting and preventing the
recruitment and exploitation of children, and the use
of sexual violence against them, by the military ansd
security forces, must be seen in the same context.
We should recall that the signing of the Framework
was accompanied by an overhaul of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), including by the
establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade. The
deterrent effect of the Brigade has already been felt on
the ground, and we welcome that. In line with resolution
2098 (2013), the Brigade will have a key role to play in
helping to achieve the goal of reducing the threat that
armed groups pose to the authority of the State and the
safety of civilians in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In general, support for security sector
reform and the protection of civilians, especially women
and children, must remain at the heart of MONUSCO’s
mandate.
At the regional level, we support Special Envoy
Robinson’s proactive approach and her intention
to design a comprehensive political strategy for
implementation of the Framework in the coming months,
based on indicators agreed on by all signatories. We will
have to remain vigilant to sustain positive momentum.
The follow-up orchestrated by Ms. Robinson needs the
benefit of the Council’s continued attention.
One issue we are particularly concerned about is
the ongoing illegal exploitation of and trafficking in
natural resources in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly by armed groups; it is a
major source of instability. We welcome the positive
steps taken by the Congolese authorities in the area. In
general, we encourage them to redouble their efforts in
the area of economic governance. As the Framework
states, regional cooperation must be strengthened,
including through deepening economic integration,
with special attention to the issue of the exploitation of
natural resources.
Lastly, I would like to stress how important it is
that the partners of the region focus on cooperation on
development and combating poverty. Indeed, security
and development go hand in hand. I encourage the
World Bank and the countries of the region to move
forward speedily with projects that support regional
development priorities, in the wake of President Kim’s
announcement in Kinshasa on 23 May of a pledge
of $1 billion in zero-interest loans. I am thinking

20

in particular of projects in the areas of agriculture,
hydroelectric power and infrastructure, which can
enable cross-border economic activity to expand.
As Ms. Robinson emphasized, the ongoing political
process can succeed only if people benefit quickly from
tangible peace dividends.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the call
to the signatories of the Framework to implement,
diligently and in good faith, all the commitments they
have undertaken, including the commitment not to
tolerate or provide assistance or support of any kind
to armed groups. This is a matter of responsibility and
credibility. In doing that, they can count on the support
of the international community in initiating a virtuous
circle that will enable the people of the region to at last
emerge from an unacceptable situation that has lasted
all too long. The opportunity is exceptional. The time
to seize it is now.
Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Thirteen years have passed since the United Nations
first established a peacekeeping operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My own country
has participated in that Mission as a troop contributor
since 2005; in fact, we lost eight troops in a wellknown incident in Garamba National Park in January
2006. I would like to honour their memory by reciting
their names here: Abelino Pop, Ramón Xi Che, Edgar
Morales Guzmán, Valeriano Rax Hul, Calixto Gómez
Pérez, Mario Enrique Tee Caal, Teodoro Tilom Paau,
and Orlando Augusto Hernandez Alonzo. Five of those
soldiers were Guatemalans of Mayan descent — Mayans
fighting for peace and security in the Great Lakes
region.
In spite of this long history, the signing on
24 February of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region has opened the possibility of injecting
renewed momentum into the efforts to achieve peace,
stability and prosperity in the Great Lakes region in
general and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular. For that reason today’s debate is timely and
relevant, and for that we are grateful to the delegation
of the United States, and in particular to Secretary of
State Kerry, for proposing it and for circulating the
concept note on the matter (S/2013/394, annex). We also
appreciate the gesture of Secretary Kerry of personally
presiding over today’s meeting.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

We also greatly value the presence of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and President of the World Bank
Jim Yong Kim, and we would like to thank them for
their presentations. We also appreciate the briefings
of Ms. Mary Robinson, United Nations Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/387),
which serves as a background document to this meeting,
refers to the relatively encouraging expectations that
exist today that the protracted crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially in the eastern part of
the country can, be resolved in the broader context that
shapes the future of the Great Lakes region. Despite
the many obstacles to be overcome, which the report
also openly describes, we agree with the assessment of
the Secretary-General and with the words of Special
Envoy Robinson. I would like to underscore some of the
elements that undergird our cautious optimism.
First, although the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region involves commitments both
for the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and for the other countries of the region, as
well as for the international community, it is clear that
the primary responsibility falls on the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as it should.
That model, with the host country serving as the
main protagonist and the international community in
a complementary role, has emerged as a paradigm of
development in recent times, in particular since the
Paris Declaration.
Secondly, the commitment to address the root
causes of the conflict in a comprehensive and holistic
manner, including the economic, social, political,
governance and security issues, also appears to be
essential if we are to restore stability and overcome the
violence that afflicts the country.
Thirdly, it is encouraging to see the presence of
11 countries and four multilateral institutions involved
in the Framework for Peace, Security and Cooperation.
It is our view that the establishment of the so-called
11+4 oversight mechanism shores up expectations that
commitments undertaken by all parties will be met.
Fourthly, we commend the partnerships that
the United Nations has built with the regional and
subregional entities of the African continent, in
this case with the African Union, the International

Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community. We consider the
synchronized and cooperative work of the multilateral
entities, each with its own specific purview, to be of
special importance.
Fifthly, along the same lines, we commend the joint
initiative of the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank to undertake a joint mission to
the Great Lakes region and to appear together again
before us. It is difficult to conceive of economic and
social progress without the involvement of multilateral
financial institutions. We are pleased that, in addressing
the problems in a holistic and comprehensive manner,
we are assigning the duties to be addressed, not only
within the United Nations, according to the speciality of
each entity, but also within the United Nations system
and between the latter and other multilateral bodies.
We also continue to hope that the new manifestation of
cooperation between the United Nations and the World
Bank will extend to the agendas of the Economic and
Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
General Assembly. We see the World Bank as not only
the financial arm of development, but also the financial
arm of peace.
Sixthly, as is known, my delegation has expressed
its reservations about the new trend of the Council to
assign peace-enforcement duties to missions conceived
under the cardinal principles that have shaped our
peacekeeping operations, including especially the
principle of impartiality. However, in spite of those
reservations, ultimately we accepted the incorporation
of the so-called Intervention Brigade into the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as the lesser of
two evils, given the imminent threat to the civilian
population by the Mouvement du 23 mars and other
militant groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and with the understanding that this would
be a stop-gap measure. In any case, it is important to
not forget that State-building, democracy building or
even more so with regard to nation building is not a
job for the international community; it is the job of
sovereign States.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the fact that,
just a month ago, we met here in the Chamber to adopt
resolution 2106 (2013), on sexual violence against
women and children in armed conflict (see S/PV.6984).
In line with resolution 2098 (2013), that meeting, which
was held under the presidency of the United Kingdom,

13-4073321

S/PV.7011

was fundamental. We should not forget the words
expressed then, which would serve as a guide for peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I hope that we are now on the path towards peace and
that we will continue advancing towards the prosperity
and development of a region that truly needs it.
Mr. Canfin (spoke in French): Allow me, on behalf
of France, to warmly thank Secretary of State John
Kerry for having undertaken the initiative to convene
this high-level meeting on the situation in the Great
Lakes region, in particular on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As others have said, this is a timely
meeting as the humanitarian situation continues to be
tragic, with more than 2.5 million displaced persons
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 450,000
refugees in neighbouring countries.
Recent weeks have been characterized by a new
spike in hostilities carried out by the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) and other armed groups against the
Congolese armed forces. This resumption of hostilities
is a test for the international community, for the M-23
and other armed groups are seeking simply to derail the
political process under way. It is a political process that
seeks to put an end to this tragedy, which has lasted for
far too long. It is a test because some players might be
tempted to renege on their commitments. Our message
is clear: neighbouring countries must stop providing
support to armed groups as they have committed to
do. The firm and united message being sent by the
international community today is a beneficial one,
as it will support the efforts of stakeholders sincerely
committed to the goal of sustainable peace in the Great
Lakes region.
We have made much progress over recent months.
We now have a consistent framework that allows us to
finally hope that the tragedy that has lasted more than
20 years in the Great Lakes region will be put to an
end. The framework is based on two pillars. The first
is the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
signed on 24 February by 11 countries of the region upon
the initiative of the Secretary-General. In that regard,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
efforts and determination. It is now the responsibility
of the signatories to implement their commitments.
We have also seen many encouraging signs in
recent weeks. The adoption by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of a national

22

oversight mechanism is a step forward towards the
crucial reforms of the Congolese army and police. Fullscale measures must now be quickly undertaken. It is
also important for the Congolese army to carry out its
activities on the ground in an exemplary manner, and
that the abuses committed by Congolese soldiers, which
are not excusable, be effectively and severely punished
by the country’s justice system.
At the regional level, on 26 May, the first meeting
of the regional oversight mechanism brought together
the majority of the Heads of State of the region on the
margins of the African Union Summit. The mechanism
first and foremost must ensure that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States of the region is upheld,
beginning with that of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It must also ensure that their security is not
threatened.
The actions taken by Ms. Mary Robinson, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, will be crucial for the coordination and
assessment of national and regional efforts to implement
the commitments undertaken. Madam President, you
can be assured of the firm support of France, which
remains at your side.
The second pillar of this new context is resolution
2098 (2013), adopted unanimously on 28 March
last. The heart of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has not changed:
it remains the protection of civilians. However, so as to
contribute to that objective, the resolution authorizes,
in an unprecedented manner, the deployment of an
Intervention Brigade within MONUSCO. The Brigade’s
mandate is to neutralize armed groups that engage in
violence and threaten civilians. France would like to see
the Brigade to become operational as soon as possible.
Another key aspect of resolution 2098 (2013) is that
of sexual violence, which continues to see widespread
use as a weapon of war, usually with total impunity.
Here we welcome the initiative of Ms. Mary Robinson
to convene, jointly with the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, a conference devoted to the
role of women in the process of implementation of the
Framework agreement. We know that in that region the
bodies of women are all too often the battlefields of
men, and, as President Kim noted earlier, that is a blot
on our conscience.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

Allow me, before concluding, to touch on the issue
of development. As Ms. Robinson noted, it is now time
to plan for peace dividends for the region as a whole.
Here I welcome the personal commitment of President
Kim in the context of resolving this crisis, as well as the
recent World Bank pledge for the implementation of the
commitments undertaken by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo during the signing of the Framework
agreement.
France and the European Union will also contribute
to the development of the region. The relaunching
of the economies of the region will also require
transparency in the exploitation of natural resources.
The lack of transparency in the exploitation of mining
resources must end. As the Council is aware, upon
the initiative of the United Kingdom and with the full
support of France, the countries of the Group of Eight
adopted at the beginning of the month an action plan for
transparency in the extractive industries. Moreover, we
intend to fully support, both politically and technically,
the efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
establish a certification mechanism for minerals from
the region. All of those tools will allow us to combat
bad practices and to increase the benefits reaped from
the exploitation of the region’s natural resources for its
peoples.
At a time when the M-23 is once again carrying
out attacks around Goma, it is important to spare no
effort not only to vanquish those who threaten peace
but also to relaunch the political dynamic that began
with the Framework agreement. So as to allow for
the establishment of a lasting peace, all players in the
region must cooperate so as to defeat violence and
looting. Only then will the Framework agreement be
able to pave the way for a tangible improvement in the
security situation and living conditions in the Great
Lakes region.
Today, on behalf of the millions of people who have
died and whom the region has mourned for so many
years, we have a collective obligation to succeed.
Mr. Esaw (Togo) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I wish to thank your country for having
convened this high-level debate on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region
and to welcome the presence of the Secretary of State
to preside over it. I welcome also the presence of the
Secretary-General. I thank him for his ongoing efforts
in the quest for a lasting solution to the conflict in the

region and congratulate him on his statement. Finally,
I should like to welcome the participation in this
meeting of the President of the World Bank, high-level
representatives of the African Union, Ministers from
the Great Lakes region and all other Ministers present.
The holding of this debate is tangible proof of the
significance attached by the Council collectively and
other Member States individually to the resolution of
the recurring conflicts in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In that regard, I welcome the appointment
on 18 June last of Mr. Russ Feingold as Special
Representative of the United States of America to the
Great Lakes Region of Africa.
I begin my remarks on a note of optimism by
echoing the joint statement made by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the President of the
World Bank on the theme “Peace within reach”, on the
eve of a joint tour in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in other countries of the region.
Togo shares that optimism, because after more
than a decade of suffering, the peoples of the Great
Lakes region deserve to finally see peace restored.
That is why my country wishes to express its gratitude
to the Heads of State of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union, as
well as the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Council for their joint determined efforts to
put an end to the massive violations of human rights
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially sexual violence and rape, which have
become weapons of war.
I wish most particularly to welcome the Framework
agreement, signed on 24 February 2013 with the support
of the United Nations, through which the 11 Heads of
State of the region have undertaken to act together
to meet common challenges in the areas of security,
governance and socioeconomic development.
It is also important that all signatories to the
agreement make a good-faith effort to implement the
provisions of that important agreement. It goes without
saying that the countries concerned must play a key role
in ensuring the success of this new peace architecture,
which is being built slowly but surely. We congratulate
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the actions already undertaken in this direction, as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of that country just
explained.

13-4073323

S/PV.7011

However, efforts must continue, especially in the
areas of security sector reform and the protection of
civilians, especially women and children, to arrest the
perpetrators and masterminds of crimes, regardless of
who they might be, thereby putting an end to the reign
of impunity.
Moreover, Togo welcomes once again the adoption
by the Council of resolution 2098 (2013), which
authorizes the deployment of the Intervention Brigade,
charged with fighting the armed groups active in
the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Increased support for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should enable that special unit to achieve its
goals.
We commend the remarkable progress achieved
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
we must condemn the actions of the Mouvement du
23 mars, which led to the ongoing clashes between the
rebels and the Congolese army.
If the peace process is to be continued without
impediment, it is also important that the armed forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Rwandan Defence Forces work together to neutralize
the Forces Démocratiques de Libération du Rwanda,
which are promoting insecurity on the RwandanCongolese border and damaging the good relations
between the two countries.
Over and above domestic and external political
factors, hunger and poverty are the accelerators of
the dynamic of violence. It is hunger and poverty that
recruit idle and desperate young people into armed
groups. Togo therefore welcomes the international
community’s inclusion of the development and regional
economic integration parameter into the comprehensive
conflict resolution strategy in the region. In that regard,
the World Bank deserves our gratitude for having
shown the way forward.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region can, like other African countries,
recover from conflict and progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals. Their populations
deserve to be given this opportunity through the
support of the international community.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United States presidency for convening
this debate on the situation in the Great Lakes region. We

24

welcome the presence at this very important meeting of
United States Secretary of State John Kerry and other
high-level officials. We are also grateful to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, World Bank President Jim Yong
Kim, Special Envoy Mary Robinson, African Union
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, and the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda for their statements.
Today’s meeting is being held against the
background of renewed hostilities initiated by the
Mouvement du 23 mars in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Azerbaijan condemns attacks by the
rebel group, which have caused civilian casualties
and displacements, and undermined regional and
international efforts towards a negotiated resolution of
the conflict. Indeed, the situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly the destabilizing
activities of the armed groups, grave human rights
violations and abuses in conflict-affected areas, and the
humanitarian impact of the crisis, represent the most
significant challenges. Concerns about the increasingly
difficult political environment and security situation
in the country require redoubled efforts at the national
and international levels.
The signing of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region on 24 February was undoubtedly an
important achievement that added new impetus to
diplomatic and political efforts and raised expectations
that the crisis in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo could be resolved. It is important that all relevant
actors involved consistently demonstrate the necessary
political will and spare no effort to translate the goals
of the Framework into tangible outcomes.
What has been clear at the outset is that the
diplomatic and political efforts should in no way lead
to the consolidation of illegal actions or be seen as an
opportunity for endless discussions of unsubstantial
and unacceptable claims, as has been the case in some
other situations of armed conflict. It is critical that
responsibility and accountability, as these notions are
understood in international law, have been from the
very beginning among the key elements guiding the
common approach of the international community.
In its presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/11), the Security Council demanded that
all armed groups cease immediately all forms of violence
and that their members fully disband and disarm, and

13-40733

S/PV.7011

emphasized the renewed commitment of all countries
to neither tolerating nor providing assistance or support
of any kind to armed groups. We also welcome the
Council’s principled stand on the need to end impunity
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed during the conflict.

by the World Bank, added the potential for significant
incentives in moving the peace agenda and prospects
of enhanced regional integration forward. Greater
coordination among donors is essential to ensuring
that assistance supports national and regional efforts to
address the root causes of the conflict.

The Force Intervention Brigade is an essential
element of efforts to address the threat posed by the
presence of armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the same time, it is clear that
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot be resolved by military means alone. Being
complementary to the political process, the impact of
the Intervention Brigade will be effective only if the
national and regional commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework are implemented
in a proper and timely manner.

Azerbaijan also commends the contribution of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the troopcontributing countries to maintaining peace, security
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and strongly condemns all attacks against peacekeepers.

An important prerequisite of conflict resolution
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is regional
support. We commend the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
other regional actors, as well the countries of the region,
for their contribution to finding a lasting solution to the
conflict. It is crucial that they continue to work together
towards the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. It is also imperative that all
countries of the region respect each other’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as the principles of
non-interference, good-neighbourliness and regional
cooperation.
We welcome the initial steps taken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to fulfil its commitments under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, including those aimed
at ending impunity for serious human rights violations
and abuses and moving forward on security sector
reform. These efforts will undoubtedly contribute to
strengthening the population’s confidence in the State’s
institutions and help lay solid foundations for the
development of the country.
The sustained engagement and support of the
international community are crucial in promoting
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the entire region. We commend the personal efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special Envoy
Mary Robinson. The joint visit of the Secretary-General
and the President of the World Bank Group, and the
announcement of a development package of $1 billion

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
you, Madam, for convening this important debate,
which has provided a useful opportunity to reiterate
the international community’s sustained engagement
on the Great Lakes issue and its strong support to the
Framework initiative.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the United States initiative to convene this
debate on the situation in the Great Lakes region. We
welcome Secretary of State Kerry in presiding over
today’s meeting.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, President
Jim Yong Kim of the World Bank and Special Envoy
Mary Robinson for their briefings. I listened attentively
to the statements of the African Union and the countries
of the region.
The Great Lakes region is situated at the centre
of the African continent and is endowed with natural
resources, a storied history and rich cultures. It
has unique development potential and advantages.
However, due to such factors as an unstable regional
security situation and protracted disputes and conflicts,
security and development in the Great Lakes region
have encountered constraints and difficulties.
It was encouraging that, thanks to the joint efforts
of the countries of the region and in particular to
the initiative of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
in February the countries of the region signed the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
This marked an important step by countries of the
region towards resolving disputes by themselves and
achieving regional peace and development through
cooperation.

13-4073325

S/PV.7011

Peace and development in the Great Lakes region
have been offered an important opportunity. China
highly appreciates the efforts of the countries of the
region to implement the Framework. We hope that all
parties will proceed on the basis of their common and
long-term interests in safeguarding regional peace
and development, act with resolve, seek consensus,
implement their commitments in good faith, resolve
regional disputes and conflicts once and for all, and
embark on the path to lasting peace and sustainable
development as soon as possible. To that end, I should
like to stress the following four points.
First, it is crucial to pursue the positive momentun
in fully implementing the Framework. The urgent
task at hand is to ensure the complete cessation of
hostilities and to restore stability to the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Armed groups
should voice their grievances through dialogue and
negotiations and conclude agreements to end violence
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, so as to create conditions for easing the
humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the country.
Secondly, the support of the Government in
strengthening capacity-building and providing security
should be the focus in implementing the Framework.
China welcomes the Government’s establishment
of a national oversight mechanism to implement the
Framework. The armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should assume the primary
responsibility for safeguarding national security and
protecting civilians. The Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo should help
and support the country’s armed forces in responding
to threats from armed groups, under the Security
Council’s mandate.
Cooperation through dialogue and the rebuilding of
mutual trust among the countries of the Great Lakes
region is crucial to restoring peace and stability in the
region and achieving development. We hope that the
countries of the region will — on the basis of mutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and
through the 11-4 Framework oversight mechanism
and the International Conference of the Great Lakes
region joint verification mechanism — strengthen
communication and cooperation, participate actively in
the drafting of regional benchmarks for the Framework
and commit themselves to peace and development in
the region.

26

Fourthly, the international community should scale
up its support and assistance and contribute positively
to long-term peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region. We hope that the United Nations will work with
the African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and other regional mechanisms,
strengthen coordination, foment synergy and push the
parties to honour their commitments to the Framework
by taking action. We also hope that the World Bank’s
$1 billion to the Great Lakes region will be disbursed
quickly to support the countries of the region to develop
their national economies, improve people’s livelihoods
and achieve lasting peace.
As stated by Chinese President Xi Jinping during his
recent visit to Africa in March, China is confident that
the setbacks and difficulties being experienced by some
African regions will by no means stop the continent’s
steady progress towards peace, development and
progress. China remains Africa’s steadfast friend and
partner. We will remain resolute in supporting African
States in their efforts to safeguard their sovereignty and
resolve African issues themselves.
I would like to reiterate here that we have all along
actively supported the countries of the Great Lakes
region in promoting peace. For many years, China has
been a participant in the United Nations peacekeeping
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
have made tireless efforts to preserve security and
stability in that country. We are ready to work with
the international community and the countries of the
region to contribute positively to freeing the people of
the Great Lakes region from the suffering caused by
war and conflict, as well as to achieve peace, stability
and development at an early date.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We would like to
thank Secretary of State John Kerry for having presided
earlier over this special meeting of the Security Council.
The initiative of the United States gives fresh impetus
to the quest for peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbourhood. Today’s
debate brings together the Secretary-General, the
President of the World Bank, Special Envoy Mary
Robinson and leaders of the region. This is synergy in
action.
We pay special tribute to the Secretary-General,
who, despite heavy odds and some setbacks, assembled
the leaders of 11 countries and four guarantors — the
United Nations, the African Union, the International

13-40733

S/PV.7011

Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community — in the common
cause of peace and stability in the Great Lakes Region.
That is a big-picture approach.
The big picture requires that countries in the region
build a strong nexus between peace and development.
There can be no development without peace in the
region. Regional economic integration should replace
the toxic legacy of pogroms and the reign of terror
imposed by militias and armed groups.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
holds out the promise to deliver peace. Special Envoy
Robinson has testified that some progress is being
made. We should maintain the momentum generated by
positive developments.
The big picture dictates that killings must end,
violations of international, human and humanitarian
laws — such as executions, sexual violence and forced
recruitment — must cease. Impunity should not be
condoned. Perpetrators should be held accountable.
The Intervention Brigade under the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is being deployed.
It must succeed. The Brigade is one of the tools in the
overall strategy to act as a deterrent. It is not meant to
be a substitute for the Congolese army, nor a panacea
for the problems in the eastern part of the country.
As resolution 2098 (2013) underlines, ultimately, a
well-trained and adequately equipped rapid-reaction
force within the Congolese army will take over
responsibilities from the Brigade. MONUSCO remains
a cornerstone of the new strategy.
We all know that the process of implementing the
Framework is not going to be easy. It is important that
regional partners and the neighbours of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo be fully on board and that they
implement the Framework in good faith. It is also
critical that all countries respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of neighbouring States. Credible
and verifiable measures should be taken to disarm,
disband and demobilize groups that defy the writ of
the State. Allegations can be investigated and truths
established. Realistic and time-bound benchmarks
should be developed to monitor the progress in the
implementation of the Framework.
We welcome the initial steps taken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and to establish the national oversight
mechanism. The responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be gradually transferred
to its armed forces and police. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo should expand security sector reform,
consolidate State authority and work towards national
reconciliation.
Pakistan is strongly committed to the goals of peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region. Pakistani peacekeepers in
MONUSCO have played an important role in restoring
and bolstering stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. They have carried out daring operations
against armed groups, contributed to the training and
capacity-building of the Congolese national security
forces and worked on community welfare projects.
Many of our soldiers have laid down their lives on the
soil of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our
peacekeepers will continue to protect civilians and to
implement MONUSCO’s mandate.
We hope that there will be a new dawn for the people
of the Great Lakes region. This century is Africa’s
century. As Africa moves towards robust economic
growth and attains political clout, the Great Lakes
region should not be held back by strife and conflict.
The illicit exploitation of minerals should stop. The rich
resources of the region should now be harnessed for the
benefit of its people. The countries of the region should
assume their rightful place in Africa and the comity of
nations. The Great Lakes region should become an ark
of stability and prosperity in the continent. The United
Nations should succeed in its mission.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation for the
initiative of the United States presidency of the Security
Council this month in convening today’s ministerial
meeting. We welcome the presence of Secretary of State
John Kerry to preside over the meeting. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General, the President of the World
Bank, Special Envoy Mary Robinson and Commissioner
Ramtane Lamamra for their participation and their
briefings. We also appreciate the high-level presence
of Ministers from the members of the Security Council
and the countries of the Great Lakes region. We are
confident that today’s meeting will provide an excellent
opportunity to review the progress thus far and further
bolster the momentum for achieving sustainable peace

13-4073327

S/PV.7011

and development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region as a whole.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
constitutes a strong political foundation for the region’s
lasting peace and stability. The participating countries
must share a common responsibility to implement the
commitments of the Framework. Full and uninterrupted
implementation by all concerned the parties concerned
at the national, regional and international level must be
ensured.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has the primary responsibility for its own reforms.
It should continue to undertake extensive reforms in
the areas of security, governance, decentralization and
democratization with firm commitment. Enhancing
effective capacity-building in the security sector,
among other areas, should lead the process. While
respecting the sovereignty of neighbouring countries,
enhancing regional cooperation by deepening economic
integration is vital. Maximizing this integration will
be a key part of achieving broader and longer-term
development goals and, ultimately, political stability.
We are of the view that the Framework’s success
depends upon an oversight mechanism with well-defined
benchmarks that are verifiable and action-oriented. The
benchmarks should also include a process to address
those that fall short of their stated goals.
We fully support the holistic approach to peace and
development in addressing the challenges in the Great
Lakes region. In that regard, it was highly commendable
that the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
visited the region with World Bank President Jim Yong
Kim. The unprecedented joint visit by the leaders of
the United Nations and the World Bank clearly shows
the value of an integrated effort that addresses both the
security and development issues of the region. In order
for that partnership to bear fruit, close cooperation and
coordination between the two bodies should be further
refined and strengthened. We hope that the partnership
can continue and expand to other areas as well.
One of the important policy goals of my
Government is the concurrent realization of peace,
security and economic and social development, not
only at the national but also at the regional and global
levels. As a part of that policy effort, my Government
will continue to actively engage in international
development cooperation. As the countries of the Great

28

Lakes region pursue security and development, the past
development experience of the Republic of Korea could
be helpful. The Republic of Korea is the only country
that has transformed itself from a least developed
country to donor country within just six decades. The
“New Village Movement” can provide a useful model
for rural development and poverty eradication in the
region.
In conclusion, we believe it is essential to maintain
high-level engagement and commitment from the
international community. We are confident that the
Framework, with firm support from the international
community, will surely contribute to the political
stability and the economic development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the United States for convening this debate and for the
personal commitment that Secretary of State Kerry has
shown by presiding over it. It is vitally important that
the Security Council maintains its focus on the region
at this critical time. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy Mary Robinson,
World Bank President Kim, Commissioner Lamamra
and Foreign Ministers Tshibanda N’tungamulongo and
Kutesa for their briefings this morning.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
a crucible of conflict for more than two decades.
Brutal cycles of violence threaten both national and
regional peace and stability. We have seen yet more
horrors in the latest cycle of violence as the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) militia commit rapes, carry out
summary executions and recruit child soldiers. The
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR),
while its threat is much reduced, has also continued to
carry out abuses, exploiting the instability created by
the M-23 rebellion.
Despite the latest outbreak of violence, we have an
opportunity now to begin a new chapter in the troubled
region that ends the people’s suffering and brings peace
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
February, countries of the region came together and
committed to building peace under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. Special Envoy
Robinson is supporting their efforts.
Resolution 2098 (2013) authorizes the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the

13-40733

S/PV.7011

Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
neutralize and disarm all those armed groups that pose
the greatest threat to civilians, not the least the M-23 and
the FDLR. Together, those different elements represent
a unique opportunity to address the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to end the cycle of violence once and for all.
We must seize this opportunity with determination
and vigour. First and foremost, countries in the
region must implement their commitments under the
Framework agreement. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo has made a positive start with the development
of a national oversight mechanism. Major challenges
remain on security-sector reform and extending
Government authority to the eastern part of the
country. Both these steps are necessary to bring peace
and prosperity to the Congolese people. But the wider
region must also deliver on its commitments. That
means, above all, that all countries show respect for
their neighbours’ territorial integrity and stop any and
all assistance to armed groups. It is a matter of great
concern to my Government that the latest report of
the Group of Experts on the arms embargo against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo refers to continuing
external support to rebel groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The meeting of the
signatories at the General Assembly in September must
produce clear benchmarks to measure progress on all
the commitments made in the Framework agreement.
MONUSCO should play its role in support of
national and regional efforts. The Council has given
the Mission a more robust mandate that will put greater
pressure on armed groups. MONUSCO will soon carry
out offensive operations informed by the latest military
technology, including unmanned aerial systems. That
pressure must be accompanied with a demobilizational
plan that offers combatants an alternative to fighting.
MONUSCO is adapting to developments on the ground
and demonstrating a flexibility in responsiveness that
other United Nations peacekeeping missions would do
well to emulate.
The United Kingdom stands ready to support all
those efforts. We are already providing training to
some of the United Nations peacekeeping troops that
will soon deploy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On our “preventing sexual violence” initiative,
we are assisting with the collection and preservation of
forensic evidence to help bring to justice perpetrators
of crimes of sexual violence. And we are providing

support to peace initiatives in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which are fully integrated with
the Framework agreement. All donor support should
be aligned with the regional and national benchmarks
of the Framework to establish a basis for mutual
accountability.
We must stay strong in our pursuit of peace. Gains
made are fragile and need unyielding support from
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from
the immediate neighbours in the region and from the
international community. We must not squander progress
with blame or retribution. Accusations by countries in
the region not backed up by evidence only undermine
our efforts. When the Council adopted resolution 2098
(2013), the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo said that his country was daring to hope
(see S/PV.6943). I can assure him that we are all hoping
with him. The Council, the international community
and, above all, the countries of the region must dare to
do all that they can for the people of the Great Lakes
and work together to keep our hopes of peace alive.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the United States
delegation for the initiative of convening this debate
of the Security Council on such a relevant topic. We
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of a
number of high-level officials.
We have from the outset actively supported the
good offices of the Secretary-General for a swift
stabilization of the situation in the Great Lakes region,
which have made possible the signing of the Framework
Agreement in Addis Ababa on 24 February. This
initiative established the problems of the region as
one of the top priorities of the Security Council and
the international community as a whole. We welcome
the vigorous efforts of the Special Envoy of the United
Nations Secretary-General on the Region of the Great
Lakes, Ms. Mary Robinson, to discharge her mandate.
We view the outcomes of the joint visit to the
region from 22 to 24 May of the Secretary-General
and the President of the World Bank as an important
milestone in encouraging the signatories to the
Framework Agreement to strictly comply with its spirit
and letter, and to consistently fulfil their obligations.
We welcome the establishment and launch of a regional
oversight mechanism involving all the signatories of the
Framework Agreement in order to develop performance
benchmarks for its practical implementation. We also

13-4073329

S/PV.7011

note the decision of the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Joseph Kabila, to establish
a national oversight mechanism.
We share the conclusion of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/387) that the political
agreements must be reinforced by a deepening of
economic ties among the neighbouring States. In this
context, we welcome the intention of the World Bank
to provide $1 billion with a view to the development of
the Great Lakes region and to strengthening economic
cross-border ties and the well-being of the people.
In order to implement these plans, there is a need
for a speedy and full cessation of violence in the region.
We strongly condemn the illicit armed groups that have
resumed fighting in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The result of the recent escalation
of violence is yet more civilian victims, new flows
of refugees and internally displaced persons, and
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights. Such violations are absolutely inadmissible. It
is important to conduct careful investigations and to
bring the perpetrators to justice.
Any support for illicit armed groups must be halted.
We expect the deployment of a fully operational Force
Intervention Brigade under resolution 2098 (2013)
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). This should assist in achieving a
qualitative breakthrough in combating anti-Government
armed groups and ultimately contribute to establishing
a climate of trust among neighbours and advance the
settlement process.
At this difficult stage of regional development,
assistance from the United Nations, aimed at achieving
sustainable and long-term peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region as
a whole, is more urgent than ever. At the same time, let
us not forget that the primary responsibility for ensuring
progress in the peace process is borne by the countries
of the region themselves. Important assistance in that
regard should also be provided by the African Union
and subregional organizations.
We must not lose sight of the crucial need for
comprehensive reform of the security sector in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to bolster
the national army, which, in the final analysis, must take
over all functions and responsibilities for protecting
civilians and ensuring the territorial integrity of the

30

country. Work must be done to eradicate the root causes
of the never-ending conflict, including by establishing
order in the exploitation of mineral resources. The
primary responsibility in these matters also lies with
the Congolese people.
For its part Russia, with other members of the
international community, will continue to support the
people and Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the States of the Great Lake region in
resolving the challenges before them.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I thank
the presidency of the United States for organizing this
debate on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region. The peoples of the
region and our entire continent attach great importance
to this high-level meeting aimed at consolidating the
peace dynamic arising from the Framework Agreement
of 24 February. We welcome the presence of United
States Secretary of State Kerry and the participation of
Ministers representing Council members and the States
of the region, as well as the participation of the President
of the World Bank. Finally, on behalf of Morocco I
commend the leadership, vision and commitment of
Ms. Robinson, as well as her unwavering commitment
and for her efforts to assist the full implementation of
Agreement of 24 February.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
suffered a succession of crises in recent decades that
have harmed its national cohesion and threatened its
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Behind
the criminal acts committed in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo by armed militias and other
armed groups, such as the Mouvement du 23 mars, the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the
Lord’s Resistance Army, lies a tragic humanitarian
crisis that has impacted millions of lives and violated
the fundamental rights of innocent civilians, especially
women and children. The perpetrators of these crimes
must be brought to justice.
The impact of the Congolese crisis also has a
regional dimension. The entire Great Lakes region
and Central Africa have been affected by the crisis in
humanitarian, security and economic terms. They all
have a historical responsibility to end it definitively and
irreversbly.
The signing on 24 February of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region

13-40733

S/PV.7011

opened up real prospects for peace. The agreement,
which is innovative in its approach, offers true hope
for a sustainable end to instability in the region and
a settlement of a crisis that has lasted too long. This
opening has been supplemented by measures taken by
the Council to adapt mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilisation Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s (MONUSCO) to the realities
on the ground, including with the adoption of resolution
2098 (2013).

of the region must quickly, fully and in good faith
implement their respective commitments under the
Framework Agreement, especially those relating to the
strict respect of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We therefore
encourage Special Envoy Robinson, in conjunction
with and supported by the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to continue to support, coordinate and evaluate
the implementation of those commitments.

Regionally, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region also put in place important
mechanisms that are contributing to the stabilization
and verification efforts. Finally, the joiny visit of the
Secretary-General, the President of the World Bank
and Ms. Robinson made it possible to graft onto the
dynamics in the field an economic development
dimension aimed at boosting economic exchanges,
reduce vulnerabilities, and promote economic regional
integration, especially through the reactivation of the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
(CEPGL) in favour of peace.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo ococupies
a special place in the heart of the African continent.
It holds enormous economic and human potential.
Its stability and prosperity directly impact all its
neighbours. The current process augurs well to ensure
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region the stability they long for and to
free up the energies of that vast country and the entire
region.

We welcome this approach, which is being
coordinated by the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank, inaugurated in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and planned for next autumn in
the Sahel. We hope that this approach will be taken up
in other crisis situations where the correlation between
peace and development is so critical.
Never have so many efforts been undertaken to
resolve the Congolese crisis, and we must applaud
that. Yet this important dynamic for peace cannot bear
fruits uneless all signatories honour their commitments
and build mutual confidence by building together a
lasting peace and common prosperity. In that context,
we welcome the commendable efforts undertaken
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo to fulfil
its obligations and to fully play its role in the peace
process. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo solemnly renewed
that commitment this morning.
That having been said, the path ahead remains
long and the bilateral partners and the United
Nations system are all called upon to fully support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in restoring
its authority throughout its national territory and in
successfully achieving institutional reform, national
reconciliation and human development. The countries

Morocco, which has stood by the side of the
Congolose people through the most difficult moments
of their history and which has participated in all United
Nations peacekeeping operations in that country, will
maintain its commitment to their national unity and
territorial integrity and to the stability of the entire
Great Lakes region.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and ask you to
convey our gratitude to Secretary of State John Kerry
for having emphasized the importance of this meeting
by his presence. I also thank the delegation of the United
States for placing this matter at the heart of the Council’s
consideration and its efforts and responsibilities. It is
also encouraging to see the participation of ministers
and other officials from the region, as well as that of
the international community. We also welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General, the President of
the World Bank and the United Nations Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson.
Argentina believes that the first steps towards the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes Region, signed in February,
constitute an opportunity to comprehensively consider
the underlying causes of the region’s problems, to
establish the bases for sustainable political, social
and economic development and achieve lasting peace.
The principle of shared responsibility, on which the

13-4073331

S/PV.7011

Framework is based, certainly involves the countries of
the region; but is also an ethical and political call to the
international community in terms of their participation,
cooperation and follow-up to the implementation of the
Framework.

remarked, include human rights, gender perspectives,
the integration of youth and child protection. By the
same token, the legal, legitimate, just, responsible and
transparent management and exploitation of natural
resources is key for peace and sustainable development.

We reiterate our support for United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in its task of
protecting civilians with full respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law. Argentina
understands that the Intervention Brigade, as the
Secretary-General has said, constitutes yet another
aspect of a broad, long-term solution to the situation
in the region, but that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians and the territorial integrity of
States lies with Governments and their armed forces.

A few days ago we received a report from the
distinguished organization Human Rights Watch that
included the testimony of a 12-year old girl who had
gone to buy sugar with her friends:

Argentina believes that it is an absolute priority
for the Governments and peoples of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region to affirm and
translate into action the words “never again” in the
face of the continuing violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights committed in the
region by armed groups of various affiliations.
We are particularly concerned by reports to the
effect that some of those violations have been committed
by some members of Government security forces. We
urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to expand the institutionally urgent democratic
transformations of the security, justice and defence
sectors.
We call on the States parties to fully fufil their
commitment to not tolerate or provide support to any
armed group and not to offer protection to those whom
the commisison has accused of war crimes, crimes
against humanity, acts of genocide of aggression or
those who violate the sanctions regime of the United
Nations. The fight against impunity is a necessary
condition for lasting peace.
We believe that the vulnerable situation of
displaced persons and refugees requires immediate
humanitarian action. But the right of all men and
women to a dignified life will come about only through
initiatives such as that led by the Governments of the
region, the United Nations, the World Bank and other
partners and donors that will contribute to setting in
motion infrastructure and development projects and
projects that advance sustainable economic growth
and social inclusion that will include, as Ms. Robinson

32

“I saw a soldier of the M-23. I began to run. The
soldier grabbed me and said that he was going to
kill me for trying to escape. I stayed quiet. I was
very scared. Then he raped me. I screamed but he
covered my mouth.”
Argentina and the international community believe
that we will have defeated poverty, fear, insecurity and
violence when we no longer hear — and the annals
of human history, including those of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region
are devoid — of such testimonies. We hope that this
meeting, convoked by your delegation, Sir, will move
us in that direction.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the United States
delegation for its initiative in convening this debate and
to Secretary Kerry for his presence. I also thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes region, Ms. Mary Robinson, for their sustained
engagement and leadership, and of course all the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
As the attendance of the participants today
indicates, we are at a pivotal moment in the search
for durable peace and security in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. We
should be ashamed by the staggering toll of the conflict:
the lives of more than 5, perhaps 6, million people,
the displacement of millions more and the subjection
of countless men, women and children to horrendous
human rights abuses. Today, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is languishing at the bottom of the United
Nations Human Development Index.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
provides the best opportunity to definitively break the
cycle of violence and instability. We are at a moment of
hope because of the leadership and efforts of regional
Governments and organizations, working in close
cooperation with the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral himself, and now with the World Bank.

13-40733

S/PV.7011

The potential genius of the Framework is that,
for the first time, all the relevant parties have made
clear commitments to integrate political, security and
development efforts — a nexus that is essential to
tackling the root causes of instability. The recent joint
visit by the World Bank President and the SecretaryGeneral reflects what should be a crucial impetus for
the region. There have been encouraging early signs
of follow-up on the Framework commitments, but
also stark reminders of the sobering challenges ahead.
Attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars and infighting
among the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) near Goma are ongoing. Just last
week, attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces in
Kamango forced more than 65,000 refugees to flee into
Uganda. We note Ugandan Foreign Minister Kutesa’s
warnings this morning about the Allied Democratic
Forces.
The immediate priority must be to ensure that
all signatories take practical steps to implement their
commitments under the Framework. Where they fail
to live up to these commitments, they must be held to
account, by their own citizens and civil society, by their
regional neighbours, and by the broader international
community, including the Security Council.
Australia welcomes the initial efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to initiate key reforms. The establishment of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s National Oversight
Mechanism is an important step, as was the inaugural
meeting of the 11+4 regional oversight mechanism and
the establishment of the technical support committee.
The implementation of tailored, realistic benchmarks
will, however, be fundamental to the success of the
Framework. It is imperative that broad agreement is
reached on the specific benchmarks and how these will
be taken forward by the next meeting of the regional
oversight mechanism in New York in September.
All signatories have committed under the Framework
not to interfere in the affairs of neighbouring countries
and to neither tolerate nor provide assistance or support
of any kind to armed groups. Any collaboration
between the FARDC and the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda must cease, as must any support
to the Mouvement du 23 mars.There can be no peace so
long as such support continues.
Turning briefly to some key practical challenges
and priorities ahead, persistent reports of grave human

rights abuses and widespread sexual violence by armed
groups and the FARDC undermine the foundations for
any lasting peace. At an event Australia co-hosted this
week, we heard first-hand the impact of the use of rape as
a tool of war to destroy communities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Impunity cannot be tolerated. It
is critical that decisive action is taken to prevent such
atrocities and to investigate and prosecute such crimes.
In this context, the efforts of the International Criminal
Court deserve our full support.
It is also critical that security sector reforms
be intensified. Ultimate responsibility far security
rests with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government. A professional and effective army is
central to this. The FARDC’s capabilities, discipline
and cooperation with the United Nations Mission,
including the Intervention Brigade, will be critical
to the success of efforts in the Kivus. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration must, finally, also be
given genuine priority. The unregulated flow of small
arms and failure to implement effective reintegration
strategies are themselves root causes and drivers of
conflict.
Women’s participation and leadership in
both the security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes is essential
to long-term peace. So, too, is their direct engagement
in the implementation of the Framework. Special Envoy
Robinson’s work to ensure their full and effective
participation, including through the recent Bujumbura
Conference is long overdue, prospective and reassuring.
In concluding, Australia reaffirms our strong
support for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade, and expresses our deep appreciation to the
troop-contributing countries. The Intervention Brigade
cannot, of course, be seen as a panacea or a substitute
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s own
responsibilities. What the Brigade can do, and what the
Council intended it to do, is to act as a circuit-breaker
to create the space for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government to implement the necessary reforms
and tackle underlying issues of the conflict.
The Brigade’s creation was an historic and risky
decision by the Council, borne out of frustration
certainly, but more so from necessity. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours have provided

13-4073333

S/PV.7011

the essential enabling environment for a new start, but
implementation will obviously be decisive. The Council
itself must continue to give incisive and consistent
attention to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
reinforce the incentives for change and to break the
cyclical patterns of the past. We all know that this is a
genuinely critical moment; we must ensure it becomes
transformative.
I understand there is a Congolese saying that “no
matter how hard you throw a dead fish in the water,

34

it still will not swim”. The framework of hope is very
much alive, and we need to ensure it is able to swim.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the
lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of
the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m

13-40733
