67

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Invites the appropriate organs of the United
Nations system, as well as the regional development
banks, to pay special attention to the particular problems of the land-locked developing countries in their
assistance to national, subregional and regional infrastructural projects related to transit;
4. Urges the developed countries and all others in
a position to do so to provide technical and/ or financial
assistance in the form of grants or in the form of concessional loans on appropriate terms to the land-locked
developing countries for the construction, improvement
and maintenance of their transit roads;
5. Calls upon the Governments of developed and
developing countries to invite and urge shipowners,
members of liner conferences and insurance companies,
as far as is feasible, to establish freight rates and premiums for the land-locked developing countries, which
will encourage and assist the expansion of trade of these
countries, and to develop promotional rates for nontraditional exports of these countries, which will facilitate the opening up of new markets and the development
of new trade flows;
6. Invites all Member States and the competent
international organizations to assist the land-locked developing countries in facilitating the exercise of their
right of free access to and from the sea.
I 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/158.

Debt problems of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Further recalling resolution 94 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 158
Noting with grave concern that heavy debt-service
payments, current account deficits stemming from maladjustments in the world economy, inadequate balanceof-payments support and long-term development assistance, coupled with tight conditions and the high cost
of loans in international capital markets and difficulties
of access to markets in developed countries for exports
of developing countries, as well as declining real prices
of primary commodities exported by developing countries, have, among other things, combined to impose a
serious and critical strain on the import capacity and
reserves of developing countries, thus jeopardizing their
development process,
A ware that the deterioration in the terms of trade of
developing countries and the high-cost short-term borrowing to which they have had to resort recently have
seriously aggravated their debt burden,
Convinced that the situation facing the developing
countries can be mitigated by decisive and urgent relief
measures in respect of both their official and commercial
debts and that these measures are essential to restore
the momentum of growth lost during the economic crisis
and to achieve the targets of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 159
158 Ibid.
59 Resolution 2626

(XXV).

Acknowledging that, in the present circumstances,
there are sufficient common elements in the debt-servicing difficulties faced by various developing countries to
warrant the adoption of general measures relating to
their existing debt,
Recognizing the especially difficult circumstances and
debt burden of the most seriously affected, least developed, land-locked and island developing countries,
1. Considers that it is integral to the establishment
of the new international economic order to give a new
orientation to procedures of reorganization of debt
owed to developed countries away from the past experience of a primarily commercial framework towards a
developmental approach;
2. Affirms the urgency of reaching a general and
effective solution to the debt problems of developing
countries;
3. Agrees that future debt negotiations should be
considered within the context of internationally agreed
development targets, national development objectives
and international financial co-operation, and debt reorganization of interested developing countries carried
out in accordance with the objectives, procedures and
institutions evolved for that purpose;
4. Stresses that all these measures should be considered and implemented in a manner not prejudicial to
the credit-worthiness of any developing country;
5. Urges the International Conference on Economic
Co-operation to reach an early agreement on the question of immediate and generalized debt relief of the
official debts of the developing countries, in particular
of the most seriously affected, least developed, landlocked and island developing countries, and on the reorganization of the entire system of debt renegotiations
to give it a developmental rather than a commercial
orientation;
6. Requests the Trade and Development Board of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, at its ministerial session to be held in 1977,
to review the results of negotiations on this question
in other forums and to reach agreement on concrete
measures to provide an immediate solution to the debt
problems of developing countries, and requests the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/159.

Report of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development on its fourth
session 60

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, as amended, 61 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Mindful that in its resolution 3362 (S-VII) it stated
that an important aim of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its fourth session was to
110 See also sect. X.B.3 below.
61 Resolutions 2904 ( XXVII)

decision 31/419.
.ind 31 /2 A and B.

68

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

reach decisions on specific issues of interest to the developing countries,
Recalling further its resolution 3459 (XXX) of
11 December 1975 in which it, inter alia, urged all
Member States to ensure that negotiations at the fourth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development were action-oriented, so that the decisions
arrived at by the Conference could be promptly and
effectively implemented,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its fourth
session, held at Nairobi from 5 to 31 May 197 6, 62 and
the report of the Trade and Development Board on its
seventh special session63 and on the first part of its
sixteenth session, 64
Reaffirming the important role of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development in the realization of the objectives of General Assembly resolutions
3201 (S-VI), 3202 (S-VI) and 3362 (S-VII),
Noting with concern that the agreements reached by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its fourth session were limited in nature and,
despite some positive results in certain areas, responded
only partially to the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 3362 (S-VII),
Noting the Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted by the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Group
of Seventy-seven, held at Manila from 26 January to
7 February 1976,65 setting forth the objectives and proposals of the developing countries at the fourth session
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and the view of the developing countries that
their objectives and proposals were not adequately met
at the Conference,
Considering that the agreements reached at the fourth
session of the Conference, despite their limited nature,
should be urgently implemented for they could give
added impetus to the efforts of the international community towards achievement of the objectives of development,
Considering further that other concerns of the developing countries also deserve the urgent attention of
the world community,
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its fourth
session and the report of the Trade and Development
Board on its seventh special session and on the first part
of its sixteenth session;
2. Endorses resolution 93 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 concerning the Integrated Programme for
Commodities and urges that the objectives of the Integrated Programme, as enumerated therein, be vigorously pursued;
3. Welcomes the establishment of the Ad Hoe
Intergovernmental Committee for the Integrated Pro62 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10).
6 3 Official Records of the Genernl Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/31115 and Corr.l), vol. J.
64 Ibid., Supplement No. 15 (A/31/15), vol. II.
6 5 See Proceedings of 1/ie United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10),
annex V.
66 Ibid., part one, sect. A.

gramme for Commodities, 67 takes note of the decision
by the Trade and Development Board on preparatory
meetings for international negotiations on individual
commodities and urges all countries participating in
those meetings to respond constructively in order to
ensure that the meetings be concluded no later than
February 1978;
4. Notes that steps have been taken towards the
negotiation of a common fund, including proposals put
forward in this regard;
5. Takes note of the specific contributions to a common fund announced by a number of countries and of
the support for such a common fund as expressed by
others, particularly at the fourth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and
invites the countries concerned to consider, if appropriate, making specific pledges before the commencement of the negotiating conference on a common fund,
open to all members of the Conference, to be convened
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development no later than March
1977;
6. Endorses further resolution 96 (IV) of 31 May
1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development66 relating to a set of interrelated and mutually supporting measures for expansion and diversification of exports of manufactures and semi-manufactures of developing countries, in particular the decisions
on the extension of the coverage of the generalized
system of preferences to as many products of export
interest to developing countries as possible and on the
continuation of the system beyond the initial period of
ten years as originally envisaged, and requests developed
countries to consider, as appropriate, making it a continuing feature of their trade policies;
7. Recalls resolution 97 (IV) of 31 May 1976 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 concerning transnational corporations and expansion of trade in manufactures and semi-manufactures, draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council and the concerned organizations of the United
Nations system to the recommendations and measures
contained therein and requests that appropriate consideration be given to means of ensuring that transnational
corporations make a positive contribution to the economic development of developing countries;
8. Recalls resolution 91 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 concerning multilateral trade negotiations and
requests that immediate and concrete agreements be
reached in multilateral trade negotiations, particularly
on the issues of special interest to developing countries,
in such a way as to secure additional benefits for their
international trade;
9. Takes note of resolution 94 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Developmentu6 dealing with the debt problems of developing
countries and requests the Trade and Development
Board at its ministerial session in 1977 to review the
action taken in pursuance of that resolution;
10. Endorses resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 recommending a series of special measures
67 See 0/ficial Records of !he General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/31/15), vol. IT, annex I,
decision 140 (XVI).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and specific action, respectively, in favour of the least
developed countries and in favour of the land-locked
and island developing countries, and requests all organizations concerned within the United Nations system to
incorporate the relevant recommendations in their activities and implement them as a matter of urgency;
11. Takes note of Trade and Development Board
resolution 150 (XVI) of 23 October 197668 on the
transfer of real resources to developing countries;
12. Urges the International Monetary Fund to continue its work on the refol'm of the international monetary system and to give in that context special and
urgent consideration to the interests of the developing
countries and to the link between the creation of special
drawing rights and additional development finance, taking fully into account the relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolution 3 3 62 ( S-VII) ;
13. Endorses resolution 89 (IV) of 30 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 relating to the establishment within the Conference of an intergovernmental group of experts which
should elaborate the draft of an international code of
conduct on the transfer of technology as soon as possible, and decides to convene a United Nations conference under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to be held early
in 1978, to negotiate on the draft elaborated by the
group of experts mentioned above and to take all decisions necessary for the adoption of the final document
embodying the code of conduct for the transfer of technology, including the decision on its legal character;
14. Welcomes resolution 87 (IV) of 30 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 concerning the strengthening of the technological capacity of developing countries and, in particular, the establishment of an advisory service within
the Conference, as well as Conference resolution 88
(IV) of 30 May 197666 on industrial property, which
recognizes the important role played respectively by
the Conference and by the World Intellectual Property
Organization in this area, and requests them to continue
their co-operation in this field;
15. Recalls resolution 90 (IV) of 30 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 relating to institutional issues and affirms, in
the context of section I of that resolution, that the functions mentioned therein should be strengthened in order
to increase the effectiveness of the Conference as an
organ of the General Assembly for deliberation, negotiation, review and implementation in the field of international trade and related issues of international economic co-operation which would play a major role in
the improvement of the conditions of international trade,
the acceleration of the growth of the world economy,
including in particular the economic development of
developing countries, and in the realization of the objectives of Assembly resolutions 3201 (S-VI), 3202
(S-VI), 3281 (XXIX) and 3362 (S-VII);

16. Endorses resolution 92 (IV) of 30 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,66 relating to measures of support by developed
countries and international organizations for the programme of economic co-operation among developing
countries, and welcomes the establishment by the Trade
and Development Board at its sixteenth session of the
Committee on Economic Co-operation among Develop68 Ibid., annex I.

69

ing Countries as an open-ended main committee of the
Board;
17. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in preparing the reports called for in Trade and Development
Board decision 142 (XVI) of 23 October 1976, 68 to
study the relevant portions of the report of the Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing
Countries, held at Mexico City from 13 to 22 September 1976,69 and other relevant proposals of the developing countries;

18. Endorses resolution 86 (IV) of 28 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development66 and decides to include Arabic among the
official and working languages of the machinery of the
Conference, particularly all sessions of the Conference,
the Trade and Development Board and its main committees, and requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to take all necessary measures in this regard;
19. Recalls resolution 95 (IV) of 31 May 1976 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade j:ind Development66 relating to trade relations among countries
having different economic and social systems, as well
as Trade and Development Board decisions 138 (XVI)
of 23 October 1976, 68 on the identification of trade
possibilities in favour of developing countries which
would result from the implementation of various multilateral schemes of countries members of the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance, and 139 (XVI) of
23 October 1976,68 aimed at developing a new dynamic
orientation for trade between developing countries and
socialist countries of Eastern Europe, respecting the
interests of all parties concerned, as specified in section I of resolution 95 (IV);
20. Emphasizes the need for the provision of adequate resources for the secretariat of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development resulting from
the relevant resolutions and decisions of the fourth session of the Conference and of the Trade and Development Board and the tasks initially assigned in the programme budget for the biennium 1976-1977;
21. Requests the competent United Nations authorities to ensure that, in the recruitment of the staff of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
the principle of equitable geographical distribution is
fully observed;

22. Urges all States members of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, in particular
the developed countries, to implement urgently, through
action at the national and intergovernmental levels, the
agreements reached by the Conference at its fourth session and by the Trade and Development Board at the
first part of its sixteenth session and, also, to reach early
agreement on the remaining issues of importance to developing countries;
23. Decides to hold the fifth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in 1979
and requests the Trade and Development Board at
its seventeenth session to recommend the place, date
and duration of the session, taking into account the
offer made in this regard by the Government of the
Philippines.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
i;nsee AT.2/31/7 anJ Add.I.
