United Nations

A/RES/58/172

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 117 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/508/Add.2)]

58/172. The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular,
the determination to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom, as well as to employ international mechanisms for the promotion of the
economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for
everyone, as set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the
General Assembly on 8 September 2000, 1
Stressing the need for undertaking urgent measures to implement the goals and
targets set at all the major United Nations conferences and summits and their review
processes, which are paramount in the process of the realization of the right to
development,
Taking note of the outcome of the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World
Trade Organization, held in Doha from 9 to 14 November 2001, 2
Recalling that the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, confirmed that the
right to development is an inalienable human right and that equality of opportunity
for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up
nations, and the individual as the central subject and beneficiary of development,
Stressing that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 3 reaffirmed the
right to development as a universal and inalienable right and an integral part of
fundamental human rights, and the individual as the central subject and beneficiary
of development,
Recalling all its previous resolutions and those of the Commission on Human
Rights on the right to development, in particular Commission resolution 1998/72 of

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
A/C.2/56/7, annex.
3
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2

03 50490

A/RES/58/172

22 April 1998, 4 on the urgent need to make further progress towards the realization
of the right to development as set out in the Declaration on the Right to
Development,
Welcoming its adoption of the United Nations Convention against Corruption 5
on 31 October 2003,
Recalling the high-level plenary meetings of the General Assembly held on
22 September 2003 devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of its twenty-sixth
special session and the implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS, 6
Recalling also the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Kuala Lumpur from 20 to 25 February 2003,
Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development 7 as a development framework for Africa,
Recognizing that historical injustices have undeniably contributed to the
poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion, economic disparity,
instability and insecurity that affect many people in different parts of the world, in
particular in developing countries,
Stressing that poverty eradication is one of the critical elements in the
promotion and realization of the right to development and that poverty is a
multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted and integrated approach in
addressing economic, political, social, environmental and institutional dimensions at
all levels, especially in the context of the millennium development goal of halving,
by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income is less than one dollar a
day and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
Expressing regret that the Working Group on the Right to Development, at its
fourth session, did not reach a conclusion, in particular on the implementation of the
conclusions of the third session of the Working Group, 8 while aware of the views
and observations of the Chairperson-Rapporteur, 9
1.
Endorses the conclusions of the third session of the Working Group on
the Right to Development,8 as adopted by the Commission on Human Rights in its
resolution 2002/69 of 25 April 2002, 10 which constitute a solid foundation for
further initiatives towards the promotion and the realization of the right to
development;
Requests the Working Group at its fifth session to revisit and build upon
2.
the conclusions of its third session in order to constructively and effectively fulfil its
mandate, bearing in mind that the Working Group did not reach a conclusion at its
fourth session;

_______________
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
Resolution 58/4, annex.
6
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
7
A/57/304, annex.
8
E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev.1, sect. VIII.A.
9
E/CN.4/2003/26 and Corr.1, annex I.
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

2

A/RES/58/172

3.
Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the
conclusions of the third session of the Working Group, congruent with the purpose
of international human rights instruments, such as equality, non-discrimination,
accountability, participation and international cooperation, as critical to
mainstreaming the right to development at the international level, and underlines the
importance of the principles of equity and transparency;
Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set out in
4.
all the outcome documents of the major United Nations conferences and summits
and their review processes, in particular those relating to the realization of the right
to development, recognizing that the realization of the right to development is
critical to achieving the objectives, goals and targets set in those outcome
documents;
Reaffirms also that the realization of the right to development is essential
5.
to the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,3 which
regards all human rights as universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
places the human person at the centre of development and recognizes that, while
development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of development
may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of internationally recognized human
rights;
Stresses that the basic responsibility for the promotion and protection of
6.
all human rights lies with the State, and reaffirms that States have the primary
responsibility for their own economic and social development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
Reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility for the creation of
7.
national and international conditions favourable to the realization of the right to
development and their commitment to cooperating with each other to that end;
Reaffirms also the need for an international environment that is
8.
conducive to the realization of the right to development;
9.
Stresses the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and
realization of the right to development at the international and national levels, and
calls upon States to institute the measures required for the implementation of the
right to development as a fundamental human right;
10. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing obstacles
impeding the full realization of the right to development at both the national and the
international levels;
11. Affirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges,
the process of globalization remains deficient in achieving the objectives of
integrating all countries into a globalized world, and stresses the need for policies
and measures at the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and
opportunities of globalization if this process is to be made fully inclusive and
equitable;
12. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the
international community, the gap between developed and developing countries
remains unacceptably wide, that developing countries continue to face difficulties in
participating in the globalization process and that many risk being marginalized and
effectively excluded from its benefits;
13. Reaffirms the commitment, and urges developed countries that have not
yet done so, to make concrete efforts towards meeting the targets of 0.7 per cent of
3

A/RES/58/172

their gross national product for official development assistance to developing
countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of their gross national product to least developed
countries, and encourages developing countries to build on the progress achieved in
ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help to meet
development goals and targets;
14. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing countries,
including in respect of agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in
particular those of interest to developing countries;
15. Considers that a desirable pace of meaningful trade liberalization,
including in areas under negotiation; implementation of commitments on
implementation-related issues and concerns; review of special and
differential-treatment provisions, with a view to strengthening them and making
them more precise, effective and operational; avoidance of new forms of
protectionism; and capacity-building and technical assistance for developing
countries are important issues in making progress towards the effective
implementation of the right to development;
16. Underlines the fact that the international community is far from meeting
the target set in the United Nations Millennium Declaration1 of halving the number
of people living in poverty by 2015, and emphasizes the principle of international
cooperation, including partnership and commitment, between developed and
developing countries towards achieving the goal;
17. Recognizes the important link between the international economic,
commercial and financial spheres and the realization of the right to development,
stresses, in this regard, the need to broaden the base of decision-making at the
international level on issues of development concern and to fill organizational gaps,
as well as strengthen the United Nations system and other multilateral institutions,
and also stresses the need to broaden and strengthen the participation of developing
countries and economies in transition in international economic decision-making
and norm-setting;
18. Recognizes also that good governance and the rule of law at the national
level assist all States in the promotion and protection of human rights, including the
right to development, and agrees on the value of the ongoing efforts being made by
States to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent,
responsible, accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and
appropriate to their needs and aspirations, including in the context of agreed
partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and technical assistance;
19. Recognizes further the important role and the rights of women and the
application of a gender perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process of
realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the positive relationship
between women’s education and their equal participation in the civil, cultural,
economic, political and social activities of the community and the promotion of the
right to development;
20. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls and
boys alike, in all policies and programmes, and for ensuring the protection and
promotion of those rights, especially in areas relating to health, education and the
full development of their capacities;
21. Stresses also that further and additional measures must be taken at the
national and international levels to fight HIV/AIDS and other communicable

4

A/RES/58/172

diseases, taking into account ongoing efforts and programmes, and reiterates the
need for international assistance in this regard;
22. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society
organizations and the private sector in pursuit of poverty eradication and
development, as well as for good corporate governance;
23. Emphasizes the urgent need for taking concrete measures to fight against
all forms of corruption at the national and international levels, to prevent, detect and
deter in a more effective manner international transfers of illicitly acquired assets
and to strengthen international cooperation in asset recovery, stresses the importance
of a genuine political commitment on the part of all Governments through a firm
legal framework, and in this context urges States to sign and ratify the United
Nations Convention against Corruption5 as soon as possible;
24. Looks forward to the consideration by the Commission on Human Rights
at its sixty-first session of the concept document to be prepared by the
Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights establishing
options for the implementation of the right to development and their feasibility;
25. Emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the promotion and
realization of the right to development, including ensuring effective use of the
financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate and better servicing of
and support for the Working Group on the Right to Development;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of the High
Commissioner effectively assists in implementing the recommendations contained
in the conclusions of the third session of the Working Group on the Right to
Development,8 and to ensure also the meaningful participation and contribution of
all relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, the specialized
agencies and international organizations in the next session of the Working Group;
27. Calls upon the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well
as the specialized agencies, to mainstream the right to development in their
operational programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the international
financial and multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right to development in
their policies and objectives;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs and bodies, specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, international development and financial institutions, in
particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental organizations;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session and an interim report to the Commission on
Human Rights at its sixtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution,
including efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in the
promotion and realization of the right to development.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

5
