S/2014/485

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 July 2014
Original: English

Third report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 2110 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 6 of its resolution 2110 (2013), the Security Council requested
me to report to it every four months on progress made towards fulfilling the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present
report covers key political and security developments related to Iraq and provides an
update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my report
dated 14 March 2014 (S/2014/190).

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Internal developments
2.
Since my previous report, the already precarious security situation in Iraq took
a dramatic turn for the worse when the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, also
known as the Islamic State of Iraq and Al Sham (ISIS) and other armed elements
took control of key cities and infrastructure in Iraq’s north -western and north-central
governorates, in particular in Ninewa, Salah al-Din, Anbar and Diyalah provinces,
causing significant civilian casualties and displacement and raising serious human
rights concerns. The rapid deterioration in the security situation came on the heels
of the Council of Representatives elections on 30 April. The negotiations on the
formation of a new Government are ongoing.
Political situation
3.
Political actors demonstrated enthusiasm about taking part in the electoral
process despite a marked fragmentation of some of Iraq’s main coalitions. A total of
9,043 registered candidates from 107 political entities and coalitions stood for the
328 seats in the Council of Representatives, compared with more than 6,000
candidates from 86 political entities and coalitions who stood for 325 seats in 2010.
The last week of electoral campaigning, covering the period from 1 to 29 April, was
marred by intimidations and attacks on some candidates and campaign events,
including a complex attack targeting a political rally in Baghdad on 25 April, which
killed 35 and wounded 102.

14-56917 (E)

150714

*1456917*

S/2014/485

4.
On election day, some 12.6 million Iraqis cast ballots in 2,667 polling centres
across the country. Fewer than 1 per cent of polling stations failed to open for
security reasons. Special voting for over 1 million members of the security forces
took place on 28 April, while out-of-country voting took place from 28 to 30 April
in 20 countries, with 165,539 Iraqis participating. Special provision was made for
internally displaced persons. On 30 April, Erbil, Dohuk and Suleymaniyah also held
Governorate Council elections, originally scheduled for September 2013.
5.
Despite the challenging security situation, the turnout rates for all voting
processes were assessed as high and demonstrated a continued commitment by
Iraqis to the democratic process. Special voting saw a turnout of 77 per cent of
eligible voters, while 62 per cent of eligible voters cast their vote in the Council of
Representatives elections. Owing to the security situation, turnout rates were lowest
in Anbar, Ninewa, Salah al-Din and Diyalah governorates, averaging 54.5 per cent.
The overall turnout for the Governorate Council elections in the Kurdistan Region
was 76 per cent.
6.
On 19 May, the Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq announced
the provisional results of the Council of Representatives elections, following the
completion of the data entry process. Following the adjudication of 2,070
complaints and 839 appeals, the Supreme Federal Court certified the final results on
16 June.
7.
According to these results, the State of Law Coalition emerged as the largest
parliamentary bloc, winning 92 (28 per cent) of the 328 seats in the Council of
Representatives. The Ahrar, Nukhab and National Partnership Coalitions secured
34 seats (10 per cent), while the Mouwaten Coalition won 28 seats (8 per cent). The
Sunni coalitions Moutahidoun and Wataniya each obtained 22 seats (7 per cent),
while al-Arabiya gained 10 seats (3 per cent). Meanwhile, two major Kurdish
parties, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Kurdistan Democratic Party, each
won 19 seats (6 per cent). Gorran, which won the second largest number of se ats in
the September 2013 Kurdistan Regional Parliamentary election, won nine seats
(3 per cent). The remaining 73 seats (22 per cent) went to more than 20 other
coalitions and parties, including eight quota seats allocated to the Christian, Shabak
and Turkmen minorities.
8.
On 26 June, the Iraq presidency issued a decree calling for the inaugural
session of the Council of Representatives to convene on 1 July, namely, within
15 days of the certification of the election results, in accordance with the
Constitution. On 1 July, the Council of Representatives held its inaugural session.
Of the 328 newly elected Representatives, 255 attended the session, achieving the
initial quorum. A second session will be held on 8 July. Once a Speaker and Deputy
Speaker have been elected, the Council of Representatives will elect the President
and two Vice-Presidents within 30 days of the convening of the Council. Within
15 days of his election, the President will formally charge the Prime Minister designate, the candidate of the largest parliamentary bloc in the Council, with the
formation of the Council of Ministers within 30 days. Lastly, the Council of
Representatives will conduct a vote of confidence in the Prime Minister-designate,
the Council of Ministers and their ministerial programme.
9.
On 22 May, the Independent High Electoral Commission announced the
provisional results for the Governorate Council elections in the Kurdistan Region.
The Kurdistan Democratic Party won 34 seats (42 per cent of the total seats,

2/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

including 12 in Erbil, 3 in Suleymaniyah and 19 in Dohuk), while the Patriotic
Union of Kurdistan won 20 seats (25 per cent of the total seats, including 6 in Erbil,
11 plus 1 quota seat in Suleymaniyah and 2 in Dohuk), Gorran won 17 seats (21 per
cent of the total seats, including 4 in Erbil, 12 in Suleymaniyah and 1 in Dohuk), the
Kurdistan Islamic Union won 6 seats (7 per cent of the total seats, including 1 in
Erbil, 2 in Suleymaniyah and 3 in Dohuk) and the Kurdistan Islamic Group won
4 seats (5 per cent of the total seats, including 2 in Erbil and 2 in Suleymaniyah).
10. Following the elections for the Kurdistan Regional Parliament in September
2013, Yousef Mohammed Sadiq, of Gorran, was nominated as Speaker of the
Parliament and Jaafar Ibrahim, of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, as Deputy
Speaker on 29 April. On 20 May, the Parliament re-elected Nechirvan Barzani of the
Kurdistan Democratic Party as Kurdistan Region Prime Minister and voted for
Qubad Talabani of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan as Deputy Prime Minister. The
new Kurdistan Region Council of Ministers was sworn in on 18 June.
Security situation
11. The security situation in Iraq’s west and north-western governorates, in
particular Anbar and Ninewa, continued to pose a threat to the country’s stability.
Between 14 March and 30 June, at least 3,010 civilians were killed and 4,799 were
wounded in incidents of armed violence and terrorism across Iraq. The governorates
worst affected by violence were Baghdad, Ninewa, Salah al-Din, Diyalah, Kirkuk,
Babil and Wasit. Since the start of the recent crisis, there have been reports of ISIS
and armed groups committing grave human rights and humanitarian law violations,
including summary executions and the killing of hundreds of soldiers and civilians,
sexual violence and abuse against women, kidnapping and harassment of religious
leaders, minorities and others, and the recruitment of child soldiers. Terrorist attacks
directly targeted civilians and public gathering places, including restaurants,
mosques and markets. On 1 July, UNAMI reported that in June alone, at least 2,417
people had been killed and 2,287 injured in Iraq.
12. In Anbar, ISIS and other armed groups continued to engage in heavy fighting
with Iraqi security forces in the Fallujah-Ramadi corridor. While Iraqi security
forces regained control of central Ramadi, control of some areas on the city’s
outskirts has swung back and forth between the security forces and the armed
groups. Meanwhile, Fallujah continues to remain largely in the hands of insurgents.
13. The Anbar crisis took on another dangerous dimension when ISIS militants
took control of the Fallujah barrage on the Euphrates River in early April,
redirecting the water flow. This led to extensive flooding in the Amariyat -Fallujah
area, while cutting off the water supply to Iraq’s central and southern governorates.
The Tigris River was also subjected to an attack on 16 April, when ISIS struck an oil
pipeline near Al Fatah in Salah al-Din governorate. This led to a massive oil spill
and forced a number of municipalities to temporarily shut down their water
treatment plants. By 22 April, ISIS had broadened its operations to take control of
another barrage at Noamiyah, which regulates the flow of water from the Euphrates
River to the Baghdad Belt districts, including Abu Ghraib and Yusufiyah. This led to
extensive flooding in those areas, as well as the displacement of local residents and
the destruction of agrarian land, livestock and irrigation networks. The Fallujah and
Noamiyah barrages were repeatedly opened and closed throughout the reporting
period as Iraqi security forces attempted to regain control of the areas. On 5 May,

14-56917

3/17

S/2014/485

Iraqi forces succeeded in opening a canal that bypasses the barrage, alleviating the
flooding in Abu Ghraib.
14. Continued efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation in Anbar,
including Prime Minister al-Maliki’s announcement of a conference on national
unity to end the crisis in Anbar, initially scheduled for 15 June, have been overtaken
by the major security and humanitarian crisis currently unfolding in Anbar’s
neighbouring provinces of Ninewa, Salah al-Din and Diyalah. Commencing on
5 June, ISIS-led armed elements launched attacks in Samarra, Mosul, Baquba and
Ramadi, which resulted in their taking control of several major cities, including
Mosul, Tikrit and Haditha, as well as key infrastructure, including the oil refinery in
Bayji. ISIS has also seized the Turkish Consulate in Mosul and has abducted
49 persons, including the Consul General. Reports also emerged of mass summary
executions of members of the Iraqi security forces and killings of civilians in these
areas. More than half a million Iraqis have been internally displaced by this new
wave of violence. The Kurdistan Regional Government deployed its Peshmerga
troops into disputed areas, including Kirkuk, following the withdrawal of the Iraqi
security forces there.
15. To stem the advances of ISIS and fill the vacuum of troops abandoning their
posts in the north-western affected areas, on 11 June, Prime Minister al-Maliki
called for volunteers to register and fight alongside the army. Tens of thousands of
volunteers enlisted in large numbers in response to this mobilization call, which was
followed by a fatwa issued by Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani on 13 June.
Al-Sistani’s representative later released clarifications limiting the fatwa to a call
for volunteers to join the official armed forces. On 20 June, al -Sistani called upon
Iraq’s politicians to convene the newly elected Parliament soon and cal led upon all
Iraqis to care for those in humanitarian need. Political efforts to solve the crisis
remained limited, despite the ongoing consultations between various bloc leaders
and political and religious representatives of different interests, who gathe red twice
in June to seek joint solutions to the security crisis. On 12 June, the outgoing
Council of Representatives, whose mandate expired on 14 June, failed to vote on a
request by Prime Minister al-Maliki to impose a state of emergency, owing to a lack
of quorum.
16. During the reporting period, Iraq continued to face the challenge of the
pending adoption of its national budget for 2014, more than six months into the
financial year, owing to disagreements between the central Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government over provisions in the budget bill relating to oil
export sales targets. On 6 April, a committee representing the major political blocs
in the Council of Representatives and the Kurdistan Regional Government was
established to negotiate an agreement on the disputed provisions in the draft budget
law. Meanwhile, the resulting lack of openness in government expenditures is
impeding inward investment and Iraq’s ability to secure loans vital to its
development programmes.
17. On 22 May, the Kurdistan Regional Government announced that it had
commenced oil exports through the Ceyhan pipeline into Turkey, independently of
the Iraqi State Oil Marketing Organization. It further announced that the sales
revenues would be deposited in a Kurdistan Regional Government-controlled
account at Halkbank in Turkey and that 5 per cent would be set aside in a separate
account to meet Iraq’s continued obligations under Security Council resolutions

4/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

687 (1991) and 1483 (2003). On the same day, the Government of Iraq condemned
the sales and moved to take legal action against all who engage in transporting,
buying or selling the oil.

B.

Regional and international developments
18. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to impact Iraq, with a flow
of militants, weapons and supplies across the Iraqi-Syrian border, which has
presented a destabilizing factor in both countries. Cross-border activities by ISIS
have led to at least one major attack by Iraqi security forces inside Syrian territory;
on 27 April, Iraqi helicopters attacked an ISIS supply convoy in Wadi Suwab,
eastern Syrian Arab Republic, as it tried to enter Iraq. There were also reports of the
Syrian air force carrying out attacks against militants in the border region on
25 June. Prime Minister al-Maliki confirmed and welcomed the air strikes the same
day. The recent advances by ISIS following the takeover of Mosul on 9 June
resulted in the capture by armed groups of the Al Qaim and Al Rabiyah border
crossings between the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq.
19. During the reporting period, Iraq and the Islamic Republic of Iran enhanced
their cooperation on judicial and economic matters. Following the visit by the
Iranian Minister of Justice to Baghdad on 8 April, Iraq’s Chief Justice, Medhat
al-Mahmoud visited the Islamic Republic of Iran on 17 April and signed a
memorandum of understanding on the implementation of the last of a series of
judicial agreements between the two countries. On 11 Ma y, Deputy Prime Minister
Rozh Nuri Shaways and Acting Minister of Finance Safa al-Safi held discussions
with Iranian counterparts on bilateral cooperation in the areas of banking,
standardization and double tax exemption as well as support for investment, and
signed several economic cooperation instruments, including a bilateral protocol for
economic and investment cooperation.

III. Update on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
20. In the run-up to the 30 April elections, my Special Representative discussed
with a broad range of political and religious leaders the need for constructive
engagement in the electoral process, urging political entities to also respe ct the
independence and integrity of the Independent High Electoral Commission. He
condemned election-related violence and attacks that targeted politicians and
election candidates and called upon the Government of Iraq to ensure that both
candidates and voters would be able to campaign and exercise their right to vote in
safety. After election day, he further called upon all political entities to refrain from
actions and statements that might sway the Independent High Electoral
Commission. Since the successful conclusion of the voting, my Special
Representative has continued to discuss with political leaders the need to work
together to enable the speedy formation of a new government, based on an inclusive
national programme aimed at political stability, democratic governance, social
cohesion, economic development and the promotion of citizens’ rights.

14-56917

5/17

S/2014/485

21. During the reporting period, my Special Representative also continued to
advocate with all sides for an immediate end to the fighting in Anbar and called for
restraint in the ongoing military operations to ensure the protection of civilians. On
14 May, he visited Abu Ghraib to assess the impact of the deliberate flooding by
ISIS and called upon the Government, security forces, local authorities and tribal
leaders to work together to restore legitimate control over the management of water
resources.
22. In view of the current security crisis, my Special Representative held intensive
discussions with Iraq’s political leaders and urged them to unite at this t ime of
crisis. He also encouraged a swift and inclusive government formation process and
offered the good offices and support of UNAMI. In addition, he advocated with the
Kurdistan Regional Government to enhance its security cooperation with the central
Government in order to address the threat posed by terrorist and armed groups. On
18 and 19 June, on the margins of the forty-first session of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation Council of Foreign Ministers, held in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, my
Special Representative addressed a ministerial session of the League of Arab States
on Iraq and briefed the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait and
Turkey, as well as the Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates, on the situation in Iraq, and called for regional support to
solve the crisis. On 23 June, he briefed the European Union Foreign Affairs Council,
in Luxembourg, on the situation in Iraq, and called for support to the United Nations
humanitarian efforts.
23. In the period leading up to the formation of a new Kurdistan Regional
Government on 18 June, my Special Representative also held a series of meetings
with various political leaders from the Kurdistan Region, offering full support for
their efforts to form a new government and urging them to work in a spirit of
compromise.
24. Facilitating the adoption of the 2014 national budget remains a priority for my
Special Representative, who has been actively engaged in offering his good offices
to the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to resolve
outstanding issues, including those relating to the sharing of hydrocarbons revenue.
His efforts to bridge the gaps between the parties led to direct discussions between
Prime Minister al-Maliki and Kurdistan Regional Government Prime Minister
Barzani. He also held meetings with then Parliamentary Speaker Osama al -Nujaifi
and the Chair of the Council of Representatives Finance Committee, Haidar
al-Abadi, to facilitate agreement on a way forward on the outstanding issues in the
Council of Representatives.

B.

Electoral assistance
25. In preparing for and simultaneously administering the Council of
Representatives elections and the Governorate Council elections in the Kurdistan
Region, the Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq displayed
professionalism and flexibility in a very tense political and security environment.
26. In accordance with the UNAMI mandate, the United Nations integrated
electoral assistance team, comprising UNAMI, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS),
continued to provide substantive advice and technical assistance to the Independent

6/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

High Electoral Commission throughout the electoral process. Since new procedures
were being used for the first time, including the introduction of electoral technology
and a full ballot recount, special attention was paid to maximizing the integrity and
inclusiveness of the process.
27. Technical operations were successfully conducted, although security and
logistics remained extremely challenging in Anbar, Ninewa, Salah al -Din, Diyalah
and Kirkuk. During the controversy over the candidate vetting process, my Special
Representative held several meetings that contributed to the withdrawal of the
collective resignation tendered by the Independent High Electoral Commission’s
Board of Commissioners, thus enabling the timely conclusion of electoral
preparations.
28. Coordinated efforts between the Independent High Electoral Co mmission and
the United Nations encouraged the presence of national and international observers.
Over 160,000 political entity agents, 72,000 domestic observers and 2,300 media
representatives were accredited to observe the polls and guard against irregula rities,
providing a significant contribution to the integrity of the election process. About
221 international observers, including the League of Arab States, monitored the
elections. Public assessments by both national and international observer
organizations were positive and provided constructive recommendations for
enhancing future electoral processes.
29. The Gender Committee of the Independent High Electoral Commission and the
United Nations integrated gender task force on elections worked together to ensure
the collection of gender-disaggregated election data as well as the implementation
of activities designed to reach out and disseminate gender-focused electoral
information to women’s groups and organizations. Election day statistics issued by
the Independent High Electoral Commission show that 42 per cent of those who
voted were women. A total of 22 women were elected to the Council of
Representatives, qualifying in their own right, outside the legal quota mechanisms;
they nevertheless count towards the 25 per cent of seats reserved for women. The
total number of women in the new Council of Representatives is 82, or 25 per cent,
of the 328 total seats.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
30. Communities in Iraq continued to suffer from acts of violence and insecurity
based on their ethnic and religious affiliations. In particular, such attacks targeted
members of the Turkmen, Yezidi, Shabak and Christian communities. The deadliest
attack was on the Shabak community on 23 April in a marke t in Bayboukh, Mosul,
with 11 civilians killed and 42 others wounded. UNAMI continued to promote
respect for the rights of Iraq’s diverse ethnic and religious communities. From 26 to
28 March, in cooperation with the Alliance of Iraqi Minorities, UNAMI org anized a
conference bringing together representatives of Iraq’s ethnic, religious, linguistic
and cultural communities, to discuss ways to guarantee their protection from
violence and to ensure their full and equal participation in the social, political an d
economic life of Iraq. The conference led to the adoption of a declaration of
principles on the rights of minorities and a road map for legal, institutional and
policy reforms. On 21 May, UNAMI and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), together with representatives from the

14-56917

7/17

S/2014/485

Government of Iraq, civil society and various communities, marked the World Day
for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development by organizing a panel
discussion and cultural events.
31. UNAMI continued to monitor places of detention under the authority of the
Ministry of Justice. While noting some improvement in infrastructure and basic
services in some facilities, UNAMI remains concerned about overcrowding and
poor living conditions owing to lack of natural light and ventilation, as well as the
lack of appropriate medical facilities and medicines. UNAMI continues to receive
reports of individuals being arrested during security operations without any
evidence of wrongdoing and allegations of detainees held in facilities run by the
Ministry of the Interior and Anti-Terrorism Directorate being tortured and ill-treated
to extract confessions. UNAMI continued to observe cases of individuals held in
detention without charge or trial for prolonged periods, in particular those charged
under the Anti-Terrorism Law, and of persons remaining in detention despite
dismissal of their cases by the courts or completion of their sentences, owing to the
length of time taken by the Ministry of the Interior to co nfirm whether there were
pending charges against them. Negotiations with the Ministry of the Interior to
allow UNAMI unrestricted access to monitor places of detention continue.
32. With regard to respect for fair trial standards, in particular in relatio n to
individuals charged under the Anti-Terrorism Law, UNAMI has observed that the
courts often fail to properly investigate allegations by accused persons whose
confessions were obtained through the use of torture and that the courts frequently
rely solely on such confessions or the untested testimony of secret informants.
33. Iraq continues to carry out executions of persons sentenced to death. Since the
beginning of 2014, Iraq has carried out 52 executions, including of two men
convicted under the Anti-Terrorism Law on 6 April. My repeated calls for a
moratorium on the implementation of the death penalty in compliance with relevant
General Assembly resolutions continue to go unheeded by the Government of Iraq.
The Kurdistan Regional Government continues to apply an unofficial moratorium on
the death penalty.
34. UNAMI, UNDP and UNOPS continued their work to support the Iraqi High
Commission for Human Rights, in particular commencing the implementation of a
capacity-building plan developed in consultation with the Commission and its staff,
funded by the European Union. The lack of agreement on the election of a Chair or
Vice-Chair of the Board of Commissioners, in addition to the absence of a
secretariat to support the Commission’s activities, has negativel y impacted its work.
Despite these challenges, the Board of Commissioners reached an agreement with
the High Judicial Council to establish a referral mechanism for human rights
violations. On 9 April, UNAMI and UNOPS visited the recently established
headquarters of the Commission. UNAMI provided human rights publications as a
first step towards the creation of the Commission’s human rights library, which will
be accessible to all Iraqis once the Commission becomes fully operational.
35. Attacks on media professionals continued during the reporting period. On
22 March, the Bureau Chief of Radio Free Iraq, Mohammed Bdaiwi, was killed by
an officer of the Presidential Guard in Baghdad. My Special Representative issued a
statement condemning the incident and calling for the person responsible to be
brought to justice. On 28 April, in Mosul, an improvised explosive device wounded

8/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

six media staff travelling in a convoy with the Iraqi army on their way to cover the
special voting process.
36. Respect for women’s rights continues to be of concern. UNAMI, together with
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), UNDP and civil society organizations, repeatedly raised concerns
about the Jaafari personal status bill and its compliance with international human
rights standards. After its approval by the Council of Ministers on 25 February, the
bill was referred to the Council of Representatives, which subsequently returned it
to the Council of Ministers owing to procedural defec ts. Meanwhile, the draft family
protection law, aimed at protecting victims of domestic violence, remains under
review by the Council of Ministers. On a positive note, on 1 April, the Council of
Ministers approved the National Strategy for the Advancement of Women (20142018). This strategy complements the national action plan on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), which was launched by the Government in February. On
2 April, my Special Representative opened a conference to discuss the
recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women. The conference was organized by UN-Women and UNDP, in cooperation
with the State Ministry for Women’s Affairs.
37. Armed violence and terrorism continued to claim the lives of children in Iraq.
The technical working group on grave child rights violations of the country task
force on monitoring and reporting, co-chaired by my Deputy Special Representative
together with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), documented 150 child
casualties (32 killed and 118 wounded) in the first quarter of the year. Several
attacks targeting schools used as polling stations were also reported during the
election period. Two allegations of child use and recruitment for suicide attacks by
armed opposition groups were documented in Ramadi in March and April, but could
not be independently verified. A formal mechanism for collaboration on child
protection between the technical working group and the Governm ent of Iraq in order
to address these concerns remains to be established.
Camp Hurriya temporary transit location
38. UNAMI continues to monitor the human rights and humanitarian situation of
the residents of Camp Hurriya and to facilitate solutions to camp management issues
between the Government of Iraq and the residents’ representatives pursuant to the
memorandum of understanding of 25 December 2011 between the Government of
Iraq and UNAMI. On 23 April, the Government of Iraq completed the installat ion of
1,488 large “T-walls” around 15 assembly areas within Camp Hurriya to increase
residents’ security. Additionally, to date, a total of 696 small T-walls, 445 bunkers
and 95,000 sandbags have been allowed into the camp.
39. United Nations monitors continued to receive reports from current and former
Camp Hurriya residents of restrictions placed on them by the camp’s leadership.
These claims included the prevention of contact with family members both inside
and outside the camp, the requirement of permission to interact with other residents
and the inability to access medical care provided by the Ministry of Health within
the camp without first obtaining permission from the leadership. As at 31 May,
3,160 residents had been registered with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 3,097 of whom have been processed. A total
of 2,434 individuals were determined to have international protection needs. The

14-56917

9/17

S/2014/485

United Nations continues to seek durable solutions for the residents thro ugh
resettlement, consular and humanitarian channels. To date, 379 individuals have
been relocated outside Iraq, of which 30 left for Albania as a result of direct
negotiations between the leadership of the Mojahedin-e-Khalq Organization and the
Government of Albania, 116 were relocated through consular readmission to nine
countries, 212 were relocated through humanitarian admission to three countries and
21 were relocated through resettlement channels to five countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Norway, Spain, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. Furthermore, three individuals voluntarily repatriated to the
Islamic Republic of Iran during the reporting period, with the facilitation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
40. Under the auspices of UNHCR and my Special Adviser for the Relocation of
Camp Hurriya Residents Outside of Iraq, Jane Holl Lute, a meeting took place in
Geneva on 26 June to discuss relocation opportunities for Camp Hurriya residents.
Some 20 Member States and several international organizations, including ICRC
and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) were in attendance. All
participants took note of the urgency of resolving this issue. Ms. Holl Lute, in close
coordination with UNHCR, continues to work with a wide range of stakeholders to
find relocation solutions for the remaining 2,746 residents. Throughout the reporting
period, she visited several cities, including Berlin, Brussels, Geneva, London, Oslo,
New York and Washington, D.C., to discuss potential relocation arrangements with
key governmental officials, United Nations agencies and other stakeholders. On
28 March, my Special Adviser, at the request of the European Union Political and
Security Committee briefed European Union Member States on the current situation
of the relocation of Camp Hurriya residents. During the reporting period, the
Government of the Republic of Korea approved a $100,000 contribution to the
United Nations Trust Fund for the relocation of the residents ou tside Iraq.

D.

Humanitarian assistance and development
41. The conflict in Iraq’s west and north-western governorates has continued to
exacerbate the humanitarian situation, with over a million people displaced since
January. The Anbar crisis has displaced 93,108 families to date, according to
Government figures. United Nations monitoring of conditions for the displaced
indicates that significant needs remain, in particular temporary shelter and
affordable rental accommodation, water and sanitation, me dical supplies, access to
health-care facilities, cash for food and non-food items and education. Access
continues to be problematic for all humanitarian actors, including the Ministry of
Migration and Displacement, which has not been able to carry out reg istrations of
internally displaced persons in many parts of Anbar.
42. In April, the United Nations protection cluster conducted in -depth householdlevel interviews and provided relevant support, including legal assistance, legal
advocacy with local authorities, referrals for social welfare, medical assistance and
cash assistance. Since March, a total of 9,155 displaced families have been assessed,
while 804 most vulnerable families have been provided with cash assistance
totalling $398,600. During the reporting period, the United Nations humanitarian
country team also provided support to the Ministry of Migration and Displacement
to enhance its registration activities and to establish child -friendly spaces.

10/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

43. Since the onset of the Anbar crisis in January, UNHCR has distributed 235
tents, in addition to other core relief kits. The World Food Programme (WFP) has
distributed 18,122 food parcels. UNICEF has delivered 42,213 water and sanitation
and hygiene emergency kits and IOM has delivered 8,250 non-food items. The
World Health Organization (WHO) has delivered two emergency health kits meeting
the needs of 20,000 persons, and one trauma kit for 100 major surgical operations.
In addition, UNICEF has provided 90 fully equipped tents to schools in Khalidiyah ,
Amariyat, Fallujah and Heet to enable educational access for approximately 7,000
displaced students. UNICEF has also mobilized communities in Rawa, Ana and
Heet to promote school attendance and strengthen relations between the host
community and displaced persons. In April, UNICEF commenced the rehabilitation
of 34 schools in Al Qaim, where 211 families of internally displaced persons from
Anbar and 247 Syrian refugee families are hosted. With the Al Qaim camp and
surrounding areas under ISIS control since 13 June, more than 60 families have left
the camp towards the Syrian Arab Republic, while other families have sought shelter
within the Al Qaim community.
44. Over 40,000 families in the Abu Ghraib district have been affected by
deliberate flooding, with 20,000 families displaced. A total of 200,000 square metres
of land have been inundated and 49 villages, including 10,406 houses, have been
partially submerged. Forty-nine schools have been closed, with two schools
destroyed, affecting 12,173 schoolchildren. Two public health clinics are unusable
and two more are at risk of submerging. The floodwaters have mixed with sewage
and stagnant water, significantly increasing the risk of waterborne and infectious
diseases. In response, since 27 April, UNHCR and IOM have distributed 1,043 core
relief items, while UNHCR is in the process of providing 420 of the most vulnerable
families with cash assistance. Also since 27 April, WFP has distributed 2,500 food
parcels and UNICEF has distributed 2,500 hygiene kits and potable water. WHO is
working with the Ministry of Health to ensure the delivery of medical supplies and
to monitor the environmental and health impacts of contaminated water.
45. The conflict in Iraq’s north-western and north-central provinces has resulted in
an additional displacement of more than 650,000 people, bringing the total number
of displaced since January to approximately 1.2 million people. Since 6 June,
approximately 100,000 internally displaced persons have entered Erbil, 200,000
have entered Dohuk and 6,000 have entered Kirkuk. The United Nations country
team and humanitarian country team are providing relief to those internally
displaced persons who are accessible, including but not limited to several thousands
of food parcels, family hygiene kits, core relief items, tents, emergency health kits,
reproductive health kits and non-food items from WFP, UNICEF, UNHCR, WHO,
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and IOM.
46. The strategic response plan originally prepared in response to the Anbar crisis
was revised and expanded in June to take into account the new displacements in
north and central Iraq and the potential for further displacement. The aim is to
secure $312.1 million to meet the needs of 1.5 million internally displaced persons .
On 1 July, the Government of Saudi Arabia announced that it would contribute
$500 million to support the United Nations response efforts. This sum is in addition
to $42.1 million pledged or secured from the Central Emergency Response Fund.
47. As at 15 June, 225,475 Syrian refugees in Iraq (41 per cent of whom are
women) had been registered by UNHCR, while an additional 13,120 are awaiting

14-56917

11/17

S/2014/485

registration. Forty-six per cent are residing in 10 camps, 9 of which are located in
the Kurdistan Region, while the rest of the refugees are living in host communities.
In addition, around 1,000 Syrians are estimated to be waiting to cross into Iraq. The
Syrian Arab Republic-Iraq border crossing at Peshkhabour has been closed since
10 April, reducing both the flow of Syrians into Iraq, as well as Syrians wishing to
return. The trench built in the Kurdistan Region, along Iraq’s border with the Syrian
Arab Republic has further slowed the influx of refugees. The presence of Syrian
refugees is straining the capacity of the Kurdistan Regional Government to provide
adequate social services, while also creating economic pressures. The reduction in
the transit of goods between Iraq and Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic
as a result of the conflict is having a negative i mpact on the capacity of the
Kurdistan Regional Government to address the refugee situation.
48. In view of the need to move beyond humanitarian responses alone, the United
Nations facilitated the participation of the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government in a comprehensive regional strategy framework meeting held
in Amman on 16 April, convened by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. The meeting exposed Iraqi participants to strategies, policies
and programmes adopted by other host Governments in the region that seek to better
integrate refugee responses within broader socioeconomic development
programmes.
49. During the reporting period, in order to strengthen the capacity of the
Kurdistan Regional Government in emergency coordination and utilization of
external assistance, UNAMI assisted with the establishment of strategic crisis
management and response mechanisms. UNHCR also continued to provide
protection assistance, shelter and core relief items to all in -camp families, as well as
support to host communities and non-camp refugees through targeted livelihood
projects and quick-impact projects, of which 60 have been completed to date. The
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) provided water and
sewerage connections to houses accommodating refugees and distributed water
tanks. During the reporting period, UNHCR, UNICEF and the Development and
Modification Centre in Dohuk signed an agreement to improve the sanitation
infrastructure and internal roads in Domiz camp in Dohuk governorate.
50. UNICEF responded to the education needs of 13,296 Syrian refugee children
by establishing 16 primary schools in nine camps in four governorates, resulting in a
34 per cent increase in the school enrolment rate for refugee children during the
reporting period. In March and April, UNESCO built two secondary schools in
Darashakran and Kawergosk refugee camps to provide 750 high school -aged
children with a safe learning environment and also procured school furniture and
stationery items for 750 students and 50 teachers. UNESCO is implementing a
series of activities to ensure access to education and livelihood development for
350 illiterate Syrian refugees in Dohuk, with an emphasis on vulnerable youth and
women.
51. During the reporting period, WFP and UNHCR conducted a joint assessment
mission to determine food security and nutritional needs of both camp and
non-camp refugees in the Kurdistan Region. They also led a multi -sector needs
assessment for non-camp Syrian refugees in April and May, aiming to provide
relevant data to guide future programmes for meeting the needs of the most
vulnerable cases.

12/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

52. In March, WHO extended its Early Warning and Response Network to eight
refugee camps in the Kurdistan Region. On 30 March, the Ministry of Health
confirmed that a baby in Baghdad had contracted the wild polio virus, with genetic
indication that the virus had originated in the Syrian Arab Republic. Four more
cases of the virus have since been confirmed. From 6 to 10 April, U NICEF and
WHO, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health, led a national polio
immunization campaign, targeting 5,715,936 children under the age of five. The
second round of immunization took place from 13 to 17 May, targeting 210,257
children under five in Anbar. WHO is working with the Ministry of Health to ensure
that a functional polio outbreak surveillance and response system is in place.
53. On 2 April, my Special Representative and Deputy Prime Minister Shaways
signed the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for the period 20152019. The Framework will complement the National Development Plan by
contributing to building the legitimacy of institutions and strengthening the bonds of
Iraqi society. The new Framework promotes social cohesion through two priorities:
improving the performance and responsiveness of targeted national and subnational
institutions; and addressing acute vulnerability and participation gaps. A total of
$838 million over five years is sought for the full implementatio n of the
programmes proposed by the United Nations country team to achieve the
Framework outcomes. This amount is less than half of that sought for the current
Framework, reflecting a more strategic focus and a realistic appraisal of a less
favourable resource climate for development assistance for Iraq.
54. Activities under the current Framework continued during the reporting period.
Following the endorsement by the Council of Ministers of the Public Administration
reform road map on 21 March, the United Nations has started supporting the
implementation of a national workplan, with a separate programme developed for
the Kurdistan Region. Under the Iraq public sector modernization programme,
supported jointly by eight United Nations agencies, the Council of Representatives
Committee on Regions and Provinces revised the Provincial Powers Act and passed
the second amendment to the Act. In March, United Nations agencies assisted the
Government in establishing a senior executive service system, as well as
e-governance systems at the federal and local levels and initiated e -portals for quick
access to information for national ministries and governorates. As a result of the
concerted efforts by United Nations agencies, by the end of March, the national
statistics system had been modernized and the code of ethics for national statistics
had been issued. In addition, the National Health Policy was developed and
endorsed by the Government in March.
55. Education remains a focus under the current Framework. In March an d April,
UNESCO, in collaboration with the German centre of excellence, trained
38 officials from the education sector on management and leadership. UNESCO also
trained 64 researchers from the University of Suleymaniyah on modern teaching and
research techniques. On 2 April, UNICEF facilitated a regional conference in Erbil
on positive discipline in schools, which resulted in recommendations to review
existing laws and regulations and to develop a framework for positive discipline.
From 13 to 15 May, UNICEF, in collaboration with Dohuk University and New York
University, facilitated a conference on using education to promote peacebuilding
and social cohesion in Iraq. Following the conference, UNICEF signed a
memorandum of understanding with the two universities to continue cooperation on
using education for peacebuilding in Iraq.

14-56917

13/17

S/2014/485

56. On 27 April, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UNDP, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and UNESCO
developed a draft regional master plan to combat sand and dust storms. UNEP and
UNDP also agreed to work towards the signing of a tripartite cooperation agreement
among Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Kuwait to jointly track dust storms as
a high-impact transboundary environment problem.
57. In April 2014, UNICEF facilitated a regional consultation on disaster risk
reduction, with the participation of over 84 Iraqi and Syrian children and young
people in the Kurdistan Region. A similar consultation was held in April in Basra for
the southern governorates, resulting in all six directorates of education adopting the
Disaster Risk Reduction in School initiative. Consequently, the directorates
established local disaster risk reduction committees comprised of students,
community members, the Ministry of Education and UNICEF.
58. During the reporting period, to accelerate Government efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, WHO, in coordination with UNICEF and UNFPA,
developed and launched a maternal mortality surveillance syst em. WHO, UNICEF
and UNFPA also collaborated with the Government to implement a five -year
reproductive, maternal and child health national strategy and action plan.
59. During the reporting period, UN-Habitat, in collaboration with the
Government, launched a new initiative to support land policy reform with the
Global Land Tool Network. On 10 April, UNDP signed a landmark agreement with
the High Judicial Council to reform the legal and judicial sector in Iraq; the
Government has committed to provide human and financial resources for the
implementation of this agreement. On 30 April, UNDP, in collaboration with the
Government of Iraq, completed the building of an electricity substation in
Suleymanyah, expected to provide 500,000 people with electricity.
60. From 1 April to 30 June, UNICEF conducted a child poverty analysis in Iraq.
The results will be used to influence the reform of Iraq’s national poverty reduction
strategy, in particular to ensure alleviation of child poverty. UNICEF is also
supporting the Government in evidence-based analysis and development planning to
address the causes of child deprivation.
61. Protection activities also focused on gender issues. On 24 April, UNDP and the
Ministry of the Interior launched the first database to track domes tic and genderbased violence cases in the Kurdistan Region. The database will provide key data
for monitoring and investigating cases of domestic and gender-based violence and
for formulating policies to combat such violence in the Kurdistan Region.
Security and operational issues
62. During the reporting period, the deteriorating security environment prompted
the United Nations to take mitigating measures, including restrictions on
movements, as well as a temporary reduction in staff in some locatio ns as a
precaution. The safety of United Nations operations has been reassessed on a
continuous basis.
63. Owing to the recent prevailing security situation, human rights monitors and
UNHCR staff were relocated from Baghdad Airport/Camp Hurriya and contin ued
their duties remotely.

14/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

64. On 22 June, insurgents took control of the UNHCR field office in Al Qaim
area, including equipment and two armoured vehicles. No United Nations staff were
in the compound at the time.
65. Notwithstanding the Organization’s efforts and my personal intercession with
the Government, it still has not been possible to conclude a status -of-mission
agreement for UNAMI, more than 11 years after the Mission was first established.
The absence of an agreement continues to significantly hamper and impair effective
United Nations operations in Iraq. While some progress has been made, with
non-holders of United Nations laissez-passer being granted free multiple-entry visas
and not being fined for overstay penalties, the largely cumbersome e ntry and exit
procedures for United Nations personnel persist, and have negatively impacted, in
particular, the regular rotation and deployment of members of the United Nations
Guard Unit. This has caused delays in their deployment and impeded planning. Th e
lack of an agreement also places staff at risk in the event of an incident, as standard
provisions on the arrest and jurisdiction of United Nations personnel, including
members of the Guard Unit, have not been agreed to. Customs clearance of United
Nations material also continues to be a lengthy process, impeding the Mission’s
ability to implement its mandate.

IV. Observations
66. I wish to stress to the Security Council the gravity of the political and security
challenges facing Iraq today, which may have devastating implications for the
stability of the country and the region as a whole. The international community,
including countries in the region, must stand in solidarity with Iraq at this time of
crisis. At the same time, Iraqi leaders must rise above narrow political or sectarian
interest to confront the most serious challenges to the country in years.
67. The rapidly deteriorating security situation, where ISIS -led armed elements
have taken control of large swathes of territory is deeply worri some. I strongly
condemn the upsurge of violence at the hands of ISIS and its supporters and call
upon Member States, including Iraq’s neighbours, to come together and support Iraq
in its fight against terrorism. Member States must meet their obligation to
implement and enforce the targeted financial sanctions, arms embargo and travel
ban imposed on ISIS. Terrorism must not be allowed to succeed in steering Iraq
away from its path towards stability and democracy.
68. Reports of mass summary executions by ISIS are extremely disturbing, and
terrorists’ use of water as a weapon, which has led to deliberate flooding and
consequent displacement of people and destruction of property, presents a dangerous
trend. Additional reports of grave human rights and humanitarian law violations are
gravely disturbing. Victims include members of the military and civilians, including
women, religious leaders, minorities, children and others. I call upon all parties to
respect their international legal obligations, in particular human rights, humanitarian
and refugee laws, in the areas under their control. The Government of Iraq must
ensure timely investigation of reported violations so that perpetrators may be held to
account without delay. It is also imperative that the Government of Iraq do
everything possible to protect civilians while confronting the terrorist threat.
69. The humanitarian situation in Iraq remains a grave concern. Iraq now holds
one of the largest populations of internally displaced persons in the world. I u rge the

14-56917

15/17

S/2014/485

Government of Iraq and the donor community to provide support to the strategic
response plan for Iraq, which will allow the United Nations to continue to deliver
urgently needed humanitarian aid without threatening its concurrent assistance to
Syrian refugees in Iraq.
70. On 30 April, the people of Iraq demonstrated determination to exercise their
democratic right to vote and elect representatives who will determine the country’s
future. I commend the Independent High Electoral Commission for havin g
conducted the complex Council of Representatives elections with professionalism. It
is now incumbent upon Iraq’s political representatives to reach agreement on a
government that represents the will of the Iraqi people and that will serve Iraq’s
future stability and development.
71. The unfolding crisis also provides a window of opportunity that must be seized
upon and fully guided by processes and timelines determined by the Constitution.
The spirit of national unity and reconciliation, non-sectarianism and non-violence
recently expressed by Iraq’s political and religious leaders must prevail at this
critical time. I urge Iraq’s leaders to unite behind an Iraqi -led comprehensive and
sustainable political process acceptable to all. The swift formation of a new
government in the spirit of national unity and inclusiveness remains critical.
72. The next steps towards an immediate and long-term solution should include:
(i) a broad-based national security plan that includes explicit guidelines for
cooperation between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government; (ii) an action plan to address the threat posed by all armed groups,
based on a comprehensive assessment of the armed groups that fight together with
ISIS; (iii) a sustainable and inclusive political process with the speedy formation of
a new government; and (iv) an equitable social policy to address the concerns of all
communities. My Special Representative will continue to provide and intensify his
good offices with all concerned to support Iraq in implementing these steps and
overcoming this crisis.
73. Relations between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government continue to be of concern. It is essential that disagreements over oil
sales, revenue-sharing and outstanding provisions of the draft national budget law
be addressed. This will ensure that productive cooperation can resume. Other
long-standing issues, such as administrative boundaries, natural resources control,
minority rights and the establishment of the Federation Council also need to be
addressed.
74. I remain concerned about the lack of standards and respect for due process
among Iraq’s law enforcement agencies, in particular regarding arrests and
detentions that have been carried out pursuant to the Anti-Terrorism Law of 2005.
Similarly, I lament Iraq’s continued use of the death penalty despite my repeated
calls for a moratorium on executions in compliance with relevant General Assembly
resolutions.
75. I continue to reiterate my appeal to Member States to contribute to a durable
solution for the relocation of Camp Hurriya residents outside of Iraq and to come
forward with offers to accept residents into their territories. I also encourage
Member States to generously contribute to the established United Nations Trust
Fund for that purpose. The Government of Iraq should continue to do its utmost to

16/17

14-56917

S/2014/485

ensure the safety and security of Camp Hurriya residents until they have all been
relocated.
76. I urge donors to contribute to the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework priorities to enable the full implementation of the Framework’s
programmes. These programmes complement Iraq’s National Development Plan and
will contribute to building social cohesion and legitimate institutions. Progress in
these areas will allow the Government of Iraq to demonstrate its continued efforts
towards sustainable recovery and development for vulnerable communities.
77. I am deeply troubled by the continued absence of a status-of-mission
agreement for UNAMI. I once again call upon the Government of Iraq to cooperate
with the United Nations in taking swift action to ensure its finalization and entry
into force. I also seek the support of the Security Council in encouraging the
Government to ensure the earliest possible resolution of this issue.
78. Lastly, I thank my Special Representative, Nickolay Mladenov, and the men
and women of the United Nations in Iraq for their tireless and often courageous
efforts. They will continue to support the Government of Iraq and all Iraqi p eople at
this time of crisis. I trust that international partners, including members of the
Security Council and Iraq’s neighbours, will continue to support my Special
Representative as he implements his mandate.

14-56917

17/17
