S/PV.8579

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8579th meeting

Thursday, 18 July 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Popolizio Bardales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Elé Ela
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alahmad
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Strengthening partnerships for successful nationally-owned transitions
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/540)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22253 (E)
*1922253*

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

(spoke in English)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Strengthening partnerships for successful
nationally-owned transitions
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/540)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Haiti and
Timor-Leste to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Bocchit Edmond, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Worship of Haiti, and His Excellency Mr. Fidelis
Leite Magalhães, Minister for Legal Reforms and
Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Franck
Bousquet, Senior Director, Fragility, Conflict and
Violence Group of the World Bank; Mr. Yero Baldeh,
Director, Transition States Coordination Office of
the African Development Bank; and His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/540, which contains a letter dated
27 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative of
Peru to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for convening this meeting.
2/28

18/07/2019

United Nations special political missions and
peacekeeping operations are some of our most
effective tools to promote and maintain international
peace and security, but they are temporary. We are
strengthening our focus on moments of transition,
when our missions are reconfigured or leave the
country. A mission transition is usually the result
of progress towards peace. It is a moment of hope,
potential and promise — an opportunity to re-engage
and re-energize our commitment. It is a time to help
national Governments themselves take forward policies
and programmes that address the root causes of crises
and conflicts and to put the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the centre of our efforts.
But mission transitions also pose risks. The
international community may pay less attention to the
country concerned. Strategic gains achieved during
decades of international support can hang in the balance
and the loss of life, economic devastation and reversal
of development gains caused by a relapse into conflict
can go far beyond the country’s borders.
We must learn from previous examples, including
those of Timor-Leste and Côte d’Ivoire, which provide
important lessons on partnership and continuity.
Nationally-owned and forward-looking transitions
are therefore a priority for the entire United Nations
system. As national authorities and communities
assume increased responsibilities for security and
peacebuilding tasks, they need the continued support
of reinvigorated United Nations country teams and
multilateral and bilateral partners so that their path
towards durable peace and development is irreversible.
We must prioritize and strengthen partnerships with
national stakeholders across the United Nations system
and with international financial institutions and Member
States for collective action to ensure their success.
The United Nations role in transition processes
must be comprehensive and coherent and work in an
integrated way to address the interlinked and often
stubborn drivers of conflict: poverty, exclusion,
inequality, discrimination and violations of human
rights, exacerbated by climate change and the movement
of people. Our ongoing reform process is enabling more
joined-up engagement in support of national efforts
along the entire peace continuum, from the deployment
of a peacekeeping or political mission to withdrawal
or reconfiguration.
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

But the United Nations cannot and does not handle
the transition of a peace operation alone. Many other
institutions and groups are involved. As I mentioned
earlier, Governments are the most important partners,
but donors, international and regional organizations,
international financial institutions, civil society, local
institutions and the business community all play
an essential role. The United Nations can add great
value by bringing ideas expertise and resources from
different sectors together around nationally determined
priorities. The changing nature of our support
puts greater responsibility on us to collaborate, to
communicate and to participate in a collective effort in
which everyone has a role to play and a stake in success.
I welcome representatives from the World Bank
and the African Development Bank here today. They
have been extremely valuable partners in several of
the transition processes we have witnessed. Strong
partnerships between the United Nations and other
organizations, including regional and subregional
organizations and international financial institutions,
can help avoid a sudden drop-off in support as our
presence is reconfigured. We already have successful
models to inform transition processes. For example,
in 2016, the United Nations, the World Bank and the
European Union supported the Government of the
Central African Republic in drawing up a national
recovery and peacebuilding plan, and donors have
pledged $2.2 billion to implement it.
The convening power and advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the President of which is
with us today, has also proven to be an effective way to
enhance coherence among stakeholders and ensure the
continued attention of the international community to
longer-term needs. The Peacebuilding Fund’s transition
window now covers two years before and five years
after a mission drawdown. I encourage all Member
States to donate to these important resource and to
substantially increase its capacity.
Earlier this year, I made transitions a corporate
priority for the United Nations and I have dedicated
special attention to transition contexts in several
countries. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the country
team have been working with the Government on
a comprehensive transition strategy. This year,
UNAMID made $32 million of its budget available for
joint activities with the United Nations country team in
priority areas, including the rule of law, human rights

S/PV. 8579

and durable solutions for displaced people, in close
coordination with the Government.
In Haiti, the peace and development pillars of the
United Nations have formulated a common approach
to support the rule of law and governance institutions
since the establishment of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti in 2017. The country team
is finalizing a package of projects in priority areas
identified by the Haitian Government, including
some to be financed for the first time in Haiti by the
Peacebuilding Fund. Working with the European
Union, we have allocated $12 million in funding from
the Spotlight Initiative to combat gender-based violence
over the next three years.
In Colombia, we have responded to the
Government’s request for support for the peace process
with two successive political missions, working in close
cooperation with our country team. I also welcome
initiatives under way here at Headquarters to provide
more holistic support. For example, the Department of
Peace Operations and UN-Women have developed a
joint initiative on gender-responsive conflict analysis
that has informed planning for our integrated office
in Haiti.
Countries that are healing after conflict may
face urgent and complex challenges, including
disarmament and security sector reform, reconciliation
and accountability processes and corruption. These
countries require multifaceted support for political
leadership, strong and inclusive institutions, the rule
of law, human rights, gender equality and sustainable
development to address the root causes of conflict.
Transitional justice and accountability for serious
crimes and human rights abuses are essential to securing
lasting peace. We are committed to advancing the four
pillars of transitional justice: truth, to acknowledge the
atrocities committed; justice, so perpetrators are held
accountable; reparations, so victims and communities
are compensated for harm they have suffered; and, last
but not least, putting in place reforms so that atrocities
and serious crime will never happen again.
The United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework is a central tool for multilateral
support under the leadership of the strengthened and
empowered resident coordinator system. Our regional
political offices also support resident coordinators
and the United Nations country teams to consolidate
peacebuilding gains in the post-mission phase. For

19-222533/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

18/07/2019

example, the good offices provided by the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel were
critical to addressing the political crisis in Liberia
following the 2017 presidential elections.

ago. These figures demonstrate that if we are to end
extreme poverty by 2030 and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, we must focus our collective
efforts on addressing fragility, conflict and violence.

Delivering on the promise of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development means delivering for
those who have been left furthest behind — people in
countries affected by conflict and crisis. The United
Nations is strongly committed to supporting countries
as they strive to heal after conflicts and fulfil their
aspirations for peace, stability and a better future. We
will continue to bring stronger partnerships to improve
coherence and increase accountability across the
peace continuum.

The World Bank Group has indeed significantly
scaled up its investment on this agenda in recent years by
doubling our financial resources from $7 to $14 billion
for low-income, fragile and conflict-affected situations,
as part of the International Development Association
(IDA), our fund for the poorest countries.

In return, I urge all to remain engaged with countries
where United Nations missions are in transition to
deliver the 2030 Agenda and sustainable peace for the
people we all serve.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bousquet.
Mr. Bousquet: At the outset, I am very grateful
for the opportunity to appear before the Council today.
On behalf of the World Bank’s Chief Executive
Officer, Kristalina Georgieva, allow me to commend
the leadership of the United Nations and the members
of the Security Council, particularly the presidency of
Peru, for organizing this crucial meeting.
The issue at hand today — how to effectively
support countries impacted by fragility, conflict and
violence — is one of the key challenges of our time. For
the World Bank Group, it is absolutely central to our
mission of eradicating extreme poverty.
Over the past three decades, the international
community has made impressive strides in reducing
poverty around the world. However, we know that
poverty is, in fact, rising in countries impacted by
fragility, conflict and violence, and it is estimated
that, if business continues as usual, by 2030 around
50 per cent of the global extreme poor will live in those
fragile settings. Furthermore, we know that levels of
conflict are on the rise. In fact, we see more violent
conflicts today than in the past 30 years, and we have
unprecedented numbers of people fleeing conflict
and violence, with over 70 million forcibly displaced
people around the world — double the level of 20 years
4/28

While financing is essential, we also know that it
is not enough. Indeed, we must do things differently
if we are to make a positive and lasting change in
fragile settings. That is why we shifted our approach
under IDA to invest in prevention; to support refugees
and host communities, in recognition that it is both a
humanitarian and a development challenge; and to
catalyse private sector investment in the most difficult
environments. Perhaps more importantly, we have
scaled up our partnerships across the humanitarian,
development and peace nexus. Let me commend the
Secretary-General for his personal leadership on this
matter. In his briefing, he clearly and compellingly
spelled out the need for a more coherent approach
that builds on the complementarities and comparative
advantages of all actors.
In this context, we at the World Bank are very
pleased about the strong partnership between the United
Nations and the World Bank Group — the Partnership
Framework for Crisis-Affected Situations — which has
in fact helped us deepen our cooperation on the ground
in over 40 countries impacted by fragility, conflict
and violence. Furthermore, we have strengthened
partnerships with a diverse range of actors
beyond the United Nations, including the African
Development Bank, the European Union (EU),
civil society organizations and bilateral partners,
through what we call joint diagnostics, joint recovery,
peacebuilding
assessments
and
on-the-ground
operational engagements.
For example, in response to the deteriorating
situation in Burkina Faso, we are currently working
in full cooperation with the United Nations under the
leadership of the Peacebuilding Support Office, the
EU and the African Development Bank to support the
country through a joint prevention and peacebuilding
assessment. This type of engagement is critical
to exploring how we can collectively support the
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Government’s efforts to promote peace and maintain
social cohesion, and to ensuring that scaled-up support
from international partners is well coordinated and
aligned, with a comprehensive strategy that links
prevention, relief, recovery and development.
Despite the important progress made, we know that
more needs to be done. That is why the World Bank
Group is building on the progress made under IDA
and now developing the first strategy to address the
challenges posed by fragility, conflict and violence.
We know that providing development support in fragile
settings is different than in non-fragile settings, given
the low capacity, insecurity and often fractured social
contract that characterize those environments.
Therefore, our forthcoming strategy will be
aligned with the sustaining peace agenda and aimed
at ensuring that our approach fully supports the most
vulnerable communities and effectively contributes to
the international community’s efforts to promote peace
and prosperity. Concretely, the strategy will propose
tailoring our interventions to diverse situations of
fragility, while respecting our mandate as a development
actor and working in close partnership with the United
Nations and other actors. This is critical, as we know
that in order to maximize our impact on the ground, we
must address the distinct root causes of fragility and
offer solutions adapted to the specific local context. Let
me therefore highlight four key pillars of engagement
on which we are currently focusing our efforts.
The first pillar is prevention. We are scaling up
our investment, as a development actor, in prevention
in order to more effectively address risks before they
turn into full-blown crises. Prevention saves lives
and resources. In fact, we know from our flagship
study with the United Nations, Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict,
that every $1 invested in prevention saves about $16
down the road. Therefore, by focusing on prevention,
we can direct more of our resources to sustainable
development outcomes, rather than continuously
responding to emergencies. For example, our support to
youth, women and pastoralist communities in the Niger
exemplifies that approach, as we proactively help the
Government to address the grievances that often lead
to the emergence of violent conflict.
Our second pillar is remaining engaged in situations
of conflict in order to preserve essential institutions
and maintain service delivery. For example, in Yemen

S/PV. 8579

we are partnering with the United Nations to help
deliver over $1.8 billion in development programmes
that focus on strengthening capacity, building the
resilience of local institutions and preserving hardwon development gains, in full complementarity with
the essential humanitarian work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs the World Food
Programme, UNICEF and other partners.
Partnerships with security actors, such as
the United Nations peacekeeping missions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali or the Central
African Republic, have also been key in providing
development support in the most fragile environments.
In the Central African Republic, for instance, the World
Bank is partnering very closely with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic to support peacebuilding
and social cohesion efforts by providing short-term
employment opportunities to over 20,000 workers in
some of the most insecure areas of the country, thereby
strengthening the presence and legitimacy of the State
in the eyes of its citizens.
The third pillar is supporting countries in critical
moments of transition to escape the fragility trap over
the long term. Critical to that effort is building State
legitimacy and capacity, fostering inclusive institutions
and renewing the social contract between citizens
and the State. We have also partnered with the United
Nations, under the leadership of the Department of
Peace Operations, to assess the macroeconomic and
fiscal impact of peacekeeping transitions. In Somalia,
we partnered with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia to assist the Federal Government in
evaluating the fiscal sustainability of the security sector
and the strength of its public financial management
system, in the context of a transition in the country.
The fourth and last pillar is helping countries mitigate
the spillovers, such as forced displacement shocks,
that are created by fragility, conflict and violence. For
example, in countries hosting refugees, like Ethiopia,
Bangladesh, Jordan, Lebanon, and Colombia, we are
complementing the essential work of humanitarian
actors by supporting long-term development solutions
for refugees and host communities, including by
working very closely with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on promoting the policy
reforms needed to build social cohesion.

19-222535/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Let me conclude by stating that this approach is
underpinned by our firm conviction that partnerships
are essential to effectively prevent conflict, build
resilience and sustain peace. Only through collective
action will we be able to succeed in our mission to
end extreme poverty, and only though a shared vision
will we be able to effectively support the vulnerable,
disadvantaged and marginalized.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Bousquet for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Baldeh.
Mr. Baldeh: On behalf of the African Development
Bank Group President, Mr. Akinwumi Adesina,
we thank the Security Council for the opportunity
to participate in today’s briefing. We extend our
congratulations to the Security Council, especially the
Peruvian Mission, on having organized this briefing
session, and laud the dedication of the United Nations to
strengthening peacebuilding efforts across the African
continent and globally.
Peace can be built and sustained only if the
underlying drivers of conflict — whether political,
economic, social, environmental or otherwise — are
effectively addressed. Most of the fragile situations
in the world are in African countries. Those are our
shareholders. That is our neighbourhood. Therefore,
empowering African nations to transition out of
fragility is a core part of our mission.
Over the past several years, our institution has
focused on identifying the root causes of fragility and
conflict, and addressing those through building more
resilient economies, institutions and communities
across Africa. Our 2014-2019 Strategy for Addressing
Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa has
been central to guiding those efforts. The Strategy
contributes to peacebuilding and sustainability by
focusing on three main areas: first, strengthening
State capacity and establishing effective institutions;
secondly, promoting equitable access to employment
and basic services; and thirdly, encouraging direct
policy dialogue on fragility issues, advocating for
actions that foster resilience and build partnerships to
achieve them. All of those are critical to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
At the operational level, we have focused our
actions on two key pillars: first, increasing the resources
6/28

18/07/2019

available to address situations of fragility across the
continent, and secondly, strengthening our intervention
approach to be more flexible and responsive to
fragile situations.
In terms of financial resources, we have created
a dedicated financing mechanism, which we call the
Transition Support Facility. That is an earmarked
concessional financing source within the African
Development Fund, with three funding windows. The
first window provides supplemental support to national
Governments facing specific fragility challenges. The
second window clears arrears to help Governments to
re-engage, as was successfully done with Liberia in
2007 and Côte d’Ivoire in 2009. We are now working
on Somalia’s arrears. The third window targets
technical assistance programmes to strengthen the
delivery capacity of national and regional institutions.
The Transition Support Facility’s resources have been
critical to addressing the vast and evolving needs of
fragile situations at the national and regional levels.
As the African Development Bank Group President,
Mr. Akinwumi Adesina, said recently in Madagascar,
fragility must not be seen as an end state. Nations may
go through fragility, but they can exit and become
stable, dynamic, prosperous and resilient to shocks.
That optimism towards building resilience through
nationally led transitions out of fragility is at the core
of the Bank’s approach.
In the case of Côte d’Ivoire, for example, we played
a central role, alongside other partners, including the
United Nations and the World Bank, in helping them
to make a successful transition over the past decade.
From 2008 to 2017, Côte d’Ivoire benefited from the
resources of all three windows of the Transition Support
Facility, alongside the other African Development
Bank Group financing instruments. That provided
both the financial and the technical support that the
country needed to emerge from two civil crises that
devastated its economy, infrastructure, institutions and
social cohesion. It was through strong complementarity
between partners, especially the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, that we were able to work
together to support the successful nationally led
transition of Côte d’Ivoire.
In the Gambia, a successful nationally led transition
of power was supported by political mediation and
regional peacekeeping efforts in 2017, after two decades
of structural vulnerabilities and marginalization.
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

However, that transition revealed the need for long-term
resilience building of institutions, services, justice and
national unity. The African Development Bank Group
has worked since then with United Nations agencies,
the World Bank and other partners to help the Gambian
Government rebuild an inclusive economy, restore faith
in justice and governance institutions and strengthen
regional integration.
We will continue to learn from those experiences
as we look at current and future transitions across the
continent. Most importantly, identifying opportunities
for early intervention and coordinating effectively with
communities, Government and international partners
are crucial to avoiding cycles of fragility.
It is not enough to just look at sources of fragility,
however. We must also look at how, as a Bank and as a
development community, we can more systematically
identify and strengthen sources of resilience to better
mitigate local, national and regional vulnerabilities.
To that end, our interventions are guided by a new
data-driven analytical framework, which we call the
Country Resilience and Fragility Assessment Tool.
The Tool identifies national and regional pressures
and capacities to manage risks and external shocks.
This framework represents a multisectoral and
multidimensional approach to identifying targeted
entry points for addressing fragility, building resilience
and consolidating peace in Africa. The Country
Resilience and Fragility Assessment builds upon the
Bank Group’s work on fragility assessments, which
have helped to generate deeper analysis, informing
fragility-sensitive design of national and regional
strategies and operations. Several of the assessments
have been undertaken in coordination with partners,
such as the World Bank Group. We need to continue
to enhance our information-sharing and coordination
efforts as development actors, leveraging our tools
and analysis towards collective impact in fragile and
conflict-affected situations.
Just last week, as my colleague Franck Bousquet
said, we worked with the Burkina Faso Government,
alongside the European Union, the United Nations and the
World Bank, to undertake a comprehensive prevention
and peacebuilding assessment. Those findings will help
address emerging security threats within the country
and across its borders. Our interventions will focus on
reaching the most vulnerable communities to enhance
economic and social inclusion.

S/PV. 8579

We cannot talk about addressing fragility and
building resilience within national borders alone.
Increasingly, fragility is regional. Spillover effects
are a major source of vulnerability on the African
continent and beyond. Factors, such as a lack of
economic opportunities for growing youth populations,
communal conflict and extremism, political instability
and climate change can accelerate forced displacement
and irregular migration, with destabilizing effects
across regions.
Partnerships between national, regional and
international actors within the humanitarianpeace-development nexus are critical to addressing
regional fragility drivers. In the case of the Group of
Five for the Sahel region, for example, we worked with
international organizations and development partners
to establish an alliance in 2017 to promote stability and
resilience in the region. That is an important example
of how we can work towards collective development
outcomes by enhancing information-sharing and
leveraging the comparative advantage of different
actors to implement targeted interventions. As part
of those efforts, the African Development Bank
Group’s projects have focused on building resilience
in key areas, such as agriculture, water and sanitation,
energy and climate change, youth employment and
entrepreneurship and regional integration.
Building more integrated and resilient regional
economies is an important part of addressing regional
vulnerability. The African Development Bank Group
is able to use its convening power for policy dialogue,
in complement to partners who have extensive field
presence in fragile and conflict-affected environments,
such as the United Nations and the World Bank
Group. Bringing together Governments, regional
actors and development partners to harness inclusive
and sustainable economic growth reduces the risk of
cross-border polarization and regional instability. That
includes the need for flexible solutions to encourage
private sector investment in fragile situations, with a
focus on including women and youth in economies.
As the Bank looks forward to its fragility agenda
in 2020 and beyond, we reflect on some of the broader
lessons that we have learned from working in fragile
and conflict-affected situations. First, we note the
importance of adopting a State-building approach
that is focused on inclusive politics, citizen security
and justice, in addition to more traditional human and
economic development needs. Secondly, we need long-

19-222537/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

term programming to build capable and legitimate
institutions that can effectively manage the challenges
of fragility. Thirdly, there is a need for the generation
of sustainable employment and the improvement
of livelihoods through private sector development.
Fourthly, good governance, especially through
improving public financial management, enhancing
natural resources management and combating
corruption, is key to strengthening State legitimacy.
The African Development Bank Group looks
forward to deepening partnerships at the national,
regional and continental levels with development
partners, including United Nations agencies, with a
view to harnessing collective development outcomes
and building resilience across Africa. That includes
conducting joint analytical work on conflict, fragility
and peacebuilding; expanding operations aimed
at promoting and consolidating good governance;
leveraging public and private solutions to maximize
development impact on the ground; consolidating
cooperation and partnerships in dealing with regional
challenges; and deepening complementarity for a
greater division of labour among institutions in specific
fragile contexts, relative to our areas of comparative
advantages and mandates.
Let me reaffirm that the African Development
Bank Group remains committed to working as part of
the humanitarian, peace and development community
to support nationally led transitions and build
regional resilience.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Baldeh for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Trujillo García.
Mr. Trujillo García (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to extend my gratitude to the Peruvian presidency
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
to explore the important role of strategic transition
partnerships for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I
would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for supporting the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
When Colombia took office as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission at the beginning of this year,
we identified the promotion of effective partnerships
with key peacebuilding actors as one of our priorities,
with the intention of focusing efforts on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace assistance, in particular good
8/28

18/07/2019

governance, promoting national reconciliation and
addressing root causes of conflict.
In that regard, the scale, scope and nature of the
proposal contained in the twin resolutions of 2016 on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture (Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262) require that the United Nations not
act on its own in its efforts to support national priorities.
As the experience of my own country reflects, effective
partnerships among the United Nations, national
Governments and other key stakeholders, including
international, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, civil society and,
where relevant, the private sector, are important for
successful initiatives in that important task.
The challenge of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace is crucial in transition contexts. Once peace
operations are concluded, authorities have the
primary responsibility of preserving the gains made
in that regard upon the respective conclusion of peace
operations. Recently, peace operations have developed
joint transition plans with host Governments, as in
the case of Timor-Leste, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia.
However, the joint planning of transitions may be more
complex in those instances where Government capacity
in post-conflict scenarios is weak.
In such cases, strong and coordinated partnerships
between the key stakeholders involved are essential to
closing political, institutional and financial capacity
gaps, as well as to preventing backsliding in progress
made towards peace after the withdrawal of those
operations. The closure of operations in Côte d’Ivoire
in 2017 and Liberia in 2018 and transitions in progress
in other countries are good examples of the importance
of having consistent efforts in place to support peace
processes in their different stages.
One of the principal purposes of the Commission is
to fill the vacuum in institutional and structural capacity
and to support countries in transition in the light of the
growing risk of the resumption of conflict. In transition
contexts, financial cutbacks constitute a latent risk.
The Peacebuilding Commission has progressively
used its convening power to promote such effective
partnerships and thereby secure sustained international
support. In Liberia, for example, the Commission
advised the Security Council on developing a national
peacebuilding plan. That enabled the establishment of
a tripartite framework allowing the United Nations, the
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

World Bank and the European Union to coordinate their
tasks through the joint Recovery and Peacebuilding
Assessment. As a result, the Multi-Partner Trust Fund,
for which the Peacebuilding Fund was a catalyst, was
created. Liberia still needs various types of resources
to achieve its development objectives.
In recognizing the role that the Commission can
play in supporting successful transitions, the Security
Council has requested its advice in specific cases,
including prior to mandate renewals and transitions.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2018/20, of December
2018, referred to the value added of the PBC’s advice
in withdrawing peace operations in Liberia and
Sierra Leone. At the same time, it encouraged the
Commission to present relevant recommendations on
national peacebuilding priorities in the context of the
formation, review and transition of mandates. The
Council has also recognized that the PBC platform
could be used to consider best practices in transitions
in respective countries. As its Chair, I hope to continue
implementing the presidential statement in the second
half of this year.
The Commission’s sessions have become
opportunities to gain a better understanding of
the multidimensional challenges being faced in
peace operations. They also have a more holistic
approach to the challenges faced by countries affected
by conflict extending beyond the imperatives of peace
and security.
In Guinea Bissau, for example, the PBC has
advised the Council on the complex political, security,
development and social challenges in the context of the
upcoming transition of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau. In that regard,
the Commission has also shared with the Security
Council the perspectives of regional organizations and
international financial institutions, thereby fulfilling
its advisory role for that organ. Recently, the World
Bank and the PBC conducted a formal dialogue to
improve the partnership of both organizations in
providing assistance through their activities in the area
of peacebuilding to the countries concerned. During
that dialogue, the Commission and the Bank delegation
had the opportunity to strengthen those partnerships in
countries of shared priority. Accordingly, we appreciate
the presence of the Bank’s representative at this
meeting as a sign of what we can achieve if we work in
a coordinated manner.

S/PV. 8579

The Security Council can take advantage of
the capacity of the PBC as a platform for promoting
coherence between the peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations and other organizations. That was
particularly obvious during its consideration of relevant
regional situations. It is in complex environments, such
as that of the Sahel region, where a diverse range of
stakeholders are involved, that the PBC can foster
coherent and coordinated approaches.
Moreover, I stress that women and young people
are key actors in peacebuilding processes and should
be meaningfully included in all our efforts. In the
implementation of its gender strategy, the Commission
held discussions dedicated to gender-related issues
within transition situations and to funding initiatives
focused on their aspects.
It would impossible for me not to refer to my own
country. We recently enjoyed a visit by the Security
Council in connection with the special political
mission operating there. Colombia has benefited from
the coordinated work of the various United Nations
agencies and bodies, which has permitted us to be
more effective in peacebuilding. That is why we just
requested the renewal of the mandate of the special
political mission for an additional year.
National processes must allow for the development
of capacities that enable States to address the root
causes of a given conflict in order to overcome them.
The Commission is uniquely placed to offer the Council
broad and diverse peacebuilding perspectives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank His
Excellency Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, in
his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru.
I am grateful for the insightful briefings by
Secretary General António Guterres, the representatives
of the World Bank and the African Development
Bank and Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo García of
Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I also welcome the presence of Mr. Fidelis
Leite Magalhães, Minister for Legal Reforms and
Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste, and Mr. Bocchit
Edmond, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of Haiti.

19-222539/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The holding of this meeting is motivated by the
importance and priority that Peru attaches to the
establishment of partnerships to promote peacebuilding
and sustaining peace through greater cooperation
and coordination among the Security Council and the
various actors involved in the promotion of peace,
development and human rights.
In line with the twin resolutions adopted by the
Council and the General Assembly in 2016 (Security
Council 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262, respectively) and reaffirmed by both organs in
2018, through the adoption of resolution 2413 (2018),
under the Peruvian presidency (see S/PV.8245), and
General Assembly resolution 72/276, we emphasize the
need to rely on national institutions that are responsible
for those processes and capable of preventing and
resolving conflicts, while building national consensus
to foster good governance, focusing on the population,
particularly those who are most vulnerable, and leading
the struggle against impunity and corruption. Over
the past several days at Headquarters, the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development has been
paying particular attention this year, for the first time,
to Sustainable Development Goal 16, which commits
us all to building peaceful and inclusive societies with
transparent and accountable institutions.
We believe that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development represents the appropriate universal
framework for the support that the United Nations
system lends to national peacebuilding and sustaining
peace efforts. The evidence shows that the participation
of various national actors is crucial to creating a system
built on the rule of law capable of overcoming conflicts
and promoting sustainable development, while paying
special attention to political and social inclusion,
macroeconomic stability and access to justice.
As part of its own responsibilities in the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Council must
ensure that United Nations peace operations are planned
and managed so as to lead to adequate transitions
culminating in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
To that end, we have a acquired a valuable collection
of lessons learned in various parts of the world. We
also know that there are no one-size-fits-all solutions.
It is necessary to establish innovative partnerships to
support countries affected by conflict, while taking
into account their particular circumstances, needs
and priorities.
10/28

18/07/2019

To that end, every situation must be considered
according to its own independent criteria, indicators
and evaluation parameters. But the results of such
consideration must make it possible to address the
root causes of conflicts in accordance with national
development priorities and establish effective
mechanisms to prevent their recurrence. In that
regard, we emphasize the importance for various
national actors to become involved and lead their own
transition processes.
The support and empowerment of women’s and
youth organizations are vital to building a shared vision
for the future. In that vein, I highlight the progress
made in Haiti — a country of our hemisphere that
hosted the largest peacekeeping operation in which
more than 7,000 Peruvian troops served. We hope that
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti will be
strengthened and that it will, in turn, strengthen the
transition process. Peru and the region as a whole will
continue to support that country’s efforts to achieve
development and stability.
We also acknowledge the successful case of TimorLeste and the continuous process of institutional
strengthening and promotion of its development dating
back to 2012 with the conclusion of United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste. We are interested
in hearing the lessons learned that Minister Leite
Magalhães will share with us today.
The
establishment
of
multi-stakeholder
partnerships, with the assistance of international
financial institutions, humanitarian actors and the
relevant regional and subregional organizations, is
equally vital in order to link the action of the private
sector and civil society with national efforts to build
and achieve sustainable peace. In that regard, we
highlight the World Bank’s strategy to address fragility,
conflict and violence, as well as the work of the
African Development Bank to promote the provision
of required resources in a coherent, predictable and
sustainable manner.
Similarly, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission is the right political platform to accompany
transition processes and to promote synergies among
the United Nations system and other international
agencies, as well as to offer strategic guidance for the
consideration of the Security Council. We underscore
in particular the importance of quick-impact projects,
through the Peacebuilding Fund, which contribute
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to the main objective of sustaining the legitimacy of
the process by supporting areas of greatest need and
visibility, based on adequate risk analysis and the
involvement of the local population, especially women
and young people.
Lastly, we hope, that today’s meeting can contribute
to reflections on the subject and on the establishment of
coordinated partnerships with the various actors of the
international community involved in all phases of the
transition process until its successful completion. That
will allow them to achieve lasting peace, which is the
ultimate objective we all long for.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to other members of the Council
who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council. We thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Mr. Carlos Trujillo
García, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, in
his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their briefings. We thank Mr. Bousquet of the World
Bank and Mr. Baldeh of the African Development Bank
for their detailed briefings, which served as a good
basis for today’s discussion.
The issue before us today, ensuring the continuity
of international assistance in the event of the drawdown
or closure of United Nations peacekeeping missions, is
clearly important in order to prevent the recurrence of
conflicts in the transition period, when the long-term
success of collective efforts is not yet guaranteed.
Indeed, maintaining and, in particular, improving
results is at times far more difficult than the initial
attainment of those results. In order to ensure lasting
peace in countries from which peacekeeping operations
are being withdrawn, it is important that the postconflict reconstruction phase be duly prepared. In
some instances, it is wise to launch peacebuilding
efforts before the peacekeeping presence is withdrawn.
Otherwise, there is the risk that the decline in the
level of international attention to a particular situation
may be interpreted by some players as a green light to
resume their destructive activities.
A mission’s withdrawal and the transfer of its
residual functions to other United Nations entities
should be borne in mind both initially and at all

S/PV. 8579

stages of the lifespan of a peacekeeping mission. At
the same time, it is also important to have a holistic
view of the political settlement being promoted by the
mission, since it is not possible to build and maintain
peace without national reconciliation. Therefore,
when considering the mandates of missions, including
existing peacebuilding objectives, the views of the host
State must be taken fully into account.
Where necessary, the Security Council may
mandate a mission to assist the host State in
addressing peacebuilding issues, such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as security
sector reform. At the same time, the provision of
assistance to States in the area of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping in the United Nations system requires
both proper coordination of efforts and an appropriate
division of labour that does not create a conflict of
authority. The inclusion in mandates of generic tasks,
such as human rights monitoring, sexual and gender
issues, environmental protection, development and
other issues, may well prove to be an unreasonable
waste of resources. Specialized United Nations bodies
and international mechanisms already exist to meet
those objectives.
When addressing the theoretical nexus among
human rights, development and peace and security,
we must acknowledge the fact that development alone
cannot guarantee peace and that peaceful conditions
do not necessarily guarantee development. Therefore,
it is important not only to take into account the nexus
but also to clearly and fully understand the difference
in those processes, as well as which specific United
Nations body or structure is responsible for promoting
each of those areas.
In the concept note for today’s meeting (S/2019/540,
annex), you, Mr. President, quite rightly emphasize the
leading role of States themselves in transitions, in line
with the principle of national ownership. Indeed, it is
the host State that has the primary responsibility for
the development and implementation of peacebuilding
strategies and programmes, while taking into account
the needs of its society. In that regard, it is important
that enhanced cooperation between the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
international financial institutions, in the area of
peacebuilding be accompanied by improved relations
with host States. Cooperation with local population
groups and non-governmental organizations can

19-2225311/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

be complementary and should be coordinated by
the authorities.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) plays an
important role in the United Nations system by providing
peacebuilding assistance to States, serving as both
an intergovernmental advisory body and a platform
linking a wide spectrum of stakeholders. We believe
that the PBC has the potential to improve the quality of
recommendations provided to the Security Council on
country-specific issues on the agendas of both bodies.
They can be provided to the Council upon request. We
believe that the value of the Commission is that it can
convey to the Council the peacebuilding priorities of
the host country. That is particularly relevant in the
final transition phase of a peacekeeping operation’s
efforts and can help to contribute meaningfully to the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General.
The added value and relevance of the PBC’s
recommendations are crucial for their possible inclusion
in the work of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. It
should also be recalled that Council members are
invariably represented in and actively engaged in
discussions of the PBC, its Organizational Committee
and country configurations. In order to improve the
quality of interaction between the Council and the
Commission, it is important to make effective use of
the ample opportunities already available, as outlined
in resolutions 1645 (2005) and 2282 (2016), which, in
our view, are sufficient.

18/07/2019

developed. Such instruments also contribute to conflict
prevention, which is something we consider extremely
important. We must therefore address the root causes:
poverty, exclusion, the lack of respect for human rights
and the effects of climate change, inter alia.
Nevertheless, we must of course ensure that we
implement transition correctly. As has been underlined
by our Russian colleague, national sovereignty and
national ownership of the process are vital. There is
sometimes a tendency — and I feel that this might be
happening in current cases — for countries on the path
to peacebuilding and from which the Blue Helmets are
withdrawing to say that they want to take ownership,
that they want the United Nations to leave and that
they want to regain sovereignty. However, we believe
that they will regain sovereignty much more swiftly if
they accept the help of the international community.
Sovereignty is strengthened with the help of the
international community in addressing the root causes
of conflict. In this context, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Colombia and through him President
Iván Duque Márquez who said, when the Security
Council visited Colombia, that he wanted the United
Nations special political mission to continue to work in
the country owing to the added value that it recognizes
in the engagement of the United Nations.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The fact that Peru has put
the issue of transition at the top of the Council’s agenda
and that you, Minister, are here suggest that, for Peru,
today’s meeting is the flagship event if its presidency.
You put the issue of transition on the agenda and
Germany fully supports it because we deeply believe
that the Security Council has to look at that issue.

When addressing the root causes that I mentioned
earlier, the international community is instrumental in
coping with the challenges. I would once again like to
reiterate my support for the Secretary-General’s words
and the reform measures that have been undertaken
to achieve a coherent One United Nations approach,
which, through the resident-coordinator system, is able
to assist in country situations with all of the relevant
instruments. The Security Council has recently
visited a number of places — from Mali, to Bogotá, to
Baghdad — where the One United Nations approach
has been applied.

The Council must not limit its work to addressing
the origin of a conflict through to the silencing of
weapons; it must look at the overall picture. It is very
important that the issue of transition be considered. As
the Secretary-General said in his briefing, very often,
when peacekeepers leave and the conflict has ended,
the international community no longer considers the
situation in the country and therefore does not see if
the root causes of the conflict have disappeared. It is
therefore very important that we consider the issue
of transition and that the relevant instruments be

The Peacebuilding Commission is extremely
important, and I wish to thank Colombia for having
sent its Minister for Foreign Affairs to attend today’s
meeting, thereby underscoring, through his presence,
the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission. Also
mentioned was the Peacebuilding Fund whose ability
to disperse funds rapidly supports the quick impact
projects that are extremely helpful during transition
periods. Germany, together with our friends from
the United Kingdom, with whom I believe we are
competing again for distinction as the largest donor to

12/28

19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the Peacebuilding Fund, encourage others to support
the Fund.
With regard to the help being provided to countries,
we now have many examples of good cooperation
with other stakeholders and regional organizations.
There are so many cases now — for example, the
Central African Republic, as has been mentioned,
and Colombia — in which the United Nations, with
the support of the African Union and/or the European
Union, is working coherently to improve country
situations, for which we are extremely grateful. I do
not know how frequently the World Bank has been
involved, but representatives of the World Bank and
the African Development Bank are here among us, and
they are very important partners.
I would like to pick up on what the representative
from the African Development Bank said with regard
to the regional crisis in the Sahel: that we must move
away from simply looking at one country. I fully agree
with him in that we must adopt a regional outlook in
the Sahel. The Council should be more proactive and
do more to support the States of the Group of Five for
the Sahel because we will not be able to stabilize one
country without first stabilizing the entire region. I
also believe in the importance of the involvement of
the private sector, as has already been mentioned. We
will not be able to stabilize countries and attain the
Sustainable Development Goals, which essentially
tackle the root causes, if we do not have the involvement
of the private sector.
To briefly return to the issue of local ownership,
our Russian colleague mentioned the importance of
national reconciliation in resolving conflicts. We must
seek national reconciliation, inclusiveness, including
the involvement of women and youth — both Minister
Carlos Holmes Trujillo García of Colombia and
Minister Néstor Popolizio Bardales of Peru mentioned
the importance of including women and youth and civil
society in the political dialogue. We must ensure the
participation of all stakeholders in order to achieve
national reconciliation. We will only be able to stabilize
a situation through good governance, respect for the rule
of law and accountability, and by tackling corruption.
In conclusion, I wish to thank Peru once again
for having put this topic on the agenda. I believe the
Council has to look much more systematically at
transition — even though we already do so to some
extent — from the first to the final mandate that we draw

S/PV. 8579

up for a mission. We must think about transition and, as
a body, continue to assess country situations, even after
United Nations peacekeepers have been withdrawn.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to warmly
welcome you, Mr. President, and your presence in
the Chamber.
Let me also begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral and today’s briefers for their contributions
to our discussion. I would like to thank the Peruvian
presidency for having organized this briefing, which
addresses one of the most crucial elements of the
Security Council’s activity.
Tackling the complex and evolving nature of current
conflicts requires a wide spectrum of activities within all
three pillars: inclusive peace and security processes with
the meaningful participation of women and minorities;
sustainable development going hand-in-hand with
resilience-building; and consistent respect for human
rights and the rule of law. The Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations, which
was endorsed by Poland last year, rightly underlines
that sustainable peace implemented by peacebuilding
activities is a fundamental condition for development.
For this purpose, the United Nations should address
conflicts in a comprehensive way by using all available
instruments, including peacekeeping. Peacekeeping
operations have proven to be an effective tool of the
United Nations to assist host countries on the difficult
path from conflict to peace. In this context, building
political dialogue with the host nation at each stage of
the peacebuilding process should consider the balance
of power and be implemented holistically, embracing
all actors on different stages, from local communities
to the high political level, including non-governmental
organizations, regional and subregional organizations
and local communities.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its Sustainable Development Goals containing the
pledge to leave no one behind create the conditions for
inclusive and sustainable development and provide the
best way to prevent crises and conflicts in today’s world.
In that regard, cooperation among all stakeholders,
including Governments, civil society, academia and
the business community is of utmost importance,
which means we have to be prepared for new forms
of partnership, converting ideas into action — action
that brings benefits to all actors involved. It is therefore
crucial to align the core business of the private sector

19-2225313/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

with the strategic goals of the international community.
Development assistance alone is not sustainable in
comprehensively tackling all post-conflict challenges,
especially economic stagnation. Only this kind
of approach will give us a chance of achieving a
peacebuilding process that delivers expected results.
In thinking of practical options for resource-pooling
in conflict prevention and sustaining peace, we
might consider leveraging more private resources for
development in the form of blended finance. In that
regard, all stakeholders should continue to invest in
new methods of generating financial resources and
innovative information-gathering, data-analytics and
machine-learning tools, in order to better define where
the risks and threats to peace and security are most
urgent and where the assistance of the international
community is needed most.
In conclusion, the experience of peacekeeping
operations in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia demonstrate
that political dialogue, security sector reform, national
reconciliation, social cohesion, the promotion of
human rights and the reduction of socioeconomic
inequalities are the only visible means of overcoming
the root causes of crises in the region. It is equally
important that the United Nations remain closely
engaged in supporting countries in transition so that
they can address the challenges in sustaining peace and
achieving sustainable development. It is our obligation
to preserve their gains and achievements and support
dialogue around the challenges that these countries
still face.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
with its focus on strengthening partnerships for
successful nationally owned transitions.
We thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
representatives of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank for their valuable briefings. We also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and
the Minister Legal Reforms and Parliamentary Affairs
of Timor-Leste.
South Africa appreciates the work done by the
Secretary-General and the progress made in addressing
existing gaps in the United Nations system to assist
countries in their efforts towards peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. While we recognize that it is the
14/28

18/07/2019

primary responsibility of national Governments and
authorities to identify, drive and direct priorities,
strategies and activities for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, the international community has an
obligation to ensure that it assists in the maintenance
of peace and security, which includes partnership
for development to ensure the implementation of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals, which are necessary
for addressing the root causes of conflict.
In that regard, South Africa continues to support
the ongoing work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) to promote national ownership in political and
peace and security processes in the pursuit of peaceful
and resilient societies. Such societies will be realized
only when the root causes and underlying currents of
conflicts are addressed. We believe that any support for
post-conflict reconstruction and development activities
should be tailor-made to suit country-specific needs. For
that to be sustainable local ownership and leadership
are required, with the meaningful participation of
women and the involvement of youth.
It is also our considered view that effective
peacebuilding during transition periods must involve
the entire United Nations system, focusing on enhancing
United Nations cross-pillar coordination, including
development, peace and security and human rights.
We therefore reaffirm our support for strengthened
cooperation between the PBC and the Security Council,
particularly when the Council is considering the review
and drawdown of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. However, the Security Council must
ensure from the outset that peace operation mandates
for peacekeeping and political missions are realistic,
tailored and flexible so that the mission can achieve its
desired outcomes in terms of peacekeeping and creating
an enabling environment for peacebuilding processes.
Consultations on sustaining peace between the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the host country during the periodic assessment
and review of peace operation mandates as well
as the eventual withdrawal of the mission are also
important. This approach will guarantee the active
involvement of all stakeholders, particularly the host
country, in outlining the expectations of the mission,
including milestones and time frames. It would not
only ensure the success of the peace mission but also
lay the foundational groundwork for the continuation of
peacebuilding processes in future.
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We also see merit in enhancing partnerships
between the United Nations peacekeeping architecture
and the regional and subregional post-conflict
reconstruction and development architecture, such as
that of the African Union (AU). The Peacebuilding
Commission should engage strategically with the AU
post-conflict reconstruction and development policy,
which is centred on peacebuilding activities in postconflict situations in Africa. All efforts must be brought
together to ensure development and the good sharing
of practices in peacebuilding and secure resources
that will enhance sustainable development. Although
we recognize the usefulness of pragmatic funding for
peacebuilding activities during transitions in order to
prevent gaps after the mission’s withdrawal, we reiterate
the need for practical, sustained and predictable
funding for peacebuilding activities through assessed
contributions. It is through this funding that peace
activities can be sustained in the long term.
In conclusion, when the Security Council considers
mission drawdowns in future, we must be cognizant
of the fact that our responsibility does not end when
the last phase of the peacekeeping mission ends. The
Charter of the United Nations places the responsibility
of the maintenance of international peace and security
squarely on the shoulders of the Council. We must
therefore ensure that we continue to remain engaged
as countries make the transition from conflict to postconflict situations. Our recent work in Haiti and the
Council’s experience with the transition in Liberia are
good examples of not neglecting countries once the
peacekeepers have left. We are currently faced with
situations on our agenda in which we are considering
missions’ drawdowns. By necessity, this consideration
must also include planning and resources in order to
ensure that the countries are able to sustainably make
the transition towards peace.
Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Mr. Guterres, Secretary-General of the United
Nations; Mr. Bousquet, Senior Director, Fragility,
Conflict and Violence Group of the World Bank;
Mr. Baldeh, Director, Transition States Coordination
Office of the African Development Bank; and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, who is
with us in his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this important
debate and for having invited current host countries of
peacekeeping operations.

S/PV. 8579

The transition phases of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are important and delicate junctures that
require us to work together.
I should like to begin by welcoming the measures
introduced by the Secretary-General to reform
peacekeeping and strengthen the coherence of the
United Nations system in terms of peacebuilding.
These reforms should in particular serve to enable
preparations for the transition and peacebuilding phases
from the very moment an operation is deployed. The
deployment of transition experts and the releasing of
guidelines in February on planning transition processes
are also welcome developments.
The withdrawal of an operation must be anticipated,
in particular by strengthening coordination between
the mission and the country team. In this regard, we
commend the efforts of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur aimed at funding
joint projects and allowing the country team to take over.
The Peacebuilding Commission also has a major
role to play in preparing and supporting the transition
phases. The diversity of its membership and the
flexibility in its functioning allow for long-term
dialogue to support the host country in developing its
peacebuilding strategy. I would also like to commend
the work of the United Nations Police units and the
Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions
of the Department of Peace Operations for having
strengthened good governance and the institutional
capacities of States in transition phases.
That brings me to my second point, which is on
strengthening partnerships with national actors.
Transition means, first and foremost, handing over
responsibility to national authorities. Building their
capacities is therefore essential. However, beyond
resources and capacities, it is essential to listen to the
priorities of the host State. Successful examples of
transition in Côte d’Ivoire in 2017 and Liberia in 2018
have shown us the extent to which national ownership
is essential.
In order to sustain national ownership, it must be
inclusive and involve all peace actors, underpinned
by the strong participation of women. Such peace
also means putting the concerns and rights of future
generations at the forefront as they will be the guarantors
of its sustainability. That includes the reintegration into
society of children recruited by armed groups. France
has been and will remain active on that issue.

19-2225315/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It is imperative that any approach aimed at
preventing the resurgence of conflicts incorporate the
fight against impunity and create favourable conditions
for the flourishing of civil society and a pluralistic media
with the freedom of expression guaranteed. Experience
has shown that without those elements peace is rarely
sustainable. That is a priority for France as part of our
prevention, resilience and sustainable peace strategy,
adopted in 2018, and in that regard I welcome the
projects financed by the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund to step up the international community’s actions
on the subject.
I would also like to touch on the partnerships
between the United Nations and institutions with
the means to complement our efforts. We must think
in terms of complementarity, coherence and the
multiplication of our efforts. We need to be innovative
and intervene in a coordinated and large-scale manner
in order to prevent countries emerging from a crisis
from relapsing into instability a few years later.
Financing for peacebuilding remains a major
challenge. The quantum leap that the Peacebuilding
Fund has experienced sets a good example, but we must
do more to devise innovative financing and involve the
private sector. France fully supports ongoing efforts
to strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and the World Bank. More generally, we also
encourage partnerships with major donors, including
the European Union and, at our national level, the
French Development Agency, which now has a peace
and resilience fund financed in part by a financial
transaction tax and which will be endowed with
€200 million per year by 2020.
Partnerships with regional organizations are
obviously essential. France is particularly committed
to the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. In the Sahel, where the international
community must remain fully mobilized for the long
term, the Alliance for the Sahel was conceived as the
essential complement to what the Group of Five for
the Sahel has achieved in the field of security. Several
transitions will soon test our collective ability to
properly address this crucial phase. I would mention in
particular Darfur, Haiti, Iraq and soon the Democratic
Republic of Congo. We cannot afford to fail.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Peru for having taken the initiative to
convene this meeting and welcomes the presence of His
16/28

18/07/2019

Excellency Mr. Néstor Popolizio Bardales, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Peru, as he presides
over this meeting in New York.
We wish to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing. We welcome His Excellency
Foreign Minister Trujillo García of Colombia and thank
him for the briefing he made in his capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We also welcome
Mr. Bousquet of the World Bank and Mr. Baldeh of the
African Development Bank and thank them for their
briefings.
A number of post-conflict countries and regions are
currently undergoing national reconstruction as part of
the transition phase towards peacebuilding and longterm development. In the face of new developments and
requirements, the United Nations and the international
community should strengthen partnerships and mount a
collective and active response by providing constructive
support and assistance.
In that regard, China would like to elaborate on
the following points. First, with regard to upholding
the principle of national ownership, achieving lasting
peace and sustainable development in a post-conflict
country ultimately depends on the country itself.
Given the differences in national realities and stages
of development, countries differ from one another in
terms of their priorities and approaches undertaken
in such transitions. The United Nations and other
partners should abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and respect the
sovereignty and ownership of the countries concerned,
provide constructive assistance based on the country’s
specific requirements and requests, and focus on
fostering their capacity-building with a view to
achieving self-driven development.
Secondly, in ensuring a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the Council is
responsible for defining the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. When drawing
up a peacekeeping operation mandate, the Council
should plan early to ensure that once the operation
has achieved its desired objectives, it is followed up
by timely peacebuilding efforts. Some peacekeeping
operation mandates already include peacebuilding
components. When a peacekeeping operation has come
to an end, various functions should be handed over
as efficiently as possible to a United Nations country
team or special political mission. Throughout this
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

process, it is important to ensure that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are coherently linked so that the tasks
in the subsequent phase can be implemented smoothly.
Thirdly, with regard to strengthening partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations, these
organizations are uniquely positioned to tackle
issues specific to their region. In order to assist postconflict countries in their transition phases, the
United Nations and the wider international community
should strengthen communication and coordination
with regional and subregional organizations and fully
leverage the role of the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, inter alia, in addressing regional affairs. The
United Nations and the international community should
engage in partnerships and cooperation with relevant
organizations and States from the region in a joint
effort to assist local socioeconomic development and
address the root causes of conflict.
Fourthly, with regard to creating synergies between
the United Nations system and the international
community, the Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
relevant funds, programmes and international financial
institutions, inter alia, should carry out their mandated
activities and create complementarity by pooling their
strengths. United Nations missions and country teams
should enhance their collaboration by contributing
their respective expertise. International development
agencies must fulfil their aid commitments and assist
post-conflict countries in implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with a view to
achieving sustainable development in these countries
and ensuring that the people there can truly benefit
from the peace dividend.
China supports post-conflict countries in their
reconstruction efforts and has been striving to assist
developing countries in post-conflict settings by
actively supporting their economic, education, healthcare, infrastructure and other endeavours. The ChinaUnited Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund
has been actively supporting cooperation projects in a
number of countries in such areas as counter-terrorism,
peacekeeping, good offices and mediation, refugees
and migrants and sustainable development.
China believes in the philosophy of mutually
beneficial cooperation in international relations and
has been seeking to build inclusive and constructive
partnerships and to foster friendly cooperation between

S/PV. 8579

countries in the political, economic, security and
cultural fields, allowing people from all countries to
collectively enjoy dignity, the fruits of development,
safety and security.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank our
briefers today.
We know that transitions are crucial for countries
emerging from crisis and which, at that time, are
at risk of returning to conflict and losing political,
developmental, social and economic gains. We need to
get those transitions right as a top priority, in particular
as we in the Security Council see missions drawing
down.
Let me start by saying that we know that in order
for peace to endure, it must be locally embedded; it
must be based on national commitment to meeting
people’s needs and overcoming their grievances.
Aligning mandate implementation with nationally
owned peacebuilding and development objectives from
the earliest possible point is therefore vital to nurturing
an enabling environment for effective transition.
Let me secondly touch on the importance
of integrated United Nations approaches. When
the Council decides to deploy a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, it does so in order to create
the space for national actors to restore security and
stability through a political process and/or to protect
civilians. While peacekeeping operations can contribute
to peacebuilding, they cannot in and of themselves
achieve political settlements, resolve the root causes of
conflicts or help national authorities to develop their
own capacity. We therefore need a holistic approach and
cross-pillar work in the field from the outset to address
these issues, which bring in humanitarian, development
and peacebuilding actors. In that regard, we urge the
Secretariat and United Nations leaders in the field to
ensure that the Secretary-General’s March planning
directive is fully implemented.
Thirdly, let me talk about the importance of
partnership for effective transitions. Of course, the
most important partners will always be national
stakeholders, particularly Governments, civil society
and grass-roots organizations working to build peace,
and we should deepen those partnerships on the ground.
But I would also like to underline the importance of
coordination and cooperation with bilateral donors and
with regional and subregional organizations. In that

19-2225317/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

context, I welcome the words of Mr. Yero Baldeh from
the African Development Bank today.
I would like to acknowledge, as others have, the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
supported transitions. It was very good to see Foreign
Minister Trujillo García here, whom many of us saw
quite recently, of course. During the transition in Liberia,
the Peacebuilding Commission demonstrated the value
of its convening power, bringing together the World
Bank, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, the Economic Community of West African
States and the country team to develop a plan and
division of labour to support the Liberian Government.
I was also very pleased to hear from Franck
Bousquet today. The partnership between the United
Nations and the World Bank is a particular priority
for the United Kingdom. The fragility, conflict and
violence strategy is an important basis for the Bank to
focus its efforts in fragile contexts, including by better
partnering with the United Nations to define strategies
for tackling the root causes of conflict.
Let me say a brief word, if I may, about the
anticipated transition in Darfur. I would like to start
by welcoming the political agreement reached by the
Transitional Military Council and the Forces of Freedom
and Change yesterday in the Sudan, which sets out a plan
for the transition to a civilian-led Government. This
is an important step towards fulfilling the legitimate
demands of the Sudanese people. The United Kingdom
will support the efforts of all sides to reach agreement
on outstanding issues. We will continue to support the
transition from peacekeeping, and remain hopeful that
the international community will have a willing and
legitimate national partner for peacebuilding. Given
the level of need in Darfur, it is clear that continued
international support will be necessary once the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
withdraws. We therefore look forward to receiving
options for a follow-on mechanism, as requested
in resolution 2479 (2019). After years of economic
mismanagement in the Sudan, there is clearly a need
for a more holistic approach to the situation.
Let me conclude by suggesting a few concrete
ideas for consideration in taking this issue forward.
First, regular reports of the Secretary-General could
focus more on the risks to successful transitions and
set out how the United Nations is working to align
mandate implementation with national peacebuilding
18/28

18/07/2019

priorities. The Secretary-General and the Secretariat
could also include in those reports examples of how
United Nations missions are working to align mandate
implementation with national peacebuilding priorities
through the various United Nations integrated
strategic frameworks.
The Security Council could review, at the working
level, its use of benchmarks, in order to take stock of
what works and what does not, with a view to honing
this practice in future. The United Nations, the Security
Council and the broader international community
should consider how to make better use of data on overall
financing to improve our understanding of the so-called
financial cliff associated with transitions, and we, in
the Council, should be asking those questions during
our considerations as missions start their drawdowns.
The Peacebuilding Commission should consider
providing short one-page submissions to the Council
on peacebuilding priorities and challenges when
the Council is discussing countries on which the
Peacebuilding Commission is focused.
Finally, the Secretariat should consider how to
engage the World Bank in strategic assessment and
planning exercises.
Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, whom I wish to thank for convening
today’s meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General,
the representatives of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, who
is with us in his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their briefings. Moreover,
I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Worship of Haiti and the Minister for Legal Reforms
and Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste.
The concept note (S/2019/540, annex) is a
comprehensive and informative document that serves
as a road map for today’s debate. We are pleased this
meeting provides a timely opportunity to exchange
views and shed light on ways to enhance peace,
security and stability in conflict areas. After several
decades of United Nations experience in peacekeeping,
it has become clear that there is no single model or
approach for transition phases, which are adapted to
the specific situations in host countries. The nature
and characteristics of conflict vary from country to
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

country, but the similarity of some conflicts must also
be taken into account, where necessary.
The Security Council has recognized the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, particularly
with regard to consolidating peace, recovery and
reconstruction during transition periods and the
withdrawal of peacekeeping operations, which are
the most delicate and critical of stages once the
mandate for a special political mission has begun to be
implemented. It is therefore important to emphasize the
role of national institutions and their full ownership of
all points of the conflict cycle and of the withdrawal of
peacekeeping operations, so as to ensure that countries
do not relapse into conflict. Transitions can be smooth
only with the support of robust and competent national
institutions, which must play a fundamental role in
post-conflict reconstruction.
In recent years, we have seen the cooperation
grow between the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Security Council. I would emphasize that the
Peacebuilding Commission briefs the Security Council
on its role on an annual basis, but the Chairs of the
Commission’s country-specific figurations should
be able to play a greater role, and the Council should
support the PBC’s recommendations when renewing
peacekeeping mission mandates. Such momentum must
be maintained bearing in mind that achieving lasting
peace involves acknowledging national ownership, as
national reforms are more effective when there is robust
cooperation with the host country.
Unpredictable financing remains one of the major
challenges for peacebuilding, peacekeeping and
sustaining peace. While the Peacebuilding Fund plays
a significant role, its resources alone are insufficient to
carry out all the required tasks. Concerted efforts are
therefore needed to ensure adequate funding through
international contributions, specifically from such
international financial institutions as the World Bank
and the myriad funds and development banks, as well
as regional and subregional organizations and United
Nations agencies. At the local level, the private sector
is a key partner in reconstruction and development.
The private sector’s participation removes numerous
funding obstacles, thus contributing to sustainable
development, peace and security.
The Security Council’s recognition, through
its resolutions and presidential statements, of the
importance of regional and international organizations

S/PV. 8579

in the maintenance of international peace and security
stems from the fact that these key organizations are
best positioned to understand the root causes of many
conflicts and other security challenges. The Security
Council has acknowledged the role that such bodies
can play in peacebuilding, recovery and post-conflict
reconstruction, but this role must be strengthened.
In conclusion, it is fundamental to address the root
causes of conflict and conflict prevention, which helps
to avert material and human losses, especially if we
have preventive tools at our disposal, including earlywarning mechanisms and surveys. If correctly used
at the beginning of conflict, such tools can help us to
prevent the escalation and outbreak of conflicts.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving us the opportunity to hold a cross-cutting
reflection on the subject of transitions. I also thank the
speakers for their informative contributions.
When speaking about transitions, it is indeed
essential to mention the importance of partnerships at
different levels among peace operations and myriad
actors. The drawdown or closure of a United Nations
mission and the transfer of its tasks and responsibilities
are complex processes. Our experience with Haiti
shows us that these processes must be preceded by an
evaluation mission. Moreover, an exit strategy with
specific benchmarks allows us to think about transition
from day one.
We must also ensure that United Nations dynamics
coherently integrate with regional and subregional
discussions. The example of the transition of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
illustrates that discrepancies may occur. National
ownership is a prerequisite for success, but it requires
the initial presence and functioning of State structures.
The transition of a peacekeeping mission to the
next phase depends on many factors, but the most
critical is capacity-building. Such a transition mainly
involves transferring duties to the authorities of the
host country. For the transfer to be effective, all United
Nations pillars — peace and security, socioeconomic
development and human rights — must be engaged.
Budgetary needs are important, and development
banks are required to support countries in transition.
I welcome the approaches of the World Bank and the
African Development Bank, which dedicate specific

19-2225319/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

strategies and enhanced resources to situations of
fragility and conflict. In addition, bilateral partnerships
with the private sector also make it possible to benefit
from other types of expertise. Work on governance,
including security sector reform, is also essential for
sustaining peace, rebuilding a strong social contract
and, where appropriate, laying the groundwork for the
exit strategy of a peacekeeping mission.
A successful and sustainable transition requires
addressing the root causes of conflict. In this regard,
Belgium and the European Union are taking a
comprehensive and integrated approach to United
Nations action on the ground, by taking into account
the full cycle of conflict and the various United
Nations actors. In addition to security sector reform,
the organization of free and fair elections, the criminal
justice system and transitional justice, education
and the inclusion of the most vulnerable groups also
play a key role in the transition process. Finally, the
authorities of a country in transition should not overlook
other conflict factors, such as competition for natural
resources. Such issues often transcend national borders
and are compounded by climate change.
The United Nations remains an essential partner
of countries in transition. The full implementation
of the various reforms of the United Nations system,
including management reform, will help to optimize
this partnership, and funding must also be secured.
I wish to conclude by commending the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the
Peacebuilding Fund. For Belgium, the PBC represents
an example of integrating the United Nations pillars
and seeking effective synergies. The projects that it
funds demonstrate how the economic reintegration of
vulnerable people contributes to social cohesion and
peacebuilding. It is important that the Fund broaden
its support base. Belgium calls on Member States to
increase their contributions to it, and we advocate
stronger relations between the Fund and international
financial institutions.
Successful transitions to lasting peace require a
coherent and comprehensive approach to strengthening
the ownership processes of national authorities.
We wish to thank you again, Mr. President, for
convening this briefing.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The success of transitions from peacekeeping to
20/28

18/07/2019

peacebuilding is crucial to maintaining lasting stability
and security around the world. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his leadership on peacebuilding
initiatives and for the valuable perspectives that he
presented earlier today. I would also like to thank
Minister Trujillo García, Franck Bousquet and Yero
Baldeh for their important contributions to this
important debate today. We also welcome the Ministers
from Haiti and Timor-Leste.
The United Nations has 14 active peacekeeping
missions and 11 active special political missions.
The goal for each of these missions is to draw down
and conclude, as we have recently achieved in Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia, and previously in TimorLeste. As experience has shown us, managing the
transition process efficiently and effectively can be a
significant challenge.
I will discuss three points today: key ingredients to
successful nationally owned transitions, the importance
of the role of women in these transitions, and the case
of Haiti.
A transition owned by the host country, with the
full support and partnership of Member States, regional
organizations and the United Nations itself, is most
likely to result in lasting peace and security. Planning
and communication, along with distinct and achievable
benchmarks, are also key elements of the process.
Successful transitions require significant advance
planning and communication among all stakeholders,
including the host Government, the Security Council,
regional actors, the Secretariat and civil society. For
this reason, the United States maintains as one of its
peacekeeping principles that every mission must have
a clear exit strategy. Ongoing engagement on the exit
strategy during the life cycle of a mission ensures
that transition planning is considered, discussed and
negotiated as early as possible.
Benchmarks during transitions serve as a critical
metric to ensure that all stakeholders, including the
host country, are meeting obligations that will help
to ensure lasting peace and security. Distinct and
achievable benchmarks provide the transparency and
accountability necessary to ensure that the host nation
is fully capable of standing on its own without the
support of the United Nations.
Women must also play a more meaningful role
in transitions, from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Supporting women peace and security experts is a
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

good place to start. In 2018, the Department of Peace
Operations and UN-Women piloted efforts to include
gender in conflict-analysis work in missions to inform
transitions and drawdowns in Liberia, Haiti and Darfur,
which helped the host nations and the United Nations
to better understand the needs of women as missions
shift from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Benchmarks
for United Nations transitions and exits should ensure
that they incorporate stand-alone measures on women,
peace and security and gender equality, in line with
the mission mandates. The United States will continue
to advocate for mandates that prioritize strategic
assessments that include experts evaluating the needs
of women.
In October, the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti will replace the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti. The conclusion of the United
Nations peacekeeping presence in Haiti, after more
than 15 years, and the transition to a special political
mission is an important milestone for the country. Once
complete, we hope to be able to hold Haiti up as an
example of a successfully nationally owned transition.
As the Security Council has repeatedly stated,
it is the primary responsibility of the Government of
Haiti to address the underlying drivers of instability
in the country. A successful transition will depend, in
large part, on progress from the Haitian Government
on a range of issues, including holding free and fair
elections, the continued professionalization of the
Haitian National Police, the reduction of community
and gang violence, the protection of human rights and
justice-sector reform.
The United States remains committed to Haiti’s
future, and it is essential for the Government of Haiti to
seize the opportunity that the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti represents. In addition to engaging all
Haitian stakeholders, including the full and effective
participation of women, the Government of Haiti must
continue to work closely with the United Nations and
international partners. By doing so, Haiti can lay the
groundwork for a prosperous and successful future.
Transitions are, by nature, a time of flux and
instability. However, through careful planning and
communication, clear benchmarks and the meaningful
participation of women, we can advance the cause of
peace, security and stability.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to

S/PV. 8579

welcome Foreign Minister Popolizio Bardales, Foreign
Minister Edmond, Minister Leite Magalhães to the
Security Council.
We warmly congratulate the Republic of Peru
on convening today’s meeting and on assuming the
Council presidency for a second time. We also welcome
the precise and detailed information provided by the
briefers, which has allowed us to edify ourselves on the
matter before us today. We also take this opportunity to
acknowledge the actions taken by the United Nations
system to build peace and the hard work of civilians,
military and police in countries in conflict.
A peacekeeping mission’s transition to another
type of mission necessarily implies a systematic
reduction of military, police and civilian personnel. In
order for such reductions not to impede the progress
made, all necessary actions must be taken based on
a coherent analysis of the root causes of the problem
and the opportunities for and the limitations of a State
to take on the responsibilities previously shouldered
by the outgoing mission. If a country lacks certain
economic, political and security conditions, in addition
to institutional capacity, the withdrawal of a mission
will lead to a high-risk situation and, in the worst
case, to a recurrence of the prior calamitous situation.
I repeat: if a country lacks certain economic, political
and security conditions, in addition to institutional
capacity, the withdrawal of a mission will lead to a highrisk situation and, in the worst case, to a recurrence of
the prior calamitous situation.
The handover to a political mission needs to include
due attention to the various options for dealing with
major challenges, such as security and governance, in
order to ensure an effective transition. The deadlines
for transitions should be the result of careful political
and operational assessments, with particular attention
paid to balancing factors such as political demand,
financial pressure and sustaining peace. A political
mission must be directly involved in creating the State
capacities necessary for coordinating economic and
social development initiatives. We believe that the
latter is essential if we wish to improve living standards
in the most vulnerable areas. It is a crucial step towards
addressing the origins of social problems generated by
violence and instability.
Actions required during transitions include
adaptation to the needs of host countries and the
integration of vulnerable groups, such as women and

19-2225321/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

youth, which are important both as agents of change
and in sustaining peace. Moreover, we must foster
joint actions that are linked to the United Nations
system. Furthermore, it is important to stress the need
for adequate financial resources for programmes that
support peace and development, and not forget to
allow for appropriate flexibility in periods of certain
political instability.
In terms of economic sustainability, such
institutions as the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund fulfil fundamental tasks through their
initiatives. These entities ensure that host countries
have the capacity and resources for maintaining
peace through their technical-assistance programmes,
judicial-reform projects and social-coherence policies.
Trust funds constitute a useful tool for channelling
donations to emergency projects and for providing
essential budgetary support for the post-conflict stage.
We must also strengthen joint strategic alliances among
the United Nations, bilateral and international donors,
multilateral financial institutions and the private sector.
In addition, a fundamental aspect for our delegation
is the vulnerability caused by both climate change and
natural disasters, which are common to many conflict
zones. Some countries are characterized by fragile
ecosystems that generate precarious conditions, causing
human displacement and threatening peace, stability
and security. These are some of the many challenges
to take into account when designing exit strategies and
thereby avoid the escalation and recurrence of conflict.
We recognize the excellent work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and advocate its greater collaboration with
the Security Council.
Our central concern is that all due attention be paid
to countries emerging from conflict. We must use the
Security Council’s convening power, so that key actors
and strategic alliances and regional and subregional
organizations can achieve positive outcomes. For
example, the African Union provides a context that
ensures consistency among initiatives undertaken at
the national level and allows for regular exchanges
of information.
Reconciliation is a key objective in building
sustainable peace. It undoubtedly contributes to the
prevention of relapses into violence, as it enables the
creation of interpersonal and group relationships in
society and between a State and its citizens. We are
aware that circumstances are not always the same,
22/28

18/07/2019

so each society must take into account its specific
situation when analysing the nature of a conflict and
the character of its transition.
In conclusion, to resolve current structural
conflicts, we must move towards the recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction of countries in
conflict, which is the only way for them to lay the
foundations of sustainable development, in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Furthermore, the participation of citizens in political
and economic processes for promoting equity and
preventing violence at all levels must be guaranteed.
Finally, we call for redoubled efforts to find political
and financial solutions that allow Governments to build
strong national institutions, which are an effective
guarantee of lasting peace.
Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to begin by expressing our
thanks to the Peruvian presidency for convening this
important meeting. I also extend a warm welcome
to the Ministers who have honoured us with their
presence today in the Security Council and to the
representatives of such relevant institutions, including
the World Bank, the African Development Bank and
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Global peacekeeping efforts need to be redesigned
to deal effectively with today’s conflicts and their
root causes. The complexity and duration of existing
conflicts, as well as their links to violent extremism,
terrorism and organized crime, make it necessary
to invest in the reorganization of United Nations
architecture so as to support the efforts of countries
to strengthen peace in the world. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea recognizes the efforts
of Secretary-General Guterres to ensure political
and operational coherence and plans to improve the
leadership, accountability and capacity of the United
Nations to support this important agenda.
We agree in particular that investing in global,
inclusive and sustainable development is the best
tool for preventing violent conflicts. We therefore
encourage the Secretary-General’s efforts to guarantee
the reform of the United Nations development system.
We commend the work and the unique role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in its support for these
processes throughout the world — especially for the
African Solidarity Initiative, the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8579

in Peace and Security and the memorandum of
understanding between the African Union Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office — which are
actively promoting gender equality and fully respect
the principle of national sovereignty.

must be to build peace. When the time comes to
withdraw, this must be done in close collaboration with
the local Government, with an orderly and well-defined
handovers of responsibilities and tasks to local bodies
and forces.

In recent years, the consequences of conflicts have
dragged certain countries down into political instability,
poverty, the violation of human rights, damage to
infrastructure and the weakening of institutions.
Countries emerging from conflicts and wars have
to face multiple challenges in the areas of economy,
infrastructure, reconstruction, the eradication of
poverty, the creation of employment, education, public
health and social security. In these situations, the
efforts of the international community should focus on
providing genuine assistance to the countries concerned
with the aim of achieving an economic recovery that
should prioritize industrialization, the modernization
of agriculture and the development of human resources,
in which consolidating educational programmes should
also be afforded particular importance.

To conclude, we believe that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission provides a holistic and
comprehensive vision of the challenges arising from
wars and conflicts. The Peacebuilding Commission,
as the coordinator of all multilateral efforts, will
undoubtedly strengthen cooperation between parties,
including United Nations organs and agencies,
Member States, national authorities, United Nations
missions and country teams, regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
civil society, women’s groups, youth organizations
and, where appropriate, the private sector and national
human rights institutions.

It is crucial to assist countries in post-conflict
stages to design comprehensive strategies for
reconstruction and sustainable development, and
pursuant to the circumstances of each situation. There
is no single model for the construction of peace, as
many of my colleagues in the Council have pointed out.
In providing assistance, the international community
must respect the idiosyncrasies of each country and
take its views and opinions into account, as such
countries are the ones primarily concerned with their
own stability and reconstruction. We therefore call on
the international community to pay greater attention to
the socioeconomic development of post-conflict States.
The positive experiences of Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, to name but a few, deserve our
recognition, as they provide tangible, practical examples
of lessons learned and good practices. Countries of other
African regions are embarking on similar processes and
we wish them every success. We invite the actors in the
various conflicts to put the supreme interests of their
nations first and do their utmost to achieve stability and
peace in their countries.
In this context, we reiterate that the United Nations
missions deployed around the world are not an end in
themselves, but rather a tool at our disposal to support
and accompany peace processes in countries affected
by conflict. Therefore, the ultimate goal of intervention

Such coordination is vital if we want to address
these situations in a broad and inclusive manner that
addresses questions of cooperation for development.
In that regard, Equatorial Guinea believes that closer
contact and interaction between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council are a priority. To
that end, we underscore the usefulness of interactive
meetings such as today’s and the need for more frequent
contact between that body and this organ.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It is an honour to have you,
Mr. President, presiding over this Chamber. I would
also like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Worship of Haiti, Mr. Bocchit
Edmond; and my brotherly neighbour, the Minister for
Legal Reforms and Parliamentary Affairs of TimorLeste, Mr. Fidelis Leite Magalhães.
We thank our briefers — the Secretary-General and
our colleagues from the World Bank and the African
Development Bank — and the Peruvian presidency for
convening this important meeting.
Peacekeeping and special political missions are
among the most effective tools at the disposal of the
United Nations to promote peace and stability, but they
are not a magic wand. There is a limit to what they
can achieve. Many of today’s conflicts are intractable.
The departure of such missions often takes place
when challenges to sustaining peace remain — some
with the potential to cause a relapse. Improving the
management of transitions is imperative to laying the

19-2225323/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

groundwork for lasting peace. Today’s discussion is
timely as we proceed with the transitions in Darfur
and Haiti. I wish to underline four important points for
successful transitions.
First, we must change the way we perceive
transitions. Transitions must not be seen as an end
in themselves, but rather as a long-term process that
starts before and stretches beyond the closure of a
mission. No United Nations entity can single-handedly
sustain peace throughout a transition. We need early
and integrated planning, harnessing the strengths of
different United Nations entities and developing a clear
division of labour, including between the mission and
the United Nations country team. Partnership with
actors beyond the United Nations, including regional
organizations and international financial institutions,
is also key.
Secondly, we must recognize the primacy of
national ownership and leadership. Peacebuilding must
be home-grown. There is no one-size-fits-all formula.
A successful transition requires strengthening local
and national capacities to build on the mission’s gains.
The inclusive participation of relevant national actors
in peacebuilding is essential. International support can
play a catalytic role, but must be provided in line with
the country’s peacebuilding strategies and needs, in
full respect for its sovereignty.
Thirdly, we need adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing, especially beyond the mission’s
withdrawal. More investment in peacebuildingrelated official development assistance is needed.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) should
further explore options on innovative financing for
peacebuilding, including to unlock domestic financing
resources. The outcome of the first PBC policy task
force on private sector partnership, facilitated by
Indonesia, remains valid.
We are pleased that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2019/448) gave appropriate recognition to the
valuable contribution of South-South cooperation
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. South-South
cooperation enables the participation of traditional
donors and international financial institutions through
triangular arrangements. The senior leadership of the
United Nations must further explore the potential of
South-South cooperation. The Peacebuilding Support
Office and the United Nations Office for South-South
24/28

18/07/2019

Cooperation could initiate joint projects to support
countries under the agenda of the PBC. Development,
economic growth, improved quality of life and the
eradication of poverty should also be our main focus in
order to maintain lasting peace.
Fourthly, we should strengthen the advisory role of
the PBC to support the Council’s work in transitions.
The PBC has been providing observations to the
Council ahead of the mandate renewal of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. These best
practices could be replicated in other missions. Contextspecific and tailored advice from the PBC would ensure
that national priorities are factored into the Council’s
mandate formulation.
We see the merit in improving the SecretaryGeneral’s report for each mission by including
recommendations to minimize risks related to the
mission’s departure and key benchmarks that must be
achieved to ensure a responsible transition. The PBC
should make the most of its convening role to facilitate
synergy and coherence in peacebuilding throughout
transitions by actively engaging with all relevant
United Nations entities and implementing actors on
the ground.
In conclusion, as one of the largest troop- and
police-contributing countries, in our humble view
the indicator of success of a peacekeeping mission
or a special political mission is when it is no longer
in situ and the country can grow peacefully with no
peacekeepers on its territory.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire commends Peru for organizing this Security
Council briefing, presided over by its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Néstor Popolizio
Bardales, whom we congratulate on his exemplary
stewardship of our work.
We also welcome the participation of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and congratulates him
on the quality of his briefing and the relevance of
his recommendations.
I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia and take note of his contributions, in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Worship of Haiti and the Minister for Legal Reforms
and Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste.
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Finally my delegation welcomes the very
informative briefings of Mr. Franck Bousquet, Senior
Director of the Fragility, Conflict and Violence Group
of the World Bank, and Mr. Yero Baldeh, Director of the
Transition States Coordination Office of the African
Development Bank.
The issue of strengthening partnerships for national
ownership of transitions is a part of my country’s recent
history and is therefore an experience that it can share
during its term on the Security Council. After 13 years
on the ground, the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire, considered by many observers to be a success
story, ended on 30 June 2017. The transition in Côte
d’Ivoire was fuelled by strong national ownership of
the entire crisis recovery and peacebuilding process,
characterized by close cooperation between the Ivorian
Government and the entire United Nations system,
strengthened by strategic partnerships coordinated with
regional institutional actors and development partners.
Those factors have enabled the Ivorian Government
to take ownership of the priority transition areas
identified by the Security Council and the Secretariat,
including national reconciliation, social cohesion,
the establishment of security and defence institutions
to ensure peace and stability in the country, and the
strengthening of the rule of law and the protection and
promotion of human rights.
In the light of its experience, Côte d’Ivoire
stresses the need to define clear and specific priority
objectives in areas considered essential to the success
of the transition plan, while taking into account
vulnerabilities that could lead to a resurgence of the
crisis. Defining those objectives must be done at the
request of the Government of the host country, in
conjunction with all other relevant national actors and
in collaboration with the United Nations system on the
ground. The aim is to set forth a clear, shared political
vision for a transition that is regularly reviewed to take
stock of its implementation and make the necessary
adjustments to the mandate of the United Nations
mission. National ownership of the process is also the
best way to ensure that the most vulnerable segments
of the population are included in transition plans, and it
generates a shared vision of priorities by national actors
and development partners.
My delegation also believes that a successful
transition hinges on good communication on the
objectives and rationale of United Nations action, which

S/PV. 8579

is essential for building the needed climate of trust
between the United Nations, the host Government and
local actors. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
role of ONUCI FM radio, which helped promote peace
and social cohesion during the transition process in
Côte d’Ivoire, and today has been succeeded by Radio
de la paix.
My delegation also highlights the significant
contribution of regional and subregional actors, as
well as the United Nations regional offices, such as
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, whose mediation and good offices missions have
buttressed transition plans. Regional and subregional
organizations also play a critical role, as demonstrated
by the support of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States for the initiatives
undertaken as part of the implementation of the
transition plan.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the national development plans
implemented by the Government have enjoyed the
support of bilateral and multilateral partners, as well
as international financial institutions, all of which
facilitated the economic recovery, the fight against
poverty and better access to education and health.
In that connection, my delegation commends the
productive cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government of Côte d’Ivoire,
which has enabled the mobilization of the necessary
resources for financing priority peacebuilding projects.
The success of any transition plan rests on a
multitude of factors, based on genuine desire to
emerge from crisis and robust national ownership of
the transition process. That ownership must also be
supported by a network of strategic partnerships with
the entire United Nations system, regional actors and
bilateral and institutional development partners. As
attention turns to other countries in transition, Côte
d’Ivoire hopes that their transition plans can benefit
from similar national ownership strategies and the
same support that my country received.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of Haiti.
Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Peruvian presidency
of the Security Council for having invited me to
participate in this important meeting, under the heading
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace”.

19-2225325/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

I welcome the relevance of the topic of the
meeting and the excellent quality of the concept note
(S/2019/540, annex) to guide our discussions. I also take
this opportunity to welcome the Secretary-General and
thank him for his outstanding efforts to achieve peace.
It is important that we continue to engage in
sustained reflection on the main requirements of
sustainable peace, taking into account each country’s
particular situation. Our discussions must focus on the
three interconnected and interdependent pillars of the
Organization’s action, and consider the real problems
of countries, the basic needs of populations and the
priorities set by national authorities.
There is therefore a need for efforts towards
coherence, strengthening partnerships, building new
partnerships and coordination at all levels so as to
restore trust and maximize long-term development
opportunities. It is those constructive exchanges that
will allow us to share best practices and identify
measures to improve the quality of life of the affected
populations and further promote sustainable peace. I
stress that lasting peace goes hand in hand with longterm development and that piecemeal solutions will
always be fragile.
I commend the efforts deployed by the
Organization, particularly by the Secretary-General, to
promote peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I would
like to emphasize, however, that the situation in the
Republic of Haiti must be well understood. Council
members will naturally agree with me that my country
has not emerged from a situation of armed conflict.
After the deployment in 2004 of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, we transitioned into
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which, as of 16 October, will
be replaced by the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti, in accordance with resolution 2476 (2019),
adopted by the Council on 25 June. I welcome once
again the adoption of the resolution, outside Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, which is a
positive development and a recognition of the efforts
deployed by the Haitian authorities, with the support of
United Nations missions.
Undeniable progress has been made in Haiti since
2004 in a particularly difficult security and stability
context, in particular in terms of strengthening the
capacities of the Haitian National Police. The same is true
in the areas of democracy, justice, human rights and the
26/28

18/07/2019

rule of law. However, much remains to be done. In that
regard, we note with interest the main tasks assigned to
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, pursuant
to paragraph 1 of the aforementioned resolution.
It would be remiss of me not to underscore the
fact that sustainable peace cannot be built in a context
of poverty, hunger, social inequality and exclusion.
We must therefore take into account the growing
importance of the effects of climate change and natural
disasters on the country’s security and stability. That
idea was largely upheld by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council following
its last mission to the country. The Group stresses the
need for a better understanding of all issues related
to insecurity, crime, instability and peace in Haiti.
The integrated United Nations presence must, in the
final analysis, seek to support the efforts of national
authorities and civil society initiatives to address the
root causes of mistrust, insecurity and instability, which
are without a doubt genuine obstacles to the country’s
long-term development.
I have duly noted Council members’ judicious
comments on and support for the transition process
from MINUJUSTH to the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti. Council members can rest assured
that the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Jovenel Moïse, and the Government of the Republic
are fully aware of their responsibility to improve the
living conditions of the Haitian people and will spare
no effort to that end.
The Haitian delegation will continue to call for
establishing United Nations missions that can address
the main emergencies faced by the countries concerned.
In the case of my country, I will mention only the
security, food, environmental and humanitarian
emergencies, including cholera.
Allow me to highlight two issues that I believe
deserve further attention: first, the importance of
unconditional and sustained funding for long-term
development efforts and, secondly, the need for
sustained dialogue, with due respect for their respective
functions and powers, between the Security Council and
other organs of the United Nations system, including
the Economic and Social Council, so as to ensure that
the United Nations presence in a country such as Haiti
is integrated, balanced and in synergy with the three
pillars of the Organization’s work.
19-22253

18/07/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8579

In conclusion, I would like to say that the desire
to promote lasting peace necessarily entails the desire
to improve the living conditions of all the populations
concerned, while bearing in mind the slogan of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: “Leave no
one behind”.

“The Government of Timor-Leste, in
consultation with UNMIT and with other relevant
stakeholders, is responsible for making decisions on
the nature, activities and role of the United Nations
after the withdrawal of UNMIT.” (S/2012/736,
annex, p. 2)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Legal Reforms and
Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste.

In our case, a high-level committee was created,
with representatives of the State of Timor-Leste and
UNMIT, to draft a joint transition plan to monitor the
finalization of UNMIT activities, including the handover process. Continued stability, the holding of free and
fair elections, the formation of a national Government
based on those elections, ensuring democratic space
for the opposition, as well as progress in other areas
identified in the transition process, such as police and
security, the rule of law, justice and human rights,
democratic governance and the elements of economic
development, requiring the specific assistance of the
Mission, were part of the joint transition plan. Once
those elements were deemed to have been met, our
national leaders decided that continued assistance was
best done through the United Nations country team,
bilateral and other multilateral partners, rather than a
peacekeeping or political mission.

Mr. Leite Magalhães (Timor-Leste): I warmly
salute the Security Council on behalf of my Government
and all my compatriots. I also extend sincere gratitude
to Peru, the President of the Security Council, for the
invitation extended to me to address this body, with
which my country’s history is forever intertwined.
For Timor-Leste, this discussion is timely as we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of a United
Nations-administered popular consultation mandated
by the Council through a special political mission,
the United Nations Mission in East Timor, which
enabled us to exercise self-determination. Following
our independence vote, the Council mandated the
establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). UNTAET
was followed by successive missions over a 10-year
period, which ended in 2012 with the establishment of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). It is therefore an honour for me to speak
from the perspective of a host country and share with
Council members some reflections on the importance
of partnerships and nationally owned transitions for
successful peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Drawing from my country’s partnership with
the United Nations, I will start by pointing out first
the importance of leadership and ownership. No
ownership of the transition processes, and hence no
successful inclusion of the people, are possible without
the full involvement of the national leaders. Regular,
extensive and meaningful consultations with national
Governments and local leaders throughout the life
of a mission, and more intensely as a mission winds
down, are paramount to ensuring ownership. National
Governments must be given the space to determine
the lifespan of the mission and the exit strategy for its
withdrawal. In a letter to the Secretary-General, dated
20 September 2012, our former Prime Minister, Xanana
Gusmão, underlined the nature of the relationship
during the transition as follows.

The Timorese leadership also proposed an
innovative working relationship of cooperation in
the form of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
who would focus on institutional strengthening and
development based on Timor-Leste’s own strategic
development plan and would also be a direct link to the
Office of the Secretary-General.
A subsequent Security Council mission, undertaken
in November 2012, verified the tangible progress
in multiple areas, as well as a number of milestones
reached, which reflected further consolidation towards
sustainable peace, democratic governance, the rule
of law and socioeconomic development during the
transition. The mission’s report (S/2012/889) also
confirmed the consensual position of Timorese
interlocutors, who requested the end of the United
Nations mission and articulated their vision for the next
stages of development, and presented the proposal for
the appointment of a Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral.
At the conclusion of UNMIT, local ownership,
leadership and consistent dialogue had become a set of
principles that contributed to the success of the Mission
and its sustained withdrawal.

19-2225327/28

S/PV.8579

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

I wish to also underline that financing for the
development aspects of the transition and the postMission exit phase is crucial to sustaining peace. Official
development assistance needs to be well coordinated in
order to be efficient and effective in supporting the exit
plan. The deployment of advisers should be oriented to
those strategic needs in a focused manner.
To conclude, although we do hope that our
experience can be useful as the Council considers
the upcoming downsizing and withdrawal of some
peacekeeping and political missions, such as the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti and

28/28

18/07/2019

the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, we all know from experience that one
size really does not fit all and that there is no quick fix.
The right balance needs to be found, together
with the leadership of each of those countries, for an
integrated exit strategy that has the support of the Peace
Building Commission and the continued engagement
of the international and regional financial institutions,
the United Nations regional commissions, the United
Nations country teams and other relevant parts of the
United Nations system to sustain the hard-earned peace.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

19-22253
