S/PV.8928

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8928th meeting

Monday, 13 December 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Olanda
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Syed
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39246 (E)
*2139246*

S/PV.8928

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council according to the year
of adoption of the related Council decisions: His
Excellency Ambassador Tarek Ladeb, Permanent
Representative of Tunisia, Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, and Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012); Her Excellency Ambassador Rhonda
King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and other Procedural Questions
and Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014); His Excellency Ambassador
Sven Jürgenson, Permanent Representative of Estonia,
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1518 (2003) concerning Iraq, and Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan; and myself, as Permanent
Representative of the Niger and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic; and His Excellency Ambassador Hai Anh
Pham, Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ladeb.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to present the report of the Tunisian chairmanship of
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
During its membership to the Security
Council, Tunisia has chaired the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, established pursuant
2/13

13/12/2021

to a decision of the Security Council contained in a
statement by its President (S/PRST/2001/3) made at
the 4270th meeting, held on 31 January 2001, to hold
consultations with troop-contributing countries in a
timely manner at different stages of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
Notwithstanding the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic on the work of the Council in 2020,
the Working Group resumed its activities. Given the
importance of peacekeeping operations, which have
been affected by the pandemic, the promotion of
peace operations is a priority despite the exceptional
circumstances in the world, especially in conflict zones.
On 21 December 2020, the Working Group held in
this context a video-teleconference on “Transitions and
exit strategies in peacekeeping operations: taking stock
and looking forward”. Such issues are of paramount
importance, given the situation of achieving and
building peace in a number of zones, the importance
of keeping the gains made in peacekeeping operations
and transitioning to the next stages without any setback
that might cause the exacerbation or the resurgence of
conflicts. It is also important to create an environment
conducive to sustainable peace in countries that have
witnessed conflicts and crises, especially by supporting
political settlements and ensuring the protection
of civilians.
The members of the Security Council heard
briefings made by Ms. Rania Dagash-Kamara, Chief of
Policy and Best Practices in the Department of Peace
Operations, and Ms. Anita Kokui Gbeho, Deputy Joint
Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. During that
meeting, there was emphasis to invest in building and
sustaining peace in order to avoid losing it after the end
of United Nations missions. We must also address the
important challenges facing sustainable peace.
In our discussions, it was agreed that changes in the
duties of United Nations missions are not related only
to the departure of the missions after completing their
tasks, but represent a process of strategic rearrangement
with regard to the United Nations presence to preserve
and build upon what has been achieved. To that end,
the Secretary-General has established transitions and
exit strategies of United Nations peace missions as
top priority.
In 2021, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations held two video-teleconferences. The
21-39246

13/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

first meeting was held on 13 April to consider the
implementation of resolution 2518 (2020), on the safety
and security of peacekeepers. Major General Jai Menon,
Director of the United Nations Office of Peacekeeping
Strategic Partnerships; Dr. Bernhard Lennartz, Acting
Director of the Division of Healthcare Management
and Occupational Safety and Health; and Mr. Anthony
Amidon, Director of Operations Support Department
in the Office of Information and Communication
Technology delivered briefings on the different aspects
of this issue, which continues to be important, especially
in the light of the increasing challenges and risks faced
by peacekeepers in many conflict zones and the rising
number of casualties among them, as well as the rise
in attacks by terrorist organizations and armed groups.
Also discussed was the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which is aimed at refocusing
peacekeeping operations on specific mandates to make
them more robust and safe while enhancing political
solutions and ensuring that peacekeepers are better
trained and equipped
Further attention was given in the meeting to
the safety and security of peacekeepers after the
report prepared by Lieutenant General (Retired)
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled “Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers”, which aims
to improve the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers, as well as the Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) and Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+)
document. The Santos Cruz report identified acts of
violence as a result of security risks emanating from
armed conflict, terrorism, violence and crime.
When we spoke of safety, we also focused on
environmental risks or those which are man-made that
might cause illness or death. All statements emphasized
the importance of complying with the highest security
and safety standards, while promoting peacekeepers’
capabilities. They also focused on good training,
with special attention to providing peacekeepers with
the equipment necessary for supporting the mandate
requirements with ensuring the safety and security of
mission staff.
During our discussion, we also addressed
fundamental preventive and medical care structures,
communication, awareness and empowerment of staff
members, as well as the mobility, fail-safe equipment,
effective training before proliferation, technological
skills, flexibility and smart response that enable United
Nations to peacekeeping. All participants called for

S/PV. 8928

greater collective efforts to respond to the current
challenges in order to protect peacekeepers, who are
facing significant risks in the service of international
peace and security.
In that regard, I reiterate my appreciation for the
efforts of all women and men who are working to
achieve a safer world. I also remember those who have
paid the ultimate price while defending peace.
During its meeting on 6 October, the Working
Group focused on supporting the United Nations
police and enhancing their role in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, leading to positive effects
on global policing. United Nations Police Adviser
Luis Carrillo enumerated in his statement the most
important achievements of the United Nations police
and the new measures taken to build confidence with
the local population by way of facilitating humanitarian
assistance, deterring criminal activities and putting an
end to human rights violations. He also showed that the
United Nations police force is characterized by diversity
and experience, embodies the values enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and has positive
effect on communities, including on human rights and
protecting and empowering vulnerable groups. The
statements of member States focused on the importance
of adequately equipping United Nations police, which
is tasked with daunting missions, including managing
public order, patrolling and community policing with
continuous presence within vulnerable communities to
protect civilians. It also helps Member States to develop
responsible national police force.
Given the extraordinary circumstances that we
are experiencing globally and the increasing risks
and challenges facing the United Nations missions to
establish peace, there is an urgent need to continue
to strive, together with all stakeholders, in the
area of peacekeeping in order to implement the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s A4P
and A4P+ initiatives, as well as improving mission
performance and the means to facilitate mission
mandates, while providing peacekeepers with the
necessary protection throughout the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding stages through commitment to
promoting political solutions to conflicts and deepening
the political impact of peacekeeping, in addition to
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda while committing to supporting performance
and accountability and enhancing partnerships.

21-392463/13

S/PV.8928

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Ladeb for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador King.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): For
the past two years, I have had the privilege to chair the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014), and I welcome this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the Committee’s
activities during this period. Before I proceed, allow
me to extend my gratitude to the Security Council
Affairs Division, which has consistently supported me,
as Chair, as well as the entire Committee. I also express
my appreciation to the Panel of Experts, with whom we
have had seamless cooperation.
Over the past two years, the Committee met eight
times, both via videoconference and in person, to
receive briefings from the Panel of Experts following
the submission of their respective midterm updates and
final reports and to consider their recommendations. In
that regard, the Committee agreed on follow-up action
in relation to a total of 11 of the recommendations
emanating from the various reports by the Panel of
Experts. The Committee also convened informal
informals to receive a briefing by Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, and will
meet on 17 December to receive, for the first time,
an oral briefing from Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, pursuant to a recommendation
contained within the Panel of Experts’ midterm update
to the Committee.
Under my chairpersonship, the Committee
considered three communications invoking the
exemption provision for humanitarian or other purposes,
as set out in resolution 2511 (2020). The Committee
also updated its guidelines to reflect resolutions 2511
(2020) and 2564 (2021). That process was completed
in October, and the guidelines have since been
published on the Committee’s website. Additionally,
the Committee added four individuals to the sanctions
list — one listed via resolution 2564 (2021) for various
acts, involving sexual violence, and three added to
the list for the first time, pursuant to a decision taken
within the Committee.
This year, following a request for support made
by the Panel of Experts, I proposed the possibility
of the Chair’s visit to the region. My proposal was
4/13

13/12/2021

made on the basis that engagement with stakeholders
on the ground would be conducive to the work of the
Committee, notably in support of the Panel of Experts.
The visit to the region would have been an opportunity
to raise awareness of the purpose and scope of the
sanctions measures concerning Yemen and would
have allowed for the Committee to receive first-hand
information on the implementation and impact of the
sanctions measures concerning Yemen. Although the
terms of reference were circulated and considered by
the Committee, we were unable to undertake the trip
as a result of the ongoing restrictions related to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in some
of the countries we planned to visit. Nevertheless, I
believe that the incoming Chair should consider taking
up that initiative in future, when the situation allows.
I also had the privilege of chairing the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, another top priority of mine. At
this juncture, allow me to extend my appreciation to
the Security Council Affairs Division for its continued
support and assistance over the past two years.
The joint retreat held in Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines in January 2020, with Kuwait as
Chair, provided the guiding framework for my
chairpersonship — action-oriented implementation. To
that end, my focus in the Informal Working Group has
been to explore concrete ways to secure implementation
of presidential note 507 and subsequently adopted
notes. In 2021, 11 of 12 presidencies prepared
those commitments.
Despite the disruption caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, the Working Group held 13 formal
meetings and maintained its focus on implementation.
The agenda included a standing item entitled
“Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507): Reflections from past
presidencies and proposals for future action”, which
allowed recent presidencies to reflect on working
methods during their respective months, including
their efforts towards securing the implementation of
said note and subsequently adopted notes. It was also
intended as an opportunity to explore the overlooked
provisions of presidential note S/2017/507 and other
presidential notes so that we could better utilize them,
thereby contributing to the overall effectiveness of the
Security Council.
21-39246

13/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

In July 2021, following weeks of negotiations, the
Informal Working Group adopted four presidential
notes. Presidential note S/2021/645 was aimed at
strengthening incoming members’ familiarity with
the working methods of the Security Council and
its subsidiary bodies and invited the Secretariat to
take appropriate measures, including by keeping a
register of training opportunities offered. Presidential
note S/2021/646 underscored the role of those who
coordinate the monthly activities of respective
missions on the Council in securing implementation.
Presidential note S/2021/647 recognized the important
role played by the President of the Security Council
in securing implementation and invited presidencies
to consider preparing written monthly commitments.
Finally, presidential note S/2021/648 was a declaration
of the Security Council’s commitment to prioritizing
multilingualism at all times. While I presented a
number of other draft notes for consideration, including
penholdership, and a note focused on the need for the
Security Council to ensure, at all times, its ability to
function continuously in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, these notes have not yet found
consensus. However, there is appetite to engage on some
of these issues, and we will continue to seek consensus
during our remaining weeks on the Security Council.
Before concluding, I would like to express my
gratitude to the members of the 2140 Committee and
the Informal Working Group for their engagement
and productive cooperation on various issues over the
past two years. I wish the incoming Chairs of these
subsidiary bodies every success.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador King for her briefing.
I now give the floor back to Ambassador Ladeb,
in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau so that he can
complete his briefing to the Council.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have had the honour and
privilege of leading the Tunisian chairmanship of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
over the past two years. I welcome this opportunity
to share my reflections and observations with the

S/PV. 8928

members of the Council and my colleagues on the
other Committees.
Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat to
international peace and security. That threat has been
greatly exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We continue to face
significant challenges in a broad range of areas, including
the adaptation of terrorist groups to counter-terrorism
measures of Member States, the use of information and
communication technologies for terrorist purposes,
border management and civil aviation security, the
protection of critical infrastructure and soft targets, the
threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, in addition to
the continued appearance of new trends, including new
methods for terrorism financing and the insurgence of
terrorism motivated by xenophobia, racism and other
forms of intolerance. Such threats are often exacerbated
in fragile contexts, particularly during prolonged and
new armed conflicts.
Since its establishment, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has stood at the forefront of efforts
to counter these threats. Tunisia was a member of the
Security Council in 2001 and actively participated
in the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and the
establishment of the CTC. We were pleased during
our presidency earlier this year to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the Committee. We launched
this commemorative process in January through a
Ministerial debate (see S/2021/48) and the issuance
of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/1). On
4 November, the CTC held a special meeting on this
topic and adopted an outcome document that outlined
new threats, trends and challenges, the measures that
need to be taken, and the way forward.
Supported by its Executive Directorate (CTED), the
CTC has continued to implement its mandate, which
has been described in more than two dozen resolutions.
A few facts and figures will suffice to indicate the
Committee’s progress. Over the past two years, acting
on the Committee’s behalf, CTED has conducted 15
country-assessment visits. The Committee adopted
modalities for hybrid visits, which allowed us to continue
assessment visits during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Two enhanced assessment
and stocktaking tools — the electronic detailed
implementation survey and the revised overview of
implementation assessment — were launched to ensure
continued thoroughness, consistency, transparency and

21-392465/13

S/PV.8928

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

13/12/2021

even-handedness in desk review and stocktaking and to
help produce quantitative and qualitative analysis.

unified, efficient and coordinated One United Nations
response to terrorism.

Twenty-three Member States have given their
consent to a full or partial release of their visit
reports and 705 identified technical-assistance needs
for posting on the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact portal for use by
United Nations implementing partners. The United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism has been invited
to provide briefings to the CTC twice a year and to
attend, as an observer, CTED briefings to the CTC
on the findings of country-assessment visits. Policy
papers and guidelines have been updated, including the
Committee’s visit-framework document and procedures,
as well as the technical guide to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.
Global surveys of Member States’ implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions,
including resolution 1624 (2005), have been adopted by
the Committee and issued as documents of the Council.
The CTC has held 13 briefings and open and closed
events on regional and thematic topics to address the
interests and concerns of States in the area of counterterrorism.

Thirdly, we must bring into full play the role of
the CTC as a key subsidiary body of the Council in
order to ensure effective implementation of relevant
Council resolutions. In this regard, the work of the
Committee was not only challenged by the COVID-19
pandemic, but also suffered the impact of the austerity
measures implemented by the United Nations. On
multiple occasions, the Committee has not been able to
hold its meetings owing to the lack of resources, even
in the absence of a parallel formal Council meeting,
thus affecting the effective implementation of the
programme of work. While the good stewardship of
United Nations resources must be a priority, it cannot
come at the expense of the efficient and meaningful
work of the Security Council. I invite Council members
and the Secretariat to work closely together to find
solutions that provide the right balance in this regard.

Indeed, much has been achieved. Yet more
remains to be done. After two years of chairing the
Committee under exceptional circumstances, I would
like to make the following observations and proposals.
First, we must continue to place counter-terrorism and
countering violent extremism conducive to terrorism
high on the international peace and security agenda.
This is particularly important in view of the additional
threats and challenges posed by COVID-19.
Secondly, in order to address the evolution of
the global terrorist threat, it is essential that we
continue to adapt our approaches and strengthen our
cooperation. One of the main lessons learned during
our chairmanship is that, with the necessary political
will, we can always find solutions. The Committee’s
procedures and methods of work are essential tools
to ensuring consistency, transparency and evenhandedness. However, the Committee was able to
come up with creative ways that allowed it to function
continuously, at times even with further added value.
This is a timely conclusion in view of CTED’s mandate
renewal, where we can examine what has worked so far
and what can we do better. This exercise is not an easy
one, but it is a necessary one, if our main objective is a
6/13

Fourthly, we must identify effective ways and
means to achieve deliverables and concrete results by
facilitating the delivery of targeted technical assistance
for capacity-building and ensuring impact on the
ground. The end result is as important as the process. In
this regard, the Committee must continue to strengthen
its partnership, collaboration and cooperation with the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the other
Council subsidiary bodies, United Nations specialized
agencies and international and regional organizations.
Fifthly, we must continue to enhance transparency
in the Committee’s working methods and outreach.
There is a need for better dialogue between the CTC
and visited States, including late or non-submitting
States. In the same vein, there should be greater
access for non-Committee members and other actors,
including academia and civil society organizations.
In all their activities, the CTC and CTED continue
to address the human rights and gender aspects of
counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism.
I am delighted that the Tunisian chairmanship has
been able to promote a multidisciplinary approach in
countering terrorism over the past two years. As part
of such efforts, on 16 December, Tunisia will organize
an end-of-chairmanship town hall meeting which will
serve as a platform to hear further views from civil
society and other counter-terrorism partners on the
work of the Committee. We are very pleased that the
incoming Chair of the Committee will be joining these
discussions, and we invite Chairs of other Committees
21-39246

13/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to consider making similar discussions an established
practice in future.
Finally, we must continue to encourage Member
States to share their progress, experiences and new
challenges and needs with the CTC in order to
strengthen the CTC’s understanding of their challenges
and enhance its ability to identify effective practices
and capacity needs and support.
I wish to conclude my remarks by extending Tunisia’s
deep appreciation to the members of the Committee over
the last two years for their invaluable contributions,
their flexibility and sense of responsibility. Without our
unified efforts, no progress would have been made. I
wish also to thank Assistant Secretary-General Michèle
Coninsx, Executive Director of CTED, and her team,
for their support for the Committee and its Chair. I wish
to thank my capable team for managing the daily tasks
of the Chair’s Office, and I wish the incoming Chair
and incoming Committee members every success in
their future deliberations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Ladeb for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Jürgenson.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I have had the honour to
chair the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1518 (2003) concerning Iraq, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan.
I thank the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to share my observations on that mandate.

S/PV. 8928

individuals were delisted. I encourage Iraq to continue
to submit requests so that the remaining 13 entities and
81 individuals can be delisted as soon as possible.
For the past two years, the issue of recovering Iraqi
financial assets abroad has remained as relevant as
earlier. I urge all countries where remaining assets lie
to cooperate with Iraq in recovering them in accordance
with relevant resolutions. I hope that the delisting of
the remaining entities will continue and that it will
be possible to terminate the sanctions regime in the
foreseeable future.
I will now turn to the 1591 Sanctions Committee on
the Sudan and then end with some general remarks on
all of the Committees.
Two years ago, my predecessor, Ambassador
Wronecka, Permanent Representative of Poland,
handed over the chairmanship of the 1591 Committee
concerning the Sudan, while emphasizing the
importance of transparency, fairness and accountability
in work of the Committee. She also pointed out that
the Chair has limited autonomy and freedom of action,
given that the Committee reaches all of its decisions by
consensus. That has continued during my term and, in
many instances, political divisions inside the Council
make it difficult to agree on even minor actions in the
Committees. I aimed to build on the great work and
lessons learned by previous Chairs.
Let me highlight three aspects, in particular, of
which I am proud, and related recommendations.

Throughout the last two years as the Chair of the
Committee, I have been committed to supporting Iraq
in its efforts to recover its assets and achieve progress
with regard to the delisting of entities and individuals.
The Committee and the Permanent Mission of Iraq
have continued efforts towards the reduction of the
number of listed entities, maintaining the momentum
created during the previous Chair’s term and reducing
the number of entities on the sanctions list by more than
80 per cent over the course of the past two years.

First, in order to improve transparency and make
the Committee’s engagement with the Council more
meaningful, I provided more substantive 90-day
briefings to the Council. We often made use of the Panel
of Experts’ reporting, as it is a valuable resource not
only for the Council, but also for the larger public. So
far, we are the only Sanctions Committee that has done
more substantive reporting by using the Panel’s reports,
but I hope that our paving the way in that practice
will open doors so that others can follow. Therefore,
I highly encourage my successor, as well as other
Sanctions Committees, to follow suit, as it improves
transparency and makes the Committees’ engagement
with the Council more meaningful.

That has been remarkable progress. Due to the
close cooperation with the Permanent Mission of Iraq,
the Committee has delisted 63 entities, with only 13
entities remaining on the sanctions list. In addition, five

In that regard, I would also like to point out that,
in the Sudan sanctions regime, only the final reports of
the Panel of Experts are published. For transparency,
the midterm updates should be made available to all, as

I would like to begin with the 1518 Committee
on Iraq.

21-392467/13

S/PV.8928

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

well. The publication of quarterly updates should also
be given due consideration. In relation to transparency,
I would also like to emphasize the importance of
respecting and comprehending the relevant resolutions
and the Committees’ rules and procedures.
Following consultations and based on creative
problem-solving, we have respected the regulations by
submitting the 90-day report and the programme of
work of the Panel of Experts in writing when it has been
impossible to brief the Council owing to restrictions
resulting from the coronavirus disease.
Our second noteworthy contribution to the
Committee has been to update the current sanctions
regime as much as possible. We have managed to
update the list of sanctioned individuals. I would
encourage my successor to continue updating the
sanctions regime, to the extent that conditions allow
and developments require.
Our third biggest contribution has been building
trust and cooperation between the Sudan and the
Sanctions Committee, as a matter of priority. I believe
that the sanctions regime will only benefit from
closer cooperation between the Committee and the
Sudan. Therefore, I highly encourage my successor
to build a strong relationship with the Sudan, as well.
One possible avenue to pave that relationship is by
organizing a visit by the Chair. Unfortunately, I have
had to postpone my visit to the Sudan twice — first,
because of the pandemic and, subsequently, because of
the developments on the ground. I sincerely hope that
the new Chair will be able to visit the country as soon
as possible.
As coordination and sharing information among
different subsidiary bodies and other United Nations
entities are crucial, I have also worked to enhance
contacts with other subsidiary bodies, as well as with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. I would like to recall
that the Panel of Experts is mandated by the relevant
resolutions to assess among, other things, violations
and abuses of human rights, including those that involve
attacks on the civilian population, sexual and genderbased violence and violations and abuses against
children. Such reporting must continue. Therefore,
I would like to urge the Committee to continue the
practice of cooperation with other subsidiary bodies, as
well as with the Special Representative of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
8/13

13/12/2021

and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
I would also like to address the misconceptions
about United Nations sanctions. Too often, a narrative is
put forward on how sanctions harm the host population’s
development and security. In reality, such narratives
could not be further from the truth. The arms embargo
helps to prevent the additional flow of arms into
Darfur. At the same time, targeted sanctions are aimed
at punishing individuals who are spoilers of peace. The
sanctions in place serve to help the population.
I thank the Panel of Experts on the Sudan, which
has been instrumental in supporting the Committee. I
completely agree with my predecessor that one cannot
overestimate the value of the information that all Panels
provide to the Committees — information that is often
obtained in the most challenging circumstances. Their
independence, security and working conditions are of
great importance.
Member States have to respect the privileges and
immunities of experts on mission. In that regard, I have
to address the situation regarding the Ombudsperson
for the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. The
Council needs to strengthen the institution of the
Ombudsperson. Estonia is currently working on an
initiative to address both matters, and we hope to bring
about a change to show our full support for both the
Panels and the Ombudsperson.
In conclusion, it has been a tremendous honour to
serve as Chair of both Committees. I have sought to
facilitate progress where possible, bring the sanctions
regimes up to date as much as possible, enhance
transparency, build trust and strengthen coordination
among stakeholders. It is unfortunate that my successors,
at this time, have not yet been determined and I hope
that, in the future, the chairmanship of subsidiary
bodies will be decided in a more timely manner, as
requested in presidential note S/2016/619, updating
note S/2010/507. In that regard, I would like to remind
all members of the Council of their responsibility to
make every effort to agree on the appointment at the
earliest possibility.
In conclusion, my words of gratitude go to the
Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch and the
Secretariat for their invaluable assistance. I would
21-39246

13/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

like to assure the next Chairs of the Committees of my
full support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Jürgenson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ladeb.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Tunisia
has assumed the chairmanship of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048
(2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau over the past two
years. We have been committed to coordinating and
cooperating with members of the Committee, as
well as Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
and the Permanent Mission of the Republic of GuineaBissau on the various issues on the Committee’s agenda.
Throughout Tunisia’s chairmanship, we have seen a
number of security and political developments take place,
both domestically in Guinea-Bissau and regionally.
One notable example is the elections that were held
in Guinea-Bissau, which were preceded by political
tensions. The presidential elections were organized on
time on 24 November 2019 in a calm environment, as
was confirmed by international observers.
I would like to express my appreciation for
the efforts of various stakeholders, especially the
Economic Community of West African States, the
United Nations, the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European
Union, to support the smooth conduct of the elections.
I would also like to commend the efforts of all
concerned parties to overcome the crisis that followed
the announcement of the election results by resorting
to judicial and legal means. I commend the important
role played by stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau, who gave
precedence to the highest national interests and have
been committed to maintaining calm and avoiding any
action that would lead to escalation.
During Tunisia’s chairmanship of the Committee,
the Security Council held meetings pertaining to the
situation in Guinea-Bissau on 14 February 2020 (see
S/PV.8724) and 10 August 2020 (see S/PV.8754). We
listened to briefings by Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.

S/PV. 8928

The coronavirus disease pandemic has significantly
affected the work of our Committee. It has not been
possible to visit the country. That visit could have had
a positive impact on the work of the Committee and
on addressing the situation in Guinea-Bissau. It would
have allowed us to directly assess the situation on
the ground.
On 12 October 2020, on an exceptional basis, the
Committee held a meeting via video-teleconference at
which the members listened to a briefing by Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly on the progress achieved in terms of
ensuring stability and restoring constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau.
During Tunisia’s chairmanship of the Committee,
the Security Council unanimously adopted, on
28 February 2020 (see S/PV.8736), resolution 2512
(2020) which was presented by the Niger as penholder.
That resolution extended the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau until 31 December 2020, which is when
UNIOGBIS was set to close permanently.
As Chair of the Committee, Tunisia, along with
its other member States, contributed to ensuring a
convergence of views regarding the different provisions
of the resolution, especially the sanctions imposed on
Guinea-Bissau. Tunisia stressed the importance of
continuing consultation and coordination regarding the
sanctions within the Sanctions Committee, UNIOGBIS
and the various relevant stakeholders according to the
developments of the situation and the political progress
and reform in the country.
We hope that the Security Council will take all
necessary measures to lift the sanctions in accordance
with developments in the situation on the ground and the
progress achieved in terms of reforms and sustainable
development, which would enhance peace and security
in Guinea-Bissau and the region at large.
In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
thanks to the Office of Legal Affairs and the Legal
Department of the Secretariat for the assistance and
support provided during Tunisia’s chairmanship of
the Committee. I especially want to thank Mr. Manuel
Bressan, who was highly professional and constantly
ready to provide support and assistance. I would also
like to wish my successor every success.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Ladeb for his briefing.

21-392469/13

S/PV.8928

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
Over the past two years, I have had the privilege of
chairing the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
I would like to take this opportunity to share some
reflections on my role as Chair of those two Committees,
as well as the work accomplished during the reporting
period.
At the beginning of my mandate, and with the
support of the Secretariat, an internal work programme
was prepared for each Committee, with our ideas for
possible meetings, our objectives for each meeting and
the main points of interest. Unfortunately, as we all
know, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic
in March 2020 hampered the implementation of those
work plans, at least as we had originally envisaged
them. In that regard, I would like to acknowledge the
efforts of the Secretariat to put in place technological
solutions to ensure the continuity of our work. Despite
the challenges posed by the pandemic, both Committees
have been able to hold fruitful exchanges with various
stakeholders.
For example, the Committee concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo discussed the
activities of armed groups, monitoring of the arms
embargo and the management of arms and ammunition
with the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mine Action Service. Work also
focused on the illicit exploitation of natural resources
with the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes Region, the Executive Secretary of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and a representative of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development.
Similarly, the Committee concerning the Central
African Republic exchanged views with the Panel of
Experts on the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
10/13

13/12/2021

Mission in the Central African Republic on the issue of
arms trafficking.
The two Committees also held meetings,
sometimes jointly, with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Both Special
Representatives have provided the Committees with
useful information, including names of persons to be
considered for appointment. I hope that my successor
will continue to hold such meetings with the two Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General on a regular
basis. I would also like to encourage the 1533 and 2127
Committees to sanction perpetrators of human rights
violations, including conflict-related sexual violence,
in order to help the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo fight impunity and
bring those responsible to justice.
Finally, the 1533 and 2127 Committees held
meetings with States in the region to discuss the
mid-term and final reports of their respective Group
and Panel of Experts. Those meetings provided
an opportunity for representatives of the States of
the region to transmit relevant information to the
Committees and address their concerns regarding the
Experts’ reports. I believe that those meetings with the
States of the region should continue, as they provide
an opportunity to bring together all relevant actors on
a regular basis, as well as to hear their ideas on the
implementation of the sanctions regimes and how the
States concerned could contribute to promoting peace
and stability in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I had the opportunity, together with the Committee
members, to visit the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in October
and November, respectively. The logistical and health
challenges associated with many trips to the region
had to be to take into account, and those constraints
prevented us from also visiting Rwanda and Uganda, as
originally planned. I therefore hope that my successor
will be able to visit both countries and the States of the
region in the near future.
Let me now make some personal remarks.
First, I am convinced of the importance of using
targeted sanctions to single out individuals and entities,
including armed groups, whose actions threaten peace
and security. Sanctions can help to isolate spoilers who
21-39246

13/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

are involved in arms trafficking, violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including
conflict-related sexual violence, the illicit exploitation
of natural resources and attacks on peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers.
Secondly, I believe that the Chair’s visits are
essential, as they allow the Committees to obtain firsthand information on the implementation of sanctions
measures and to interact in person with a wide range
of stakeholders, including Government officials at
the highest level, civil society organizations and the
diplomatic community. The visits also give us the
opportunity to hear national and local perspectives
regarding the impact of sanctions, and it is an opportunity
for our hosts to hear the Committee’s messages.
Thirdly, on the importance of raising awareness
and transparency, in the course of my various
engagements, I have noted the persistent lack of
understanding of the nature, purpose and broader
framework of United Nations sanctions. That is true for
the sanctions regimes of both the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Central African Republic. In that
regard, in my interactions and meetings, in particular
in the Committee’s briefings with States of the region,
I sought to clarify misunderstandings about the United
Nations sanctions on the two countries and to emphasize
that arms embargos, asset freezes and travel bans are
adopted by the Council to help to promote peace and
security in the region. Such misunderstandings were
never more evident than during my recent visits to the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I believe that more effort should be made
to communicate the aims of the sanctions mechanism to
the population, perhaps through United Nations radio
in the countries concerned.
Fourthly, regional cooperation is essential. In the
case of the Central African Republic for example,
my main objective was to continue to strengthen the
Committee’s engagement with the States of the region,
as I strongly believe that only with the cooperation of the
States of the region can those countries address regional
threats in a comprehensive and collaborative manner.
Regional efforts are essential to combating crossborder trafficking in small arms and light weapons, as
well as natural resources, and to prevent the movement
of combatants among neighbouring States.
Fifthly, the work of the United Nations expert
groups is essential to ensuring the implementation

S/PV. 8928

of sanctions measures, and their independence must
be preserved. The experts are truly the eyes and ears
of the sanctions committees and work tirelessly to
assist national authorities and States of the region in
implementing sanctions measures. That cooperation is
essential to the work of the Committees. In that regard,
I welcome the recent decision of the 1533 Committee
to approve the proposed list of members of the Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
after more than four months of stalemate. I hope that
the members of the 2127 Committee will reach a
similar decision with regard to the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic, which has been pending
since 17 August. I call on the Committee to approve the
list expeditiously so that the Panel of Experts can begin
its mandate under resolution 2588 (2021).
On specific issues, I would now like to briefly address
the arms embargo in the Central African Republic,
which remains a sensitive issue. In that regard, let me
reiterate that the Committee has always worked with
the authorities of the Central African Republic and has
acted swiftly in approving all exemption requests and
notifications. I would also like to call on the authorities
of the Central African Republic to redouble their
efforts to implement the benchmarks set by the Council
in presidential statement S/PRST/2019/3 of 9 April
2019, and I encourage Member States and regional
organizations to assist the authorities of the Central
African Republic in achieving those benchmarks.
Last year, the international community followed
with great concern the setback in implementing the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic when the Coalition of Patriots
for Change threatened to undermine the peace and
political process in the country, in particular by attacking
the capital, Bangui. I would like to recall that article 35
of the Political Agreement mentions the possibility of
sanctions against violators. The Security Council and
the Central African Republic Sanctions Committee
should continue to act decisively in support of the peace
agreement and sanction other individuals or entities
that continue to deliberately violate the agreement.
Indeed, one of the Niger’s objectives in being elected as
a member of the Security Council and in chairing the
two Committees was to ensure that sanctions imposed
on countries under its responsibility were as fair as
possible. On the basis of that conviction, I believe that
the term “sanctions committee” is perhaps not the most
appropriate one, as it does not reflect the reality of the

21-3924611/13

S/PV.8928

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Council’s role in monitoring the measures that form
the regime. My proposal would be, as part of future
reflections, to consider renaming such committees to
something more appropriate that would not sound like
coercion or repression.
In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude and thanks to all those who have supported us
and worked with us during the implementation of our
mandate, in particular our fellow Committee members
in New York who joined me during my visits to the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the experts and colleagues in
the Secretariat for their professionalism.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Pham.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Ambassador Dinh Quy
Dang, Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan for the term from 2020 to 2021. This statement
focuses on the following points.
First, regarding the work of the Committee
over the past two years, the Committee adapted its
working methods in the light of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Despite the challenges related to the
pandemic, the Committee held 11 meetings, passed 85
communications, granted 10 exemption requests and
issued two press releases. In June, the 2206 Committee
was the first subsidiary body of the Security Council to
return to in-person meetings.

13/12/2021

process and its new approach to fostering dialogue with
international partners and meeting the benchmarks.
Secondly, during his tenure, the Chair of the
Committee has been committed to exploring new ways
to support South Sudan in achieving progress towards
meeting the conditions for the lifting of sanctions, while
conducting the work of the Committee in a transparent,
objective and responsible manner.
Fostering cooperation between South Sudan,
regional countries and the Committee, the Panel of
Experts has been a high priority for Viet Nam. The
Chair has actively conducted consultations with the
members of the Committee, South Sudan and members
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) on new initiatives aimed at increasing the
implementation of relevant Council resolutions on
South Sudan. Four out of eleven meetings of the
Committee have involved the participation of South
Sudan and regional States.
In addition, the Chair has held several informal
meetings with the representatives of South Sudan,
neighbouring countries and IGAD member States to
exchange experiences and increase mutual understanding
on relevant aspects. Furthermore, with the support of
all Committee members, all 10 exemption requests in
the past two years have been granted to support the
implementation of the revitalized agreement. Together
with the progress achieved in South Sudan, these have
resulted in the establishment of key benchmarks for the
review of the arms embargo measures, with a view to
lifting them when the conditions are met.

In November, the Committee conducted a visit to
South Sudan, which was the first visit of the Committee
in two years, as well as since the transitional Government
was established in February 2020. The visit took place
at an important moment when the Security Council is
preparing for the review of the arms embargo measures
in May next year. It provided an opportunity for the
Committee to acquire an updated view of the situation
on the ground in the country, the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan and the progress on the
implementation of the key benchmarks.

Thirdly, throughout his work in the Committee, Viet
Nam has been convinced that cooperation and dialogue
between the Committee and relevant stakeholders
will remain crucial in ensuring the effective work of
the Committee. In this regard, it is Viet Nam’s hope
that the Committee will continue to support South
Sudan and regional countries in the implementation
of relevant Council resolutions, provide assistance to
South Sudan authorities in their implementation and
reporting of the key benchmarks, and help address any
related challenges. It is also Viet Nam’s wish that the
Committee will make further visits in the future, not
only to South Sudan but also to the regional countries.

Particularly, the Chair was encouraged by the
willingness expressed by the Government of South
Sudan to address the multiple challenges faced by the
country, its commitment to advancing the transitional

Finally, we wish to express our sincere gratitude
to the members of the Committee, South Sudan and
regional countries for their active engagement in the
work of the Committee under Viet Nam’s chairmanship.

12/13

21-39246

13/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

We thank the Secretariat, particularly the Security
Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, for their invaluable
assistance with the everyday work of the Chair.
We would like to commend the other outgoing
Chairs and their teams for their efforts during the
past two years and to wish the incoming Chairs
every success.

S/PV. 8928

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Pham for his briefing.
On behalf of the Security Council, I take this
opportunity to express appreciation to the outgoing
Chairs for the manner in which they have discharged
their important responsibilities on behalf of the Council,
and to wish every success to their successors.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

21-3924613/13
