c

UNITED

NATIONS

p;.,(,:/ E
- I
: 2 -.,
'..,,,J
TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

c, .I : { ! .*1”
2. .1
_;,

f. ,

1973”‘~

” I

th
MEETING:

NEW

14 AUGUST

! ,1 ; .. ,I > ,
~

-I’

.-

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. , .. . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .. . .. . . . .. . .

1

. , . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10983)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I..

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1737)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . ,. . . . .

S/PV. 1737

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDTHIRTY-SEVENTHMEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 14 August 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. John SCALI (United States of America).

3. The PRESIDENT:
The President of the Security
Council has received a letter from the People’s Democratic
Republic of Yemen in which he asks to be allowed to
participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the rules
of procedure. I would suggest that, in view of the limited
number of places at the Council table, the representative I
have just mentioned also be invited to take a place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber, on the
understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he is called upon to speak.

Besent:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1737)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10983).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. S. Ashtal
(Democratic Yemen) took the place reservedfor him at the
side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: Further, the President of the Security Council has received a letter from the representative of
the Sudan dated 13 August 1973, [S/10986], which was
circulated this morning. Members of the Security Council
will see from that document that the representative of the
Sudan requests that the Security Council, under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure, extend an invitation to
Ambassador El-Shibib to address the Council. In accordance with the practice established by the Council and as
there appears to be no objection, I take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation to Ambassador El-Shibib
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. At the
appropriate time, I shall accordingly invite him to make a
statement.

7% meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter

dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Repre-

sentative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/10983)

5. Sir Donald MAITLAND
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, when I left London to take up my appointment here I
did not expect that I should so soon have the opportunity
and the pleasure of congratulating you on your accession to
your high office. I wish to assure you that I shall do my
best to co-operate with you in your difficult task. I should
also like to express my thanks for your kind words of
welcome to me and for your generous remarks about my
predecessor.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at our meeting yesterday afternoon, I shall now, with
the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of
Lebanon and Israel to take places at the Council table in
order to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon)
and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table.

6. I followed the Council’s debate yesterday afternoon
with close attention. There were moments, it seemed to me,
when it ranged rather far and rather wide. But there can be
no doubt about the seriousness of the matter which this
Council has been summoned to discuss. When the Security
Council met in April of this year, following the Israeli raids
on Beirut, my predecessor described that operation as “an
act of officia1 violence which can, under no circumstances,
be justified under the Charter”. [I 708th meeting, para. 10.1
The action we are meeting to consider today falls into the

2. The PRESIDENT:
I shall next, in accordance with the
decision
taken yesterday, and with the consent of the
Courlcil, invite the representatives of Iraq and Egypt to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. K. Al-Shaikhly
(I.aqj and Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (Egypt) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
1

12. Leaving aside the legal aspects of the recent incident,
which in all conscience are clear enough, we cannot ignore
the humanitarian aspects. It is fortunate that no lives were
lost on this occasion. But the tragedy of the Libyan airliner
earlier this year demonstrated the danger of taking forcible
action against civil aircraft, and demonstrated it in stark
terms.

same category. It is a further step down the path towards
what Sir Colin Crowe called “a state of international
anarchy” [ibid.].
7. The position of my Government on the use of violent
methods in international relations, no matter who the
perpetrators may be, has been made clear many times. We
deplore all acts of violence. But however much we may
deplore acts of violence committed by individuals or groups
of individuals; however much we may wish that ways be
found to halt the growth of international terrorism;
however impatient we may feel at the failure of the
international community to agree on measures to deal with
the problem-however
we may feel on those issues, my
delegation cannot accept that any Government is entitled
to take the law into its own hands and itself commit acts of
violence totally inconsistent with international law. By
doing so, a Government adds a new dimension to the
problems associated with international terrorism and inevitably complicates efforts to find a solution. If there is to be
any hope of finding solutions to these problems-and I
include amongst these what have come to be known as the
“underlying causes”-then those solutions must surely be
sought through international action and in accordance with
the principles of international behaviour which are enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

13. The action which has occasioned this meeting of the
Council merits our consideration in its own right, lt
exemplifies the futility of violence. But not only that; it
must be seen against the background of the Middle East
problem as a whole. I do not wish to repeat what the
United Kingdom delegation said when the Council met te
consider this problem last month. I wish only to recall the
stress which Sir Colin Crowe laid on the need for the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to resume
their efforts, despite the fact that the Council had not gene
on record with a specific request to them to do so. In this
connexion, my delegation has welcomed the announcement
that the Secretary-General will be proceeding with his visit
to the area in a few weeks’ time. Incidents of the kind we
have met now to consider underline how essential it is that
all concerned exert their efforts to make progress towards
the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
14. Mr. LECOMPT (France) (interpretation from French]:
Mr. President, first of all I should like to congratulate you
on your accession to the presidency of the Council. There is
no doubt that your distinguished qualities will be of
valuable support to us in our work and in particular in our
consideration of the question before us today.

8. My delegation regrets that the Ad Hoc Committee on
International Terrorism has failed to agree on any recommendations to submit to the General Assembly. This failure
must not be allowed to divert us from the aim of achieving
international agreement on measures for dealing with the
problem of international terrorism in its many manifestations. Further efforts to find such solutions will have to
be made.

15. The Council has met to consider the complaint
submitted by Lebanon, following the interception of a civil
aircraft on 10 August by Israeli air forces. The Iraqi
Government has also sent to the Council a letter of protest
[S/10984].

9. My Government has for some time been working with
other Governments, both in the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) and elsewhere, to achieve international agreement on measures to combat acts of violence
which involve interference with civil aviation. Important
work has already been done. We hope that further progress
will be made in the course of the Extraordinary Assembly
of ICAO which is due to start in Rome later this month.

16. There is no need for me to dwell on the facts; they are
well known to everyone and the Israeli authorities therrb
selves have admitted responsibility. On Saturday the
spokesman of the French Government stated that the
“Israeli military intervention against a civil aircraft shoulil
be condemned”. He added that that action had been carried
out in violation of the air space of a neighbouring country
with which there is an armistice agreement and that it had
contributed to aggravating the tension existing in that area
of the world. A number of other Governments, through
their representatives, also came out vigorously against that
inadmissible violation of conventions governing inter.
national civil aviation, to which Israel, like all other States,
has an obligation to adhere strictly. As Ambassador Ghorn
said yesterday / 1736th meeting/, world public opinion has
sharply rejected this action, in which it sees a new fcrtneI
threat to freedom, order and security in civilized c0nl1IW
nications. There is no need for me to say that France,
which maintains well-known
ties with Lebanon, fully
supports its complaint, which we regard as legitimate.

10. But none of this in any way excuses the action of the
Israeli Government on 10 August. The argument has been
advanced that we live in abnormal times and that this fact
justifies the resort to abnormal methods. But the fact that
we live in abnormal times is surely not so much an
argument for resorting to abnormal methods whenever one
party or the other sees the chance of a tactical success;
rather is it an argument for redoubling our efforts to
normalize our times.
11. There are certain acts which jeopardize innocent lives
and which are not admissible whatever the motive when
committed by individuals or groups of individuals. How
much more inexcusable arc those acts when committed by
Governments. Moreover, in the case we are considering the
undenied and undeniable fact is that Lebanese air space was
deliberately violated by Israeli military aircraft. This is a
fact which my Government cannot but deeply deplore.

17. The international community, which we represent
here, cannot agree to some Member States deliberately
violating rules to which they have voluntarily subscribed. 11
2

cannot, in the present case, tolerate a situation in which
Israel unilaterally takes step’s which are prejudicial to the
rights of the human being, international conventions and
the principles of the Charter. The fact that this inteiception
of an aircraft did not have any regrettable consequences
for
persons or property in no wiseattenuatesthe responsibility
for it. Indeed, we know that such incidents can easily
degenerate into tragedies. I should like at this point to
recal1 that only a few months ago membersof the Israeli
amy showed inexcusablebrutality in an attack on a Libyan
civil aircraft which had gone astray. We were told at the
time that the tension in the Middle East explained the
r:e-ousness shown in the acts committed. It was argued
t:rat we should understanda country that had for so long
been subjected to severetension. Is not that tensionin fact
caused in very large measureby the actions undertakenby
Israel? Is it not first of all for the Statesof the areato keep
caIm end to act in sucha way asnot further to compromise
attempts at a settlement of the conflict on the basisof
resolution 242 (1967)?

21. Mr. KOMATINA (Yugoslavia): Mr. President,may I
start by stating how glad my delegationis at seeingyou, the
representative of a country with which my country has
traditionafly enjoyed’friendly and beneficialrelationsbased
on equality and mutual respect and tested in someof the
most trying moments of modern history, occupy the
important seat of Presidentof the Security Councilfor the
month of August. You may have hoped to belucky andto
have this month passquietly. But it was not to be so.This
is-the first time that you personallyhave assumed
the heavy
responsibilities of the presidency, and my delegationis
ready to extend to you all co-operationin facilitating your
burdens. I certainly hope that under your presidencywe
shall be able to reach decisionsthat will do credit to the
Council in the dischargeof its responsibilitiesunder the
Charter.
22. The letter from the representative of Lebanon requesting, on instructions of his Government, an urgent
meeting of the Council was terseand very short. It did not
have to be anything else,as the deedcommitted by Israel,
causing Lebanon againto ask protection from the United
Nations, is kriown to everybody, its nature not in dispute,
its grave character undoubted, its far-reachingdangerous
iinplications itimediateljl recognized by many, including,
this time, some.in Israel itself. That Israel’s air force
inyaded the. air space of Lebanon, directly and openly
violating the sovereignty of a Member nation, that it
committed a seriousact of aggression,that in hijacking a
civilian plane, endangeringthe lives of 83 personson board,
it committed an act of air piracy is disputedby no one.

18. I have just spoken of States membersof the international community and their duties. I do not wish to get
into the complex and at times emotional debate which in
the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism pitted
the opponents of individual terrbrism against thos’e‘of
so-called State terrorism. I would merely repeat here that
States have special obligationsifi this matter. They must of
course set an example by respecting &e laws that they
make their own citizens respect and that, they agree to
establish among themselves. The violation of the conven tions governing world air traffic which Israelcommitted,
23. What really frightens us is that a Governmentwould
and admits having committed, is from this point of view
especially seriousbecause,asthe representativeof Lebanon decide to commit suchan act, immediately risking almost
said yesterday, it seemsthat this is the first obvious 100 lives, in total disregardof that risk, especiallyso soon
after the tragic experienceit itself hadhad whenits own air
cxalnple of such a thing in the history of civil aviation. It
force, its own military pilots, had shot down the Libyan
would be deplorable if this examplewere to be followed by
airliner over occupiedSinai on 21 February 1973, resulting
other
States in applying to Israela policy of “an eye for an
eye”, as it were, thus unleashingagainan unendingprocess in the massacreof over 100 persons.
of action and reaction that could only result in the
24. It was therefore extremely important that the Security
aggravation of the prevailing state of affairs in the Middle
East-a state of affairs which it is for us to make tolerable Council addressitself without any delay to this flagrant
rejection of somebasic precepts of international law, and
until such time asit can be remedied.
we appreciate the prompt calling of a meeting of the
Council.
19. But I should like to limit my remarks-and I would
venture to hope that the Council would limit itself-to the
action which led to the convening of the Council hardly
tIlree weeks after it had thoroughly discussedthe wholeof
the problems an aspectof which hasnow comeup. In view
of the nature of the facts with which we are concerned,the
Council must clearly condemn the action of the IsraeliAir
Force. The Council should firmly invite Israel to refrain
from an action of this kind in the future and strictly to
respect, as it has an obligation to do, the provisionsof
international
conventions in effect. We know that the
International
Civil Aviation Organizationhasbeenseizedof
this incident, and it will doubtlesshold a debate on the
subject shortly.

25. The reasonwhy the international condemnationof the
latest Israeli act was so swift, widespread,resolute and
unqualified is that, being an act of international terrorism
committed by a State, a Government of a Membernation,
and defended by that State, it is particularly fraught, if left
unchecked, with the worst possibleconsequences
for the
rule of law upon which the international community must
be based. If left unchecked, without the strongestcondemnation, without the strongestexception beingtaken by
responsiblebodiesof international life and public opinion,
the basic structure of international law would be gravely
compromised and the security of each and every one of us
would be further eroded.

20. In conclusion, I should like to expressthe hope that,
in a matter where responsibility is so clearly established,
o~lr Council will reach a decision without delay and, I
earnestly hope, unanimously.

26. Israel’slatest act is no exception, sinceit, like somany
others, resultsfrom that policy of force which characterizes
its approach there generally. Israel’s committing of such
acts and its defenceof them-even askingthe international

3

community to issue a licence to Israel to continue
committing them-are based on a constant reliance on force
almost without precedent in the current conduct of States.
According to responsible press reports, high members of
Israel’s Cabinet are reported to maintain that Israel has a
duty to seize any opportunity it can to cripple the
Palestinian organizations; that its choice was between doing
everything it could to combat Palestinian guerrillas and
doing nothing; and-a particularly disturbing doctrine-that
acts that are against the normal laws should not be carried
out in normal times, meaning that in what one chooses to
call abnormal times one can depart from normal laws.

the self-preservation, security and integrity of a nation or a
State, especially a small one, as the belief and practice that
it does not need to root itself in the strictest possible
observance of international law and the Charter, and that it
can, even temporarily, dispense with them. In the Iong run,
the Charter and international law are the best possible allies
of nations and States, especially small ones.
31. That leads me to the concluding part of my statement,
which concerns what in our opinion the Council must do
and what it must not do in considering the item on our
agenda.

27. Are we really and seriously expected to agree to that,
to accept it, to tolerate it even tacitly-if not by commission, then by omission? We hope not. There are simply
no grounds, no normal or abnormal situations based on
which anyone-l repeat, anyone-can be exempted from the
obligation to respect the principles and norms of the
Charter and international law. No one can, and no one
should be able to, obtain the right to violate them.

32. First, there is no doubt in our mind that we must
resolutely condemn the latest Israeli act of aggression, for all
%e reasons I have just stated.
33. Secondly, we must make it quite clear that we reject,
resolutely condemn and forbid the repetition of acts of
international State terrorism such as hijacking and air
piracy; we must do that for the sake of the safety of the
international air travel of all of us. The response of a score
of international and national pilots’ organizations-even
some in Israel-testifies
to the fact that the gravity and
enormity of the implications of Israel’s deed, if unchecked,
are almost universally grasped. We must stress that aspect.

28. We are all familiar with the contention that all is
permitted under the specious claim of the so-called right of
legitimate self-defence. But even apart from the fact that
we do not have here a situation of true self-defence, neither
the Charter nor international law nor any United Nations
decision permits anyone to make that claim and operate
accordingly under any circumstances. Therefore there is no
need even to mention that the argument of so-called
self-defence and the persistently created image of one being
in mortal danger and so qualified for special consideration
is not at all convincing, especially in the light of the known
realities of constant enlargement of one’s conquests and of
the ever larger population under one’s occupation. It is,
after all, Palestinian Arabs who are dispossessed of their
homes and land, who are under occupation and who are in
mortal danger of being denied the ability to live as a nation.

34. Thirdly, we must also, in whatever we decide, be
mindful of the fact that WC are acting at a time when the
United Nations is debating the problems of international
terrorism and measures against it, and that we are aware
that if terrorist acts by States are not condemned and
opposed, that will retider it impossible for the international
community to do anything effective in that field.
35. Fourthly, we should be opposed to any so-called
balance when faced with this act of Israel’s. First, and most
important, any linkage to other events would in this case be
tantamount to implying that somehow Israel was provoked
into committing its act of air piracy, that somehow there is
behind it all a justifying cause. That would be extremely
shortsighted, since it would m‘ake it easier for anyone in
future to claim that it had only reacted and not just acted
in utter disregardof any State’s obligation. SecondIy, if it
were attempted artificially to link the act with the senseless
terrorist act at Athens airport or with the hijacking of the
Japaneseairliner, that too would be totally unwarranted,
especially after legitimate representativesof Palestinian
Arab organizations have either condemned, deploredor
dissociatedthemselvesfrom thosedeeds.

29. Having said all that, one must be mindful of the wider
political and security context of the situation in the Middle
East in the framework of which Israel has chosen to
commit its latest aggressive act. And here too one cannot
but be aware of a particularly disturbing pattern. My
delegation, among others, has in the past repeatedly stated
that Israel, a Member State and a party to the Middle East
dispute, often chooses to undertake a serious attack
precisely at the time when some diplomatic action is about
to take place, when another attempt to contribute to the
prospects of settling the Middle Eastern crisis through
peaceful means is to be pursued. This time-perhaps in their
own minds emboldened by what they consider to be a
protective veto-they have chosen to act practically on the
eve of the Secretary-General’s forthcoming trip to the area,
as if his task had not already been made less easy by the
fate that befell the last non-aligned draft resolution,

36. Fifthly, we might this time consider, beyond condemnation, what effective measurescan be taken against
Israelin the light of its latest deedin the framework of the
United Nations, ICAO, and so on. We might considerwhat
is, and what should be, the position, the rights, the
obligationsand possiblelimitations of and on the air lines
and civilian air carriers of a country whose Government
officially arrogates to itself the right to hijack other
countries’ civilian air carriers over the territory of other
sovereignStates.

30. We can only hope that nothing will be done to
aggravate further an already extremely tense situation. In
that respect the Council can on this occasion contribute
only if it adopts a decision that in no uncertain terms
totally rejects Israel’s claim to place itself outside and above
international law and the Charter. Let me add that it is our
deep conviction that in the long run nothing so endangers

37. Faced with this most clear item on our agenda,we
must be clear, firm and relevant. This time, at least,we can
4

-

L

ask, expect and requestthat nothing prevent our taking the
right decision.
38. Mr, ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President,I take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your accessionto the
high office of President of the Security Council for the
month of August and to assureyou of my delegation’s
support and co-operation in the dischargeof your duties.
39, Similarly, I wish to commend the United Kingdom
delegation upon the able mannerin which it conductedthe
affairs of the Council during the month of July.

violation of obligations acceptedby that Governmentin a
number of instruments regulatinginternational civil aviation. The principal instrument, namely, the ChicagoConvention of 1944,’ to which Israelis a party, records,in the
first and secondparagraphsof its preamble,that:
“Whereasthe future developmentof international civil
aviation can greatly help create and preservefriendship
and understandingamong the nations and peoplesof the
world, yet its abusecan becomea threat to the general
security; and
“Whereasit is desirableto avoid friction and promote
that co-operation between nations and peoplesupon
which the peaceof the world depends;“.

40. May I also take this opportunity to welcomein our
midst the representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Donald
M&land, and to assurehim that my delegation looks
forward to co-operating with him in our work here at the
United Nations.

45. If the Israeli act of State hijacking is not in consonance with the goals of the Chicago Convention laid
down in the paragraphsof the preamblethat 1 have just
quoted, they are even further removed from somekey
articles of that Convention; for example, article 1, which
reads: “The contracting States recognizethat every State
has complete and exclusive sovereigntyover the air space
above its territory”, and article 3 (c,J, which reads: “No
State aircraft of a contracting State shall fly over the
territory of another State. . .“.

41. Turning to the question under discussion,it will be
recalled that for the months of June and July the Council
was seized of the examination of the generalMiddle East
question. My delegation, like other members of the
Council, addressedthe Council at length on that question.
Consequently, I will confine my remarksto the particular
aspect of the problem raised by the Governments of
Lebanon and Iraq. But before doing so, I would like to
state my delegation’sview that the Government of Israel,in
using its air force to divert civil aircraft from over the
territory of Lebanon into Israel, doesnot servethe causeof
an early and lasting peacein the Middle East.Rather, its act
agitates and strains to yet thinner limits an already delicate
and at all times imminently explosivesituation. Weconsider
that such measuresby any of the States in the region,
measures that are likely to inflame the situation andinjure
genuine efforts for peace, should be discouragedor, better
still, stopped altogether.

46. Thesearticles have thus beenhonoured in the breach
and the r6gime of the ChicagoConvention seriouslyput
into jeopardy by the Israeli act. ICAO, whoseobjectives
include overseeingan orderly and safedevelopmentof civil
aviation, might well consider suchaspectsof the present
case as fall within its mandate,after the Security Council
has dischargedits vital responsibilitiesunder the Charter of
the United Nations.
47. Besidesviolating the ChicagoConvention, Israelhas
likewise acted contrary to the letter and spirit of the Tokyo
Convention of 1963,2 to which it is a party, and of the two
recent instruments3 in the elaborationof which Israelhas
assisted,namely, the Convention for the Suppressionof
Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signedat The Hague,1970,
and the Convention for the Suppressionof Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signedat Montreal,
1971.

42. The representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt andIsrael
laid down the facts before the Council in their interventions
yesterday. We have alsohad occasionto readthe reportsof
various sections of the press,which, by and large, do not
add to the basic, essentialfacts before the Council. I will
therefore not repeat these, but rather turn to the legaland
politicai ramifications of Israel’sact.
43. It is admitted that the Israeliair force penetratedinto
the territory of Lebanon, thus violating the sovereigntyof
Lebanon, and forced the diversion of a civil aircraft of a
Middle East airline to an Israeli base,where it washeld
without lawful causefor sometime. The diversion,which
was a clear case of hijacking by a State, was carefully
planned and executed. The incident is a straight caseof
aggression and constitutes a glaringbreachof the Charterof
the United Nations; of the Declaration on Principlesof
International Law concerning Friendly Relalions and Cooperation among States in accordancewith the Charter of
tile United Nations, adopted unanimously on 24 October
I973 ~Gcmrd Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV)]; resolutions of the Security Council; and general international
law.

48. I would add that this behaviourof a State Memberof
the United Nations towards another has retrogressive
effects on the efforts of ICAO to develop further effective
measuresin the field of civil aviation to closegapsin air
law, and the efforts of other United Nationsbodiescharged
with examining measuresfor combating international terrorism.
49. My delegation does not condone acts of piracy and
hijacking, whether committed by States or by indjviduals.
We condemn such acts and, for purposesof our internal
law, have enacted a tough law againstunlawful interference
with civil aircraft.
1 United Nations, Treaty

44. In addition to violating the Charter and international
law generallly, the Israeli act specifically amounted to a

2Ibid,

vol.

704,~.

Series,

vol.

15, p. 295.

219.

3 SW Document A/C.6/418, anncxcs III and IV.

5

58. It is for all those reasons that my delegation calls on
the Council to vindicate the Charter, international law aad
order, by adopting effective measures, fully demonstrating
its revulsion of such dangerous and self-liquidating acts,
such as those committed by the Israelis in violation of the
sovereignty of the Lebanese State.

50. Arguments have been adduced to justify this act of
State hijacking of a commercial. aircraft. Such arguments
cannot, in the view of my delegation, be sustained in the
circumst‘ances of this incident. The dangers such acts and
practices portend are too grave to condone or tolerate in
international affairs, for, among others, the following
reasons.

59. One cannot but agree with what the Chairman of the
Israeli Pilots Union, Captain Yitzhak Shaked, said, 8s
reported in The New York Times of 12 August 1973:

51, First, they are, in conception and execution, geared to
violate the Charter and general international law, and
therefore constitute aggression.

“As a union that fights against hijackings and inter.
ferences with civilian aviation, we could not accept tllis
interception even if the aim was to capture criminal No. 1
against civilian aviation.”

52. Second, they are contrary to international intercourse
through international civil aviation and deal a death-blow to
the regime of the Chicago Convention and efforts to
improve it.

60. In retrospect, we must regret that measures that the
Council wanted to adopt last month, on 26 July, were
thwarted by the unjustified exercise of veto power agaiasr
the letter and spirit of the Charter and in clear opposition
to the vast expressed opinion of the international conlmunity. It is equally clear from the statement made by tile
representative of Israel that the contempt Israel has fbr the
United Nations and international organizations like ICAO,
the Organization of African Unity and others, and for
international opinion, will persist as demonstrated by tile
recent statement of the Israeli Defence Minister.

53. Third, any errors of judgement could cause, and have
caused, loss of life, serious damage to property, and costs.
Indeed, the Libyan jet incident of 21 February 1973,
demonstrates the kind of loss of life and property just
mentioned. In this case, it will be recalled that the ICAO
Council, after a study of the report of an expert mission,
adopted resolution A-19-1 early in June 1973-by 27 votes
in favour and none against, with 2 abstentions, namely, the
United States and Nicaragua-the operative part of which
reads as follows:

61. We might, therefore, legitimately ask how long tile
United Nations will tolerate this stated objective of
persistent South-African-style
defiance of the Charter,
international law and public opinion.

“1. Strongly condemns the Israeli action which resulted in the destruction of the Libyan civil aircraft and
the loss of 108 innocent lives;
“2. Urges Israel. to coniply with .the aims and objectives of the CIQcago Convention.?,

62. Mr. CI-IUANG Yen (Chinaj (interpretation
fioa
Chinese): On 10 August, Israeli military planes intercepted
in the airspace over Lebanon a Lebanese civil airliner
chartered by the Iraqi Airways and hijacked ‘it to a military
airfield in Israel, where all the personnel on the airliner
were subjected to illegal search and questioning. This is
another act of piracy committed by the Israeli Zionists in
grave violation of the territory and sovereignty of other
countries, which threatens the peace and security of all
peoples. The Chinese delegation expresses great indignation
at this and strongly condemns it.

54., One shudders to think what.would bqve happened if
the pilot of the Iraqi-chartered Lebanese plane.had refused
to comply with the Israeli hijackers’ demand that he fly to
Israel. Would the international community once again have
been treated to the spectacle of a civilian airliner being shot
down with the unnecessary loss of the lives of dozens of
people? The memory of the shooting-down of the Libyan
plane is still fresh in our minds.
5.5. Fourth, in their nature of a threat to international
peace and security, they could lead to the undoing of the
present international order created by and within the
United Nations, through reprisals leading to war-a consequence we can ill afford.

63. The piratical act of the Israeli Zionists is by no mearls
accidental, but a continuation of the series of aggressive
atrocities which they have ferociously perpetrated over a
long period against the Palestinian people and other Arab
countries and peoples. People may still recall vividly that
last February Israeli military planes barbarously shot dowI
a Libyan civil airliner over Sinai, causing the tragic death of
over 100 passengers and crew members on board the
airliner. Following that incident, last April the Israeli
Zionists flagrantly dispatched warships, airplancs and armed
bandits to invade Beirut, the capital of Lebanon, and sonle
coastal areas, where they wilfully slew a good number of
Palestinian and Lebanese people. By incessantly carrying
out barbarous invasions, raids, kidnappings and slaughters
against the Palestinian people and other Arab countries and
peoples, the Israeli Zionists have undisguisedly revealed
before the people of the whole world their aggressive nature
and most cruel features. IHowever, no amount of savage
atrocities committed by the Israeli aggressors can intimidate

56. Fifth, they could strengthen the hand of the strong,
and cause total insecurity to the small nations whose only
hope of survival is the order established by the United
Nations and enshrined in the respect of the purposes and
the principles of the Charter-thus
perilously subverting the
cherished principles of sovereign equality of States into a
principle of inequality;
57. Sixth, that condoning such measures could be emulated by other rbgimes, say, the illegal Rhodcsian rigime,
Portugal and South Africa, to disrupt and confuse the
African region for the benefit of new imperialism and
colonialism.
6

the Palestinian and other Arab peoples iho.are fighting for
justice. The atrocities of the Israeli aggressors can only
arouse the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to greater
hatred towards their common enemy, so that they will
enhance their fighting will, heighten their vigilance and
strengthen
their unity to carry through to the end their
struggle against aggression.

detail the gruesome succession of terrorist outrages and
hijackings that have taken place in the Middle East, or in its
context elsewhere, since we met in April. They have already
been catalogued in this debate, and we are only too
painfully aware of all of them. As we have recognized long
since, they are all part of a chain of violence, and this
hijacking on which we are now passing judgement is the
latest link in the chain to be engaged by a remorseless kind
of sprocket wheel. As such, it deserves the strongest
censure, like all its predecessors. And it gains no credit from
the fact that, fortunately, it involved no loss of innocent
human lives, as it could well have done.

64. In defiance of the Charter, the Israeli Zionists have
unscrupulously
and grossly violated the territory and
sovereignty
of other countries, perpetrating one unpardonable crime after another. This is absolutely intolerable
to all justice-upholding
countries and peoples.

70. The Acting Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. Barnard,
on learning over last weekend about the latest act in this
tragedy, made a statement on Sunday evening in the course
of which he deplored all acts of interference with civil
aircraft, he recalled the strong opposition that the Australian Government had expressed to terrorism and aircraft
hijacking, and he saw in the Israeli action implications of
the gravest kind both for the safety of passengers and for
the security of international air transport generally. He
concluded by expressing the Australian Government’s
concern lest this incident should lead to an escalation of
tension throughout the Middle East.

65. The Chinese delegation maintains that in order to
fulfil its responsibilities the Security Council must condemn
most severely the Israeli authorities’ piratical act of
violating
the territory and sovereignty of other countries
and hijacking a civil airliner and consider the adoption of
effective
measures to stop the atrocities of the Israeli
authorities.
66. Sir
Laurence MCINTYRE
(Australia):
My first,
pleasant duty is to welcome you, Mr. President, to your
first occupancy of the presidential Chair of this Council, to
express the complete confidence of my delegation in your
experience and your capacity to conduct the proceedings of
the Council with the necessary mixture of firmness and
impartiality,
and to assure you of our full co-operation. We
have no doubt that you will maintain in all respects the
standard
set by our predecessors in the Chair, and I think
firstly
of your immediate predecessor, Sir Colin Crowe,
V&O
earned the highest regard of all of us, and also, I may
say,. of Mr. Jamieson, who shared Ambassador Crowe’s
duties SO ably during last month. Let me also join in
welcoming
to the Council the new Permanent‘Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Donald Maitland.

71. That brings us down to the substance of the most
intractable problem that faces this Council: the search for a
just and lasting settlement in the Middle East, which in the
last resort can be achieved only by negotiation between the
parties, within the terms and in accordance with the
principIes set forth in resolution 242 (1967). Given a
genuine desire for peace by both sides, this Council, with
the aid of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, can be the catalyst. But the outlook for the Middle
East is going to be increasingly bleak if both sides believe
that time is on their side-because one of them must be
wrong and neither may be right.

67. The item on our agenda, in the form of the letter
addressed
to you, Mr, President, on 11 August by the
representative
of Lebanon, is concerned with the specific
instance
of interference four days ago by the Government
of Israel with the flight of a commercial aircraft over the
territory
of its neighbour sovereign State of Lebanon, and I
intend to confine my few words closely to that item. That
tneans in effect that anything 1 can usefully say will amount
to not much more than repetition of what I said in this
Council
as recently as 17 April (1708th meeting/, when we
were addressing ourselves to the incursion into Beirut by a
commando
unit of the Israeli armed forces, under the
proclaimed
direction of the Government of Israel, to
eliminate
certain leaders of the Palestinian guerilla move-

72. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
73. Mr, ASI-ITAL (Democratic Yemen): It is with some
hesitation that I have asked to speak in order to exercise
my right of reply. Every time the Zionist representative
comes to the Council to defend the atrocities and wrongdoings of his Government, he prefers to play the innocent
sheep by intentionally provoking other representatives to
speak, in an attempt to blur the issue and to divert the
attention of the Council.

ment.

74. Yesterday the Zionist representative levelled a malicious allegation against the Government of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen. In his statement he said
the following:

68. If I may take the liberty of recalling what I said at that
tiIne, I referred to the pattern of escalation of violence and
terror
that was threatening to endanger innocent human
lives in every corner of the world, and I described the
coIltinuing
spectacle of violence followed by violent reprisal
and further
violence on a mounting and increasingly
world-wide
scale as not only saddening but: gravely disturbing.

“22 February 1972: A Lufthansa airplane was seized by
Arab hijackers and forced to land at Aden in the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen. Negotiations for the
payment of ransom to the Popular Front were then
conducted in Lebanon, and the sum of $5 million was
paid to the terror organization for the release of the

69.
Sicce then, unhappily, nothing seems to have changed.
I would
be straying from the agenda if I were to recite in
7

81. The argument has been advanced that Arab terrorism
must inevitably, indeed morally, attract retahation every.
where and at any time. We do not and cannot-for reasons
so clearly given by various speakers before me-accept that
view, particularly if such acts of retaliation take place at a
time when a cease-fire is in force and when such actions
take place on the territory of other sovereign countries, Nor
is it true that the problem of terrorism has not been solved
because of Arab machinations.

plane. . . . The sum of $1 million had been retained by
the Government of the Democratic Republic of Yemen”.
[1736th meeting, para. 93 (j). /
in an apparent embellishment of this unfounded allegation,
the Zionist representative
said that “it was widely
reported”-and
I emphasize the words “widely reported”that the sum of $1 million had been retained by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of Yemen.

82. Let us see what the Secretary-General
say on this problem:

75. It is no wonder that the distortion of facts, the slander
of Arab Governments and the vilification of the heroic
struggle of the Palestinian people and its revolutionary
resistance movement have become a way of life in the
Zionist policy. My delegation categorically refutes and
denies the malign allegation that my Government was in
any way involved in any money dealings in the laudable
efforts it undertook to save the lives of the passengers on
the Lufthansa airplane.

“Obviously it is no good to consider this very complex
phenomenon without at the same time considering the
underlying situations which give rise to terrorism and
violence in many parts of the world. It is these underlying
causes that make the problem so appallingly difficult to
tackle owing to their variety and different natures, and
which also make it SO difficult for Governments to agree
upon the kind of measures which could reverse the
current trend to violence. The roots of terrorism and
violence in many cases lie in misery, frustration, grievance
and despair so deep that men are prepared to sacrifice
human lives, including their own, in the attempt to effect
radical changes.“4

76. Thanks to the diligence of the civil aviation authorities
and the high officials in my Government, the lives of 189
passengers and crew were spared, and the plane left Aden
safely. Numerous letters of thanks from the relatives of the
passengers, civil aviation associations in different parts of
the world, Lufthansa and a number of Governments attest
to the fact that my Government handled the incident in the
most judicious and opportune manner.

That paragraph-from
a statement by the SecretaryGeneral, who, I believe, cannot be dubbed “a friend of the
Arabs”-clearly
explains the difficulties inherent in this
problem, And those of us who have followed .the proceedings of the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Terrorism will be ‘impressed that, by equating individual
and private and group terrorism with State terrorism, the
point has been established that all types of terrorism must
be the subject of international action at the same time. In
fairness to the Committee, it should also be stated that it
was not asked to deal only with Arab terrorism and that
much of its difficulty related to the struggle for independence of people in the colonial Territories and under racist
regimes.

77. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, we offer you our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of August and extend to you our fullest
co-operation as you carry out the difficult and responsible
tasks before the Council. Your country and mine try to
serve many common values and face many common
difficulties, and so we have built together many bonds of
understanding and tolerance.
78. We welcome
Maitland.

himself has to

our new British colleague, Sir Donald

83. On the specific complaint before us the facts, fortunately, are not in dispute; nor will any member of the
Council question Israel’s right of self-defence should it be
attacked or its duty to take necessary security measures on
its own territory. I-Iowever, no member of the Councilindeed, no Member of the United Nations-will
or can give
Israel the right to take violent and illegal actions on the
territories of other States. Nor will any State accept that
Israel has any right to enforce, as a kind of world
policeman, what it conceives to be international law. If
Israel has any grievances about any terrorist acts that can be
the subject of international action, it is free to bring such
complaints to the Security Council. If it chooses not to do
so, for whatever reasons, it cannot at the same time decide
how those grievances are to be removed by its unilateral
and admittedly illegal actions.

79. I shall not make another speech in tribute to Sir Colin
Crowe, because I think I have done my share, as far as time
has permitted.
80. The specific complaint brought to the Council by the
Government of Lebanon cannot, of course, be completely
separated from the general problem of the Middle East,
which was debated so thoroughly only a few days ago. At
that stage the various principles which should govern a final
solution of this complex problem were embodied in a draft
resolution which could not, however, be adopted because
of the negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.
None the less, we continue to hold firmly to the view that
unless and until Israel has undertaken to withdraw from the
occupied territories and to respect and accommodate the
rights, interests and aspirations of the Palestinian people
there will be no solution. Once Israel has taken those steps I
can assure it that it will find all those it describes as
“friends of the Arabs” most forthcoming in supporting
Israel in its desire to live in peace and security with all its
Arab neighbours.

84. When parties are in full war cry many exchanges are
indulged in which, in a more cbjective analysis of the

8

problem, would appear to be totally irrelevant. For
instance, it was stated yesterday that what Israel was doing
was in Lebanon’s long-term interest. We have in a different
context the advice of The Times of London on what is in
Israel’s interest. WC believe that each country is competent
to decide what is in its own interests; but it cannot, in
serving those interests, violate, particularly by violent
means, the rights of other States. What Israel has done
cannot be justified and must be firmly condemned.

are evident in his statements, such as the one made when an
Israeli school bus was ambushed by Arab terrorists at
Avivim, near the Lebanese border, on 22 May 1970, where
8 children, 3 teachers and the driver were mercilessly
murdered and 20 children wounded. On the following day
George Habash declared: “It is wise to kill Israelis while
they are still young.” No wonder that Habash’s Popular
Front employs former Nazi concentration camp commanders and former SS officers as instructors and trainers.
No wonder that Nazis with similar background and experience, whose names are in our possession, are employed
by the Arafat terrorist organization, Fatah, and its branch,
Black September. These are the Palestinian leaders to whose
assistance the representative of the USSR rushed so eagerly
at the last meeting.

85. But apart from condemnation, these frequent and
varied aggressive acts seriously threaten the tenuous ceasefire in the area and certainly make the task of any
mediator, or even of the Council, much more difficult. We
are therefore most anxious that any action we may take
must ensure that Israel desists from these actions entirely in
the future and that its profession to live in peace and
friendship with its Arab neighbours will be translated into
r&ion
by withdrawal
from the territories it illegally
occupies and by respecting the rights of the Palestinians.

92. HOW is it possible to separate the Habashes and the
Arafats from the views they hold and openly express
regarding the desirability of murdering innocent human
beings? How is it possible to separate these terrorist leaders
from their acts, from the atrocities they plan and perpetrate
through their organizations ? How is it possible to condemn
the slaughter of American and Belgian diplomats in
Khartoum, personally supervised and directed by Arafat by
telephone from Beirut till the last moment of this savage
operation, and then receive Arafat with honours in Moscow
or East Berlin? I-low is it possible to censure barbarism like
the Munich or Lad carnage and then give Habash a hero’s
welcome in Peking?

86. Finally, this Council and each of its members will
always be ready to apply international law and the
provisions of the Charter in their totality to any action
taken by any Member of the United Nations. Those
considerations
will determine the attitude of the Indian
delegation towards any draft resolution that may be
submitted for our consideration.
87. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel
in exercise of the right of reply.

93. An inevitable question arises: If so many Governments, including even that of the Soviet Union, condemn
atrocities such as Munich, why is nothing being done about
it by the United Nations? If during the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly more than 50 Ministers for
Foreign Affairs spoke out against terrorism, why does the
General Assembly remain helpless in taking effective
measures to curb it? If since 1967 the Security Council has
discussed Arab terrorism and Israeli defence actions against
it at 10 series of meetings-this being the eleventh-and if SO
many States members of the Council have expressed their
abhorrence of the Arab terror attacks, why has the Security
Council failed to condemn at least once massacres such as
that in the school bus at Avivim, at Lod, at Munich, at
Athens, in the air and on the ground?

88. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): At both yesterday’s and
today’s meetings the discussion has left no doubt that the
real problem before the Security Council is the menace of
Arab terrorism,
which brought about Israel’s defensive
action on 10 August.
89. Based on blind hostility and the denial of the Jewish
people’s inalienable right to self-determination and independence, Arab terrorism was first initiated in the 1920s by
feudal Arab effendis who sought to strengthen their hold
over the masses by the usual method of exploiting man’s
lowest passions of hatred and bloodlust.
90. Borrowing
the anti-Jewish slogans of the Fascists and
of the Nazis and actively collaborating with them, such
Arab terrorist leaders as I-laj Amin El-I-~usseini
organized
and
prcachcd not only the murder of individual Jewish
men, women and children, but also the genocide of the
entire Jewish people. El-Husscini himself got his chance to
indulge to the full in his bloodhirsty aspirations when he
spent the war years in Berlin as Hitler’s and Eichmann’s
adviser on the extermination of Jews. Among other things,
he organized a Moslem SS battalion which fought on the
side of the Nazis, against the united nations. Today, the
same El-Husseini lives and works in Beirut. The younger
terrorist leaders, such as Arafat and I-labash, arc continuing
in his fOOtstepS.

94. What is Israel to do in the face of this utter failure of
the international community to live up to its responsibilities and to put an end to international terrorism?
What is Israel to do in the face of this utter inability by the
United Nations to make Arab Governments abide by their
obligations under the Charter and terminate the operations
of the terror organizations on and from their territoriesthe operations of murder gangs engaged in sanguinary
attacks against defenceless civilians?
95. Let me first of all state what Israel will not do. Israel
will not acquiesce in the continuation of armed attacks
emanating from Arab States against it, against its citizens,
against Jewish people in various parts of the world. Israel
will not accept counsel based on the notion that there can
be one law applicable in general and another applicable in
the case of action by Israel. For instance, we shall not
accept counsel regarding the 10 August action from States,

91. Yesterday,
I submitted to the Council evidence regarding the barbaric outrages of which Habash and his
organisation,
the Popular Front, are guilty, as well as
inforlrlation
regarding Habash’s views. The Nazi antecedents
9

met with the responsethat such intervention would be
contrary to such principles is, for instance, domestic
jurisdiction.

even if they are permanent members of the Security
Council, which have themselves intercepted civilian airplanes and detained individuals or groups of individuals on
board.

101. The world knows how it all ended. The memoriesare
still with us all, and the horrible experience is still in our
hearts and our minds. Let us therefore not hear againthe
samekind of argumentswe heard only severaldecadesago
,asjustification for international inaction to prevent the
killing of Jews.

96. Yesterday I already indicated that when the USSR
found it necessary for its self-defence to take military
action across the border, its armed forces crossed frontiers
of a foreign State in punitive measures against White Guard
terrorists, Today I should like to add to the record the
following statement made by the representative of the
United Kingdom in the Security Council on 7 April 1964 in
the discussion of a Yemeni complaint against the bombardment by British RAF planes of installations located on
the territory of Yemen:

102. If the Security Council desiresto see international
law and the provisions of the Charter observed in the
Middle East, there is only one way to attain that-by
causingthe Arab Governments to abide by their international obligations, put an end to the savagecampaignof
terror atrocities and start builcling a genuine peacein the
re’gion.

“There is, in existing law, a clear distinction to be
drawn between two forms of self-help. One, which is of a
retributive or punitive nature, is termed ‘retaliation’ or
‘reprisals’; the other, which is expressly contemplated and
authorized by the Charter, is self-defence against armed
attack. The term ‘counter-attack’
has perhaps led to some
misunderstanding, It might imply to some of those seated
,around this table action in the nature of reprisals only,
and this impression has been deliberately fostered by
somespeakers,But it is clear that the useof armedforce
to repel or prevent an attack-that is, legitimate action of
a defensive nature-may sometimeshave to take the form
of a counter-attack.” (1109th meeting,para. 26.1

103. The PRESIDENT: I call 011the representativeof tile
Soviet Union, who wishesto speakin exerciseof his riglIt
of reply.
104. Mr. SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialis(
Republics) (translation from Russian): Mr. President, l
deeply regret that despite my remarks yesterday, in whicll
your attention was drawn to the illegality of any attempts
by the representativeof Israel to bring up at thesemeetings
of the Security Council questionsrelating to the policy of
the USSR, the Israeli representative, apparently as a result
of your very indecisive conduct, is continuing to have
recourseto that unworthy practice.

97. Finally, Israel will not absolvethe Arab Governments
of responsibility for the initiation and continuation of Arab
terrorism from within their borders.
98. What will Israel do? lsrael will continue to vindicate
its right and the right of its people to live in security. Israel
will continue to vindicate its rights under the Charter of the
United Nations, including the right to self-defence.
99. Indeed, how could it be otherwise? How would the
Council suggest that the Government of Israel should
explain the situation to Israeli citizens? What is it to say to
the parents of the children killed on the Avivim bus? That
the Habashesand Arafats and their organizations,though
subsidized, supplied, sheltered and protected by Arab
Governments, are individuals and groups and therefore
nothing is being done by the Security Council about their
murderous atrocities? What does the Council suggest
should be told to the President of Israel, ProfessorKatzir,
whose brother, a distinguished and world-renownedscientist, was one of the victims of the Lod massacreorganized
by Habash’sPopular Front? What are we to say to the
parents, wives, children of the athletes murdered in
Munich? Are we to tell them that the Arab slaughterers
should not be pursuedby Israeleverywhere and at all times
because their protectors, such as the Government of
Lebanon, while flouting all principles of international law
and the Charter of the Unjted Nations by allowing the
terrorist organizations to operate from their territories,
invoke the purity and sanctity of their air space?
100. Such advice cannot but be reminiscentof the times
when the Jewish people pleadedwith Governmentsto act
against the growing Nazi campaign againstJews, And we
10

105. Grossly violating the provisional rules of procedure
of the Council, misrepresentingand falsifying historic facts,
having recourseto inexcusableand brazen cafumny against
a State memberof the Council, the representativeof Israel
is trying to divert the Council from discussionof the
measureswhich should be taken in connexion with the
unprecedentedact of aggressionand air piracy committed
by Israel’s ruling clique against the sovereign State ol
Lebanon.
106. The brazen attacks by the Israeli representative
againstthe USSR, against States membersof the Council,
againstthe Arab States, againstlegitimate resistancetnovL’merits, convince us once again that the rulers of Israelhave
understoodnothing and learlied nothing.
107. In the circumstances, it would appear that the
Security Council has no choice but to set about tile
practical task of formulating a decision on the basisof the
information which we have already heard hem, a decision
which would entail practical, realistic measuresto prcvclll
further aggressiveacts by Israel againstneighbouringArab
States, We emphasized yesterday that the dangerousl)
explosive situation in the Middle East, for which Israel’s
terrorist Zionist ruling clique is rcsponsiblc,callsfor urgent
measureson the part of the Security Council. SLlCh 3
situation, in which the st;mclardsof international law 8x1
the opinions and decisionsof authoritative international
organizationsare being tramptcd upon, asthe distinguished
Ambassadorof Kenya said today -organizations induding
the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity, tilt

organization
of non-aligned States and the International
Civil Aviation Organization-such
a situation obviously
cannot be tolerated any longer.

109. If the representative of Israel continues to depart
from that rule, it seems to me that the Council will be
entitled to deprive him of the right to participate in these
proceedings, for he is going beyond the limits of the
discussion.

108. In concluding this short statement made in exercise
of the right of reply I should like to say that if the
representative
of Israel continues to have recourse to such
unworthy
methods and to slander my country, our allies
and our friends, the Soviet dclcgation will be obliged to
invoke rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, which
clearly states the following:

110. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for his statement expressing his highly
specialized version of the rules of procedure
111. On a point of order, I call on the representative of
the Soviet Union.

“Any
Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council may be invited, as the
result of a decision of the Security Council, to participate, without vote, in the discussion of any question
brought before the Security Council when the Security
Council considers that the interests of that Member are
specially affected . . .I’.

112. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian]: I read out rule 37 as
it appears in document S/96/RevS, without any comments
on my part. I therefore protest against your remark that I
was giving my own version of the rules of procedure.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

11

MOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
msy bc obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world.
Consult your bookstore
or write to: IJnited
Nations,
S&s
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent cn vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informes-vous
aup&
de votce libraire
ou adressez-vous
A : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicsciones
de las Nacioncs
Unidss &fin
en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte a su librero o dirijase
a: Nariones
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas, Nuev~ York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

.52001-my

1979-2m
