1st

United Naholll

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

•

THlRTY·FlRST SESSION

531
534
537

PLENARY ImlNG

OJficial Recordl
CONTENTS

(Opening meeting)

Tuesday, 21 September 1976,
at3.25p.m.
NEW YOlK

A.dd,. by Mr. Gtuton Thorn, T~mporary President,
OIsirnum ofthe ckle&Qtion of Luxemoourl

~

Apndaitem 1:
Op6nlna of the lCSSion by the C1talrman of the dolegation
of Luxembourg
.

11.

Apnda item 2:
.
Minute of silent prayer or meditation ••.•••••••••••

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): The international conferences which have been

held with particular frequency since the beginniIlg of the
thirtieth session have made their mark on international life
and have struck world public opinion both by the number
of participants and the peoples represented, and by the
impact they may have had.
.

1

Address by Mr. GutOR Thorn, Temporary PrcNdent, ChaIIman of the delegation of Luxembourg
.

545
SSO
S53
mirates) • 556

incipe) •. 559

563
I ... ··· 568
571

575

Tribute to the memory of Mao TICtull8, alalrman of the
Central Committee of the Communist Parl:V I~f China ••••

3

Asendaitem 3:
Cred"ntlals of rcprclCntath-es to the thlr13,-Iflfst lICwon of
the General Assembly:
{.J Appointment of the Credentials Committee

4

Agenda-ltem 100:
SCale of assessments for the I'pportionment of the expeRlCS
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions •••••.•••••••••••••.••.•..•.

4

Apnda item 4:
E!ls;:tion of the PnIsldent

•••••••••••.••••.•••••

4

Addrcu by Mr. Hamilton Shlrlcy Amcrasinghe, President of
the thirty-that lICsslon of the General Assembly ••••••••

5

Agenda item 26:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations • • • • • •

8

4. I am wondering whether we are not entitled to see in
this multiplication of international contacts unequivocal
proof of the fact that international co-opernt!on has
assumed new dimensions and that mankind has determinedly and defmitively embarked on a course of dialogue,
thanks to which we can harmonize everyone's interests.

5. The movement towards the building of a new 'Yorld .
which to its groat credit the United Nations has fostered
and directed is a powerful Gause for hope, peace and
progress, provided, however, that the effort made is
followed up within a reasonable period of time by decisions
which can be reflected !n tangible advantages for an men,
because, in order to assist ail those who are afflicted by the
many scourges of today's world, we can no longer confme
ourselves to speeches or to solemn procl~.uations of the
right of an human beings to existence, to food and to a
dignified md free life. The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights has unequivocally set a goal that is ambitious but
one we have all committed ourselves to attain. The
International Co\';:nants on Human Rights constitute a real
step forward, albeit a timorous one, in the right direction,
but a great deal remains to be done.

Temporary PreSident: Mr. Gaston THORN
(Luxembourg).
President: Mr. Hamilton Shirley AMERASINGHE
(Sri Lanka).

58S

6. As long as practical measures have not been taken in
each of our States to respect, and to ensure respect for, the
rlghtll of each individual, our words, void of sense, will
remain lies and hypocrisy.

JR RAM-

~URITIUS

59!

AGENDA ITEM i

Openinl of the -wn by the

~ of the delegation of Luxembourg

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I declare open the thirty-fl1'St regular session of
the General Assembly.
S9S

AGENDA ITEM 2

601
public) " 60S

....

Minute of silent prayer or meditation

610

i

7. It is becoming more and more unacceptable for us to
invest annually some $300 billion in the arms race while we
do not dev!lte even a tenth of that amount to the struggle
against under-development, which, however, condemns-and
I am sorry to quotlll these fIgUres, which are increasing
dangerously-1.2 billion human beings to overwhelming
poverty, the majority of them being, according to the
Inte~tional Labou.r Office, totally destitute.

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

,i

~4

;i

The reprelSltativelllltood in lIilenee.

8. How indeed can we properiy ensure the security of the
world when we are in this way allowing to develop one of
the greatest sources of frustration, tension and conflict?
1bis is one of the essential concerns of our SecretaryGimeral.

~

J••lr.TIFIJ:• • •

---~--~-..---

r;ifi

.;.

r

lIJ

. .A:/~3~1/P~V~.~1_ _..

Genenl AJlembly - TIdtty-fI nt SessiOn - I'fenuy Meetings

1

9. It is to be hoped that we can find in these figures,
which testify to a tremendous injustice, a silent injustice
suffered by so many men, the necessary motivation to
accelei'.1te our work in an obviously complex field, namely,
that of disarmament, confIDing ourselves to its priority
upecu in order fmally to achieve the cessation and then, it
is hoped, the reversal of a trend which is a threat to the
whole of mankind. No argument about the balance of
power, no commercial considerations, should influence any
one of us or distract us from our great responsibility.
10. Economically, the world situation today is of concern
but perhaps it is encouraging at the same time. It is
disturbing because of the persistence of too high a rate of
inflation side by side with massive unemployment. However, it is encouraging because the problem of aR equitable
distribution of the world's wealth, including the resources
of the sea, among all nations and for the benefit of all
mankind remain~ the focus of our debate. At each new
international m".:ting, wt.tther at Vancouver, Nairobi, Paris
or New York, new momentum is given to the creation of a
new economic and social order, an international order
marked increasingly by justice and solidarity.
11. No one has the right to oppose this just redressing
among eations of the balance of economic interests and
arrangements which have so far turned out to be inadequate
for ~nsurini a significant measure of development, particularJ.:; in developing countries, which for far too long have
suffered from foreign economic domination.
12. It was at the seventh special session that the General
Assembly, by choosing the path of reason between con·
frontation and conciliation, made it possible to lay the
foundations for the search for a negotiated solution. The
Conference on ~nternational Economic Co-operation in
Paris has been able precisely to defme the positions of its
participants before it embarks on the production of
tangible results, I hope, in the near future. The fourth
session of ta'le United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development IUNCTADj ,I the great discussion gro"" of
industrialized and developing countries, ended not without
SUCl;eSS and establimed procedures which should lead the
parties to draw closer togeth\\r on the heart of the problem.
, 13. At the thirty-farst session it is important to undertake
an evaluation of the efforts made over a year alld to
establish the necessary guidelines to facilitate within our
existing structures a crystallization of the progress -already
achieved.
14. At the same time, along with this necessary transformation of economic relations throughout the world, we
welcome the idea of introducing into developing countri.es
autonomous structures and new instruments which could
guarantee balanced regional development and create authentic markets which would take better account of the
needs and local conditions.
IS. In this regard, I should like to pay a particular tribute
to the non-aligned countries, which, as was recently stressed
at the meeting in Colombo,' will be a driving force in the

,..
I

1 Held It NaIrobi from 3 to 31 May 1976.
2 Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAIipecI Countries, held at Colombo, Sri Lanka, from 16 to 19
AUlUJt 1976.

search for a new political and economic order to the extent
that they are persevering and are able to maintail!. unity and
display creative im!!-gination.
16. Whether it be international or regional, economic
growth is not, we must stress, an end i.'1.itself. To have some
sense it must be of benefit to all countries and all nationals
.
of those countries.
17. However, with regard to the fair redistribution of
national wealth and income, we must note that unacceptable privileges and inadmissible social and economic
gaps survive in almost all parts of the world. In order truly
to improve the conditions of all, and particularly the
conditions of the most underprivileged, we can no longer
delay putting int'J effect national deve!opm~nt strategies.
Whether it be a matter of social restructuring, the implementation of agrarian programmes or the bringing about of
urban reform, all these measures are inevitable and of
absolute priority.
18. More than 30 years after the foundation of the United
Nations, our Organization must regrettably register a new
serious setback to the tolerance which the Charter calls on
all peoples to observe. For almost a year now a fierce and
murderous civil war hBs gone on in Lebanon. Two
communities are destroying each other with incredible
ferocity. The world is, alas, watching this carnage, powerless and shocked by the spread of so much violence and of
so much hatred.
19. I feel myself that the General Assembly must call on
the different oppoaing parties to renounce their recourse to
Violence, so that they may without delay and without
preliminary conditions conduct serious negotiations.
20. It is a fact that what is now happening in Lebanon is
merely the latest bloody stage in the tragic·conflict in the
Middle East which has engaged our Organization since its
foundation. Can we continue to refuse to give a definite
and objective reply to the Palestinian people who, for many
years, have been subjected to massacre and to a life of
wandering and misfortune that only the founders of Israel
had known before it?
21. We cannot deny to this people the very thing that we
have granted to the other, what every people is entitled to,
namely, the right to existence and to a country of its own.

----- --~-

-._--

'I

22. If the parties involved in this conflict rely on the work
of the Security Council, and once they are given a
guarantee to live in peace, that is, within secure and
recogrtized boundaries, they should at last be able to meet
openly to work out the means for a peaceful settlement
which it would be vain, indeed irresponsible, to delay any
longer.
23. In southern Africa, frontier incidents proliferate, and
bloody riots, which fmt broke out in Soweto and were
followed by frrece repression, are spreading throughout the
region. Under the pressure of an increasingly impatient
public opinion, and faced by growing opposition at home
and abroad, the white minority governments can see the
last ramparts of their oppressive regimes collapsing about
them. Defying all the resolutions of the United Natior,s,

i

~ ------'---._---~~-

!

I
'I

- - . . - . -------

.

.,.--

'.~.-

.

~.

J

.,..- ---

rder to the extent
~aintain unity and

1 :

:gional, economic
self. To have some
:s and all nationals
redistribution of
note that unac:ial and econnmic
lrld. In order truly
~ particularly the
we can no longer
lopment strategies.
eturing, the implee bringing about of
inevitable and of

i

~

(~
,I

1i1 1

,

,j

i

I
!

ation of the United
ably register a new
he Charter calls on
Ir noW a fierce and
in Lebanon. Two
,er with incredible
his carnage, powerluch violence and of

lembly must call on
Ice their recourse to
delay and without
Ilegotiations.

ening in Lebanon is
ragic-conflict in the
IrganiZation since its
le to give a defmite
wple who, for many
ire and to a life of
le founders of Israel

le ve'f'j thing that we
people is entitled to,
a country of its own.

lict rely on the work
, they are given a
, within secure and
last be able to meet
peaceful settlement
lusible, to delay any

lents proliferate, arid
in Soweto and were
ading throughout the
Icreasingly impatient
~ opposition at home
lrnments can see the
mes collapsing about
. the United Nations,

II

1st meeting - 21 September 1976

they have for too long successfully disregarded the most
elementary rights of the indige~10us populations, including
the right -to self.detennma~ion. Those who now hold power
should seize the last opportu.llity for a dialogue which is
offered to t.l;.em and make :it last the changes which our
Organization and the real majorities of their countries are
demarlding. Otherwise they will run the danger of being
destroyed by the violence for which they will be fully
responsible arid which t1Ieir lack of action alone will have
justified.

24. In Cyprus, new negotiations between the communities
have still not led to any real progress towards an enduring
settlement. It is desirable that the parties concerned should
be given further and serious encouragement so that, under
the auspices of the Secretary-General, they Carl come to
grips with the fundamental problem in a serious and
constructive manner.
25. Internationai terrorism and violence have during the
past weeks and months assumed, we must all admit,
alanning proportions. In its most revolting form, namely
the hijacking of irlrcraft and the taking of hostages, this
phenomenon not only increasingly endangers the lives of
many completely innocent individuals, but also seriously
threatens the security of all our States wiiliout a single
exception. No State can benefit from allowing this anarchic
disturbance of international life to continue. It -is therefore
essential tlIat this Assembly should fulfd its special responsibilities in the matter and succeed in adopting urgent and
energetic steps.

26. Instead of dealing with the problem of terrorism as a
whole, the moment may have .:ome to concentrate our
immediate efforts on one aspect of terrorism, tL ~ most
important aspect-tlIat of defending the most innocent
victims by taking decisive action against ilie seizing of
hostages.
27. In a few moments, the General Assembly will proceed
to the election of the person who will preside over the
debates during the coming w.;eks and months. I feel sure
that you will elect to this office someone whose competence for such a task will need no confmnation and who
will, witll exceptional lucidity, successfully carry out a task
which is often difficult and sometimes trying. I hope too,
and in so doing I am honestly confessing my own
snort-cornings, that he will be able to maintain, for the
numerous tasks that await us, a discipline and a level of
debl'.te which have often been lacking in t1Ie past. The
import.ance and urgency of those tasks are worthy of the
prestipe and universal character of the Organization which I
hope w, .,hall shortly be happy and able to strengthen and
consolidate.
Tribute to the memory ofMao Tsetung, Chairman of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
28. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): And now I have one last and sad duty to perform.
29. A few days ago, as you know, the whole wcrld learned
of the death of Chairman Mao Tsetung. This Assembly
must bow before tlIe memory of this pioneer of his great
countty, the man who was called the Great Helmsman, an

3

outstanding personality of the twentieth century who
aroused, more or less everywhere in the world, the most
diverse feelings with the sole exception of indifference.

30. On behalf of this General Assembly, I should like to
reiterate to the delegation of the People's Republic of
China our heartfelt condolences and our feelings of deep
sadness. As a tribute to the memory of Chairman Mao
Tsetung, I now call on representatives to rise and to ~bserve
a minute of silence.

The members of the General Assembly observed a minute
ofsilence.
31. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I call Oll tlte Secretary-General to join in this

tribute.

32. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I would like, Mr. President, to associate myself with the sentiments which have
been expressed by you on the death of Chairman Mao
Taetung. Today, the world is poorer for the loss of this
great statesman.

33. The whole life of Chairman Mao Tsetung was devoted
to his country. He was a source of constant inspiration to
his people in the drive to build a new China. His leadership
will remain a cherished memory for his nation in its future
endeavours.
34. Chairman Mao was a great political thinker, philosopher and poet and, for almost half a century, his influence
has been felt throughout the world. His ideas will leave a
lasting imprint cn our times and ensure him a unique place
in history.

35. On this occasion I wish again to express, on behalf of
the United Nations, my deep sympathy and sincere
condolences to the Government and people of China and to
the bereaved famny.

36. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The passing of Chairman Mao Tsetung, the esteemed and
beloved great leader and teacher of tlte Chinese neople, has
plunged the entire Chinese people into boundle~ll grief and
is deeply mourned by the people throughout the world.
Today, at the opening of the thirty-first session of the
General Assembly, the President and the Secretary-General
have expressed deep condolences on the passing of Chairman Mao Tsetung. In the name of the Chinese delegation to
tlIe thirty-fll'st session of the United Nations General
Assembly, I would like to extend our deepest thanks to the
President, tlIe Secretary-General and other representative-s,
and I shall convey their heartfelt sentiments to ilie Chinese
Government and people.
37. Since the passing of Chairman Mao Tsetung, the
representatives of many countries, regional groups, organizations and national liberation movements have expressed their profound condolences on the death of
Chairman Mao at the meetings of tlIe Security Council, the
fifth session of tlIe Third United Nations Confenmce on the
Law of the Sea, tlIe Special Committee on decolonization, 3
3 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

me . . '
4

n_

f

Genlllll AIIclmbly - Thlrty·Ont SeIIlon - P1eauy Moctinp

the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean, and others.
The permanent representatives of many countries, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, officials of the
United Nations Secretariat and a larget number of Americans from various walks of life have paicl\ condolence calls at
the Chinese mission or sent telegrwns and letters of
condolences. The respect and tribute they have paid to
Chairman Mao Tsetung and their high appraisal of the
contributions and achievements made by Chairman Mao
Tsetung in his lifetime constitute a tremllndous support of
and encouragement to the just cause Ci'll'ried on by the
Chinese people under the leaderllhip of C'l1airman Mao. We
are deeply moved. We wish to take this opportunity to
express once again our heartfelt thanks to them.
38. Chairman Mao Tsetung WIIS the founder and wise
leader of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese
People's liberation Army and the People's Republic of
China. He dedicated all his energies throughout his life to
the liberation of the Chinese people and to the emancipation of the oppressed nations and oppressed people the
world over. Chairman Mao led the Chinese people's
revolution to victory Which transformed the old semicolonial and semi-feudal China into thll new socialist China.
All the victories of the Chinese people were achieved under
the leadership of Chairman Mao; they lIre victories for Mao
Tsetung thQught. The radiance of Mao l'setung thought will
forever illuminate the road of advan,:e of the Chinese
people. Chairman Mao will live forever in the hearts of the
Chinese people as well as of people all over th~ world.
39. Turning grief into strength, the entire Chinese people
are determined to cm)' on the cause left behind by
Chairman Mao md, fonowing his behest, "act according to
the principles laid down". continu~ to implement fmnly his
reVOlutionary line and policie$ in foreign affairs, adhere to
proletarian internationalism, strengthen· ta'le militant unity
between the people of our country and the people of other
countries, particularly those of the third-world countries,
unite with all the forces in the world that can be united and
carry the struggle against imperialimn, colonialism and
hegemonism through to the e~d. Loyal to the teachings of
Chairman Mao, we will never seek hegemony and will never
be a super-Power. We must strive to build our country into
a powerful socialist State and make a greater contnbution
to humanity.

~
I

mentioned are hereby appointed members of the Credentials Committee.
.

45. The TEMPORA

French): I most si!:

and I invite him to 8
session of the Genen

It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 100

Mr. Amerasinghe t(

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expeWJeS
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions

Address by M,:. Nan
oJ the thirty-firs

41. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I now invite the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/31/219, which contains a letter
addressed to me by the Secretary-General informing the
Assembly that two Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their fmancial contributions to the United
Nations within the meaning of Article 19 of the Charter.

i~

'~
~
I'it
••. .• '.!

'1

I

42. I have !>ten informlld that the permament representatives of the Member Stl',es concerned have assured the
Secretary-General that 'l remittance k: the necessary
amount is forthcoming.

47. To all you dist
you, to your Gover
utmost sincerity for
session of the Gener

43. I should also like to inform tb'a Assembly that En
understanding which resolves this matter in complian\~e
with Article 19 of the Charter has been reached with tbe
delegations of those Member States. The Gen.eral Assembly
will of course be kept informed of anv new developments
in this connexion.

48. Without any pr
I regard my election
but as an honour
acknowledgement 0
of the policies of 0\1
Prime Minister Sir'
national affairs. The
will and understandl
nations.

AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President

44. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpret{Jtion from
French): I now invite the members of ~~\;l General
Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of the
thirty-fust session of the General Assembly. In accordance
with rule 92 of the rules of procedure, the election will be
held by secret ballot.

49. I succeed to a
state5men and state
tionaJ achievement I
in the sphere of fore
sense of humility
limitations that I ass

At the i1Witation of the Temporary President, Mr. Ing'IIarsson (Iceland) and Mr. Heidweiller (Surinam) acted as
tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the thirty-first session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee

I

40. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that
the General Assembly at the beginning of each session shall
appoint, on the proposal of the President, a Credentials
COiimlittee consisting of nine members. Accordingny, I
propose that, for 'the thirty-first session, the Credentials
Committee should consist of the following Member States:
China, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ivory Coast, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United· States of America a.-:.d Zambia. ~~ I h ~ar no
objection, I shall take it that the countrjes I have

Number ofballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Number ofvalid ballots:
Abste;~tions:

Number ofmembers voting:
Required majority:

141

1
140
2
138

70

Number ofvotes obtained:
Mr. AmerliSinghe (Sri lanka)
135
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia)
, . . . . . . . .. 1
Mr. Echev"rria (Mexico)
,...... 1
Mr. Kikhia (Libyan Arab Republic) . . . . • . .. 1

Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Hamilton
Shirley Amerasinghe (Sri Lanka) was elected President of
the thirty-first session ofthe General Assembly.

46. The PRESIDEr
graphical rotation of
Assembly and the w
for the established 0
presented by the ge
bined to bring me
President of the th
sembly. My thanks a
Asian group of Stat
they have displayed
presidency.

J

l
1

4

SO. It will. be my
legitimate expectati
Assembly prescribe,
makes it my duty te
to be guided by it if
sluill Ilt all times act
faithful to the Chart

'd

:1

~I

51. last year we ha
Minister as our Pre
bourg has earned th
his smooth and ef
thirtieth session of tl
52. Our distinguisll
.heim, has continued
tiousness, industry a
in his efforts to use
in order to preserve
and status in intema

1st meeting - 21 Septcmbel1976

45. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): I most sincerely congratulate Mr. Amerasinghe,
and I invite him to assume the presidency of the thirty-fust
session of the General Assembly.

5

53. In his exacting task the Secretary-General has been
supported by a !ltaff of international civil servants who have
discharged their functions with complete loyalty to ilie
Organization in consonance with the Otarter. To them all I
extend my profound thanks.

Mr. Amerasinghe took the Chair.
Address by M,~ Hamilton Shirley Amerosinghe, President
o.f the thirtY-first session ofthe General Assembly
46. The PRESIDENT: The principle of equitable geographical rotation of the office of President of the Generll1
Assembly and the unfailing respect of the entire Assembly
for the established convention of accepting the nomination
presented by the geographicail group concerned have combined to bring me to the position I occupy today as
President of the thirty-first session of the General Assembly. My thanks are due primarily to the members of the
Asian group of States for the trust and confidence in me
they have displayed by making me their choice for the
presidency.
47. To all you distinguished representatives and, through
you, to your Governments I extend my thanks wit.'l the
utmost sincerity for electing me as your President for this
session of the General Assembly.
48. Without any pretence at modesty, I must confess that
I regard my election not as a recognition of personal merit,
but as an honour conferred on my country ll.'1d as an
acknowledgement of the positive and constructive impact
of the policies of our Govem..nent urlder the leadership of
Prime Minister Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike on international affairs. These policies are founded on justice, good
will and understanding in the search for harmony among
nations.
49. I succeed to an office which has been adorned by
statemlen and stateswomen of rare distinction and exceptional achievement not only in their own countries but also
in the sphere of foreign relations. It is therefore with a deep
sense of humility and a consciQusness of my personal
limitations that I assume this office.

:
)
(
:"~

SO. It will. be my constant endeavour to live up to your
legitimate expectations and, as the rules of the General
Assembly prescribe, to remain under your authority, which
makes it my duty to ascertain the will of the Assembly and
to be guided by it in the discharge of my responsibilities. I
shall at all times act with comple~e impartiaHty and remain
faithful to the Charter.

.;

j

i'i

--

51. last year we had the rare distinction of having a Prime
Minister as our President. Mr. Gaston Thorn of Luxembourg has earned the thanks and approbatiOJil of us all for
his smooth and efficient conduct of the work of the
thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
52. Our distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Wald.heim, has continued to serve us with exemplary conscientiousness, industry and integrity. He has not spared himself
in his efforts to use the prestige and authority of his office
in order to preserve for the United Nations its proper role
and status in international affairs.
-

--

_~-r___-

&

54. Although I miss the familiar fJgUre of our former
Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly
Affairs, Mr. Bmdford Morse, who in every sense provided
formidable support to the President and has deserved well
of this Assembly, I am delighted to welcome a friend and
colleague of long standing and a diplomat of wide ex·
ptlrience, Under-Secretary-General William Buffum, on his
fust appearance at a session of the General Assembly. I
trust that the satisfaction he will derive from the performance of his new duties will be as gQlst as the benefit we
shall derive from his services.

SS. The world recently lost one of the most heroic fIgures
of our times, Mao Tsetung, Chainnan of the Central
Committee cf the Communist Party of the People's
Republic of China, the creator of modern China and the
revered leader of the Chinese people. To the Government
and people "f the People's Republio of China and to his
bereaved family I offer my sincere sympathy.
56. In addressing you as a national of Sri Lanka, I should
like to stress the implications of, and tIle benefits we derive
from, our association with the widest possible cross-section
of nations in several distinctive groupings. Geogmphically
we belong to the Asian group of States. With many
countries in Asia we share the priceless legacy of an ancient
culture and a long history of varied experience which has
equipped us fully, more in the spiritual than in the material
sense, to face the problems and trials of the world of today.
Our continued ass~iation with the group of Commonwealth countries-once known .as the British Commonwealth-gives usilie advantage of consultation within a
unique mstitution which, by the very reason of its
heterogeneous composition, serves as ail excellent forum
for the harmonization of conflicting attitudes.
57. Economically we belong to perhaps the laIgest group
of States functioning as such in the United Nations sphere
of activities, the Group of 77-a numerical misnomerwhich is an alliance for the advancement of the economic
interests of developing countries through active co-operation, which is now directed primarily towards the establishment of the new international economic order and the
fulfdment of the principles of the Otarter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)).
Both these endeavours are designed to mitigate and
ultimately eradicate the injustices and inequalities of the
past and substitute for them a pattern of international
economic co-operation based on equality that would bring
justice and equity to all.
58. Finally, there is the group of non-aligned countries,
which we helped found and which recently held its Fifth
Conference of Heads of State or Govermnent in Colombo,
Sri Lanka, under the presidency of the Prime Minister of Sri
Lanka. We accord to our membership in this group a
prc-eminent position because its principles and philoso!,hy
are aimed at the attainment of the supreme objective of the
United Nations, the maintenance of international peace and

.. .-

..

6

-- - -

..--.

'"

- ..

....

-

..

..

~_RenI Auembly - Thirty-6nt SeIIion - P1muy Meetings

security. The foreign policy of my' cbuntry is irrevocably
committed to non-alignment.
59. Non-alignment had its genesis in the political situation
created by the Second World War, a situation in which two
power blocs, obsessed with mutual suspicion and hostility
and sharply divided by ideology, strove to surpass each
other in military power and competed for influence and
support among the uncommitted nations. Non-alignment
has met with a great measure of success in safeguarding and
promoting the independence and sovereignty of all nations,
large and small. The prospects of international peace have
been vastly enhanced by increasing adherence to the
principles and policy of non-alignment, which categorically
rejects the concepts of balance of power and spheres of
influence. If its authority is to grow progressively, the
members of the group must remain ever faithful to its
t~nets.

60. With the thirty·fll'st session, the General Assembly
enters upon the last quarter of the twentieth century. There
has been no other period in the history of the human race
which could claim such a glittering record of achievement
in scientific progress but which has also been besmirched by
such 88vage destruction of human life and property in two
wo:tld wars and other no less brutal conflicts and by the
most infamous affronts to the dignity of the human
Filrsonality in ~e name of ethnic superiority.
61. Even as the secrets of the universe unfold themselves
to the penetrating scrutiny of the fecund and versatile
genius of human science, the legitimate expectation that
the advance of technology would produce a corresponding
degree of progress in the solution of the political, social and
economic problems that beset the international community
has fallen far short of even modest realization.

62. During the 31 years of its existence, the United
Nations has advanc\1d steadily towards the attainment of
the ideal of universality of membership. In 1945 it counted
51 countries among its Members. Today we expect t..'te one
hundred and forty-fifth Member to be admitted. Almost
tluee fourths of the countries admitted to membership
since 1945 were once under colonial rule. This has resulted
ill a radical change in the pattern of voting which has
formed the subject of caustic and even offensive criticism.
An induilgent observer may explain this reaction as attributable to frustration, but it fails to show a proper
appreciation of the sensibilities of those who constitute the
majority. if the criticism were treated as only a natural
human reaction to a loss of influence it could have been
dismissed without comment. But when it is taken into the
realm of political theory and the behaviour of the so-called
new majority is ascribed to irrational antagonism or
partisanship and a repudiation of principles, the charge
should not go unanswered.
63. The Charter expresses the determination of the
peoples of the United, Nations to practise tolerance, which
implies mutual respect for different political and economic
systems. The nations that have chosen the democratic
system of government are too prone to claim that the
system automatically endows them exclusively with the
virtues of infallibility of judgement .and impeccability of
conduct. This is a presumptuous ,:laim. What i~ most

important is that in the conduct of international relations a
nation is governed and guided by the principles of the
international covenants and instruments to which it has
subscribed and whose purpose is the maintenance of
international peace and justice in the interests of orderly
human progress and well-being. It is not by the manner in
which it votes on a particular issue that a Member has to he
judged, but by the sum of its actions and its policies and
the effect those actions and policies have on the aims and
objectives of the Charter and on the lives of others affected
by such actions and policies.
64. last year in the General A~embly 123 nations asked
the Security Council to admit the two Viet Nams to
membership in the United Nations [see resolution
3366 (XXX)]. This year the two Viet Nams have sought
admission as one country, the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam. After 30 years of bitter fratricidal conflict during
which they were a divided nation they have succeeded in
achieVing their unification through the free will of their
people. This is a unique and unparalleled achievement
during the post-Second World War era and by itself
establishes beyond cavil their credentials. They have
demonstrated clearly their intention and capacity to discharge the obligations of a Member of the United Nations.
65. For more than 25 years the United Nations has .
devoted much of its attention to political problems. Many
of those problems still plague us and are an imminent threat
to international peace and security. The United Nations
cannot relax its vigilan;:e. The scourge of apartheid and the
repressive measures adopted by the white minority regimes
in southern Africa have brought the world to the brink of
disaster, which can only be averted by honest, resolute and
united action on tlle part of the entire United Nations
membership, especialiy the countries best placed to influence those offending and offensive regimes.
66. In the Middle East, a state of tension continues as the
occupied population becomes increasingly restive and desperate. The agreements on the disengagement of forces on
the Sinai and Suez and the Golan Heights have provided a
respite and offered some hope of progress towards a just
and honourable settlement. This result can be achieved if all
parties to the dispute accept without qualification certain
elements as indispensable to a fmal settlement. None of
these elements commands priority; they form a composite
whole. One of them is the principle of the inadmissibility of
-the acquisition of territory by war. The acceptance of this
principle would require Israel to withdraw its armed forces
from territories occupied by it as a result of war. Another
element is the acknowledgement, both. in policy and in
practice, of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area and of the
right of every State in the Middle East, including the State
of Israel, to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries, free from the threat or use of force. This does
not, however, mean that the expression "secure and
recognized boundaries" entitles any State to determine for
itself what those boundaries should be.
67. The third and perhaps the most important element is
ilie need for restoring to the Arab people of Palestine their
legitimate rights, which will give them a separate Palestinian
State a.s prOVided for and endorsed by the United Nations

.~.~_ .. _~-

--- .---.,

. .~

-

in the partiti
is only bye
right of self·
and State
harrowing 0
refugee cam

.J,

'ii

I

I;
l

...

"
i'i
"

,I

:1'

-,:1

68. The po
permanent
but create
regard to th
every State
cannot be c
special prer
where those
ensuring its
nations in
have stated
again that t
matter for 11
the recogni
from the re
on the grou
and frieiuisl
only in th
especially, t

69. Theev
death toll in
catastrophe.
and of Rhc
brought to
those who b

-I .

70. IJt Cy
towar& a
integrity of
the apPiehe
destroying t
formula C8J
live in han
. nation.

71. It is it1
this nature
will come 1
to those w
peace andll
72. The it
Progress in
the time sp
Committee
iliat Confer
do with th
As&embly.
a whole to
in a world
the fallacy
armaments..
impedimen
approach is
eliminated .

73. World
'IDlounted

-~.,~.-----------.

lit meeting - 21 September 1976

in the partition agreement of 1947 [resolution 181 (I/)]. It
is only by ensuring for the Palestinians the exel'Cise of their
right of self·detennination and giving them a national home
and State that the United Nations can tenninate the
harrowing ordeal of a people who have been condemned to
refugee camps for more than 28 years.
68. The policy of annexation Imd of the establishment of
pennanent settlements in the occupied territories cannot
but create serious misgivings as to Israeli intentions in
regard to the future of the occupied territories. The riglJt of
every State to live within secure and recognized boundaries
cannot be construed as conferring on the State of Israel the
special prerogative of determining at its own discretion
where those boundaries should be established as a means of
ensuring its security. The exercise of such a right by all
nations in general would plunge the world into chaos. I
have stated b"'fore and I take this opportunity of stating
again that the question of safe and secure boundaries is a
matter for negotiation but ~at it cannot be divorced from
the recognition of the right of Israel to exist as a State or
from the renunciation of belligerency. No boundary drawn
on the ground can serve as a guarantee of security. Peace
and friendship are the sole guarantees, and they can exist
only in the hearts and minds of peoples and, more
especially, their leaders.
69. The events in southern Africa, especially the increasing
death toll in townships such as Soweto, are a presage of dire
catastrophe. The white minority regimes of South Africa
and of Rhodesia must come to their senses or must be
brought to their senses b)' concerted action on the part of
those who believe in civilized conduct.

.

-! ~

70. IJt Cyprus there has, unhappily, been no progress
towardll a peaceful settlement that would preserve the
integrity of Cyprus as a single State. It is to be hoped that
the appzehensions of the minority can be allayed without
destroying the territorial integrity of that island and that a
fonnula can be found that will enable the communities to
live in hannony with each other as one people and one
. nation.
71. It is impossible within the compass of a statement of
this nature to cover the numerous other political issues that
will come before this session. I have drawn attention only
to those which constitute a grave threat to international
peace and llecurity.

\,

72. rIle items on disarmament increase from year to year. ,
Progress in the matter of disarmament is in inverse ratio to
the time spent on the question by the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament and the two Co-Chairmen of
that Conference. Every year a new item which has little to
do with the heart of the problem is brought before the
As!lembly. The time has come for the General Assembly as
a whole to take up this issue, whether in a special session or
in a world conference. We should liberate ourselves from
the fallacy that war can be prevented by a reduction in
annaments.. It is this fallacy that has proved the greatest
impediment to real' disarmament. A new and positive
approach is needed. It is the causes of war that should be
eliminated if preparation for war is to be avoided.
73. World military expenditure in 1975 at current prices
'!11lounted to about SUS 300 billion, which, in tenns of

-bi, ts

7

constant 1970 prices, would amount to approximately
SUS 230 billion. Since the end of the Second World War,
the total world military expenditure has amounted to
SUS 4,500 billion at constant 1970 prices. This f18ure is
regarded as a conservative estimate.
74. World military expenditure in 1975 was equivalent to
the tl);~iil gross national product of 65 countries in Latin
America and in Africa. The time and effort devoted by the
two most powerful nations at working out an equation of
their relative military strength could be put to better use by
an examination of the reasons for their engaging in this
frenzied competition to produce even more sophisticated
and more lethal weapons. Growing military strength, far
from preventing a war and ensuring security, could provoke
a war that would bring the combatants to the point of
extinction and consign all humanity to oblivion.
75. It took the United Nations more than 25 years to
realize that the solution of economic problems could
prOVide a key to the easing of political tension. The First
United Nations Development Decade was no more than a
modest start. The real turning-poinl\ came with the sixth
special session on the subject of· raw materials and
development, convened at the imaginative initiative of
President Boumediene of Algeria. That session produced
the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolution 3201 (S-V/)] and a
Programme of Action relating to it [resolution
3202 (S- VI)]. The inability of certain powerful developed
market economy countries to subscribe in its entirety to
the latter resolution should not, however, discourage our
efforts to bring into being a new and more equitable
international economic order. To fail to do so would only
be to perpetuate an order that, even when it was working at
what appeared to be its best, did not serve the interests of
the developing world.
76. The Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order was soon reinforced by the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, adopted
in General Assembly resolution 3281 (XXIX). These instruments were further complemented and reinforced by the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation adopted at the Second General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization [UN/DOl in March 1975,4 as well as by the
resolutions adopted at the fourth session of UNCTAD at
Nairobi in May 1976.5
77. The most striking achievement of the fourth session of
UNCTAD was the acceptance of the principle and the bases
of negotiation in three crucial sectors of international trade
and development, namely, primary commodities, manufactures and technology.
78. The integrated programme for commodities, contained
in resolution 93 (IV) adopted at Nairobi, of which the
principal element is the common fund for fmancing buffer
stocks, forms the core of our effort to restructure the trade
in primary commodities. A happy augury for the success of
that effort was the pledge made by 14 developed market4 See document A/I0112, chap. lV.
5 See document ID/217.

......

economy cmmtries, immediately after its adoption in
Nairobi, of their support for that resolution. A few of the
most powerful developed market economy countries entered reservations on the integrated programme, but it is to
be hoped that these reservations will be withdrawn as the
programme of commodity consultations launched by
UNCTAD gets under way. Self-reliance is more consistent
with the dignity and self-respect of developing countries
than continuing dependence on the charity and capricious
benevolence of the developed countries.
79. In thll area of manufactures, UNCTAD at its fourth
session has given its approval to an over-all strategy for
manufactures which takes into account the main objectives
of the UNIOO Conference at Lima. In the area of
technological development, there is now agreement to
negotiate a code of conduct for tb.e transfer of technology,
as well as a commitment te strengthen the technological
capacity of developing countries.
80. There is, however, an important area ofinlmediate and
critical concern to tile developing countries, particularly
those most adversely affected, wliere UNCTAD at Its fourth
session gave little or no satisfaction to the developing
world. I refer to the area of money and fmance, where no
progress was made on solutions to the pressing fmancial
problems created in a large number of developing countries
by the shinp decline in commodity prices or on adequate
measures to give prompt relief to developing coun~ries
burdened with critical debt problems or· on measures for
the transfe:r of adequate resources from those in possession
of them to tIlose who need them. In this area the only
satisfaction given to the developing world was an agreement
to continue the dialogue. There is, however, a glimmer of
hope in this agreement.

82. On all sides it is recognized that, as more and mora
nations attain the status of sovereign and independent
countries, the interdependence of nations in every sphere of
international activity grows. It is not within the capacity of
!l single country or a group of countries, however powerful
they may be militarily and economically, to find complete
solutions to current international prob!ems independently
of the rest of the international commwtity. Tltis requires a
joint and collective effort in an 8tmosphere of concord and
good will, inspired by the deterJ;nination to subordinate
narrow sectarisn and selfish aims, whether at the national
or international level, to thb B:mthamite ideal of the
greatest good of the greatest number.
83. We have a haavy agenda, but I am confident that I can
rely absolutely on the help and support of repr~sentatives
in approaching all our problems in a disciplined and
states,manlike manner and so prove to the world that the
United Nations is fully aware of its responsibmties and is
determined to live up to them.

87.
admitt

The
toitsp

"

Wo

I

.. f

"

1

84. The United Nations system provides a unique forum
for establishing a bond of unity in the pursuit of a common
purpose among the nations of the world and for deriving
from that unity fresh vigour and strerigth. But the strengtll
derived from unity requires to be governed by a discipline
that will lead us all to the objectives we so devoutly desire
to attain. In stressing this principle, which I consider to be
vital to the success of our efforts, I echo tile wOids of the
SakYamuni, Gauthama Buddha, tile sage whose teachings
have had such a profound influence on the lives of the
people of my country, as of many other countries in Asia,
who once said: "Sammag8niun tapo sukho"'-"'Happy is the
discipline of tIlose who are united." It is with that message
that 1wish to conclude my address today.

91. M
to wel
of tile
sincere
of tile
Gener
sh1gul
month,
august
you
distln
play in
is there
bring
Assem
which
adjou
a great
should,
again t
highest
can do
and
session.

..J

I

...

~.'-'....."

--~_._---~.~~. ,--~-,.

----" ---

Admission of new Mlembers to the United Nations
8S. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with tile procedure
followed in the past, I should now li\{e to invite tile General
Assembly to consider, under item 26 of the provisional
agenda, the positive recommendation by the Security
Council in document A/31/176 for the admission to
membership in the United Nations of the Republic of
Seychelles. This special procedure has been applied previously in order to give any State recently recommended by
the Security Council for membership in our Organization
the opportunity, if the General Assembly acts favourably
on the request, to participate from tile outset in the work
of the session. If there is no objection, we shall proceed in
this manner.

It was so decided
86. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has recommended tile admission of the Republic of Seychelles in
. document A/31/176. In this connexion a draft resolution
has been submitted in document A/31/L.l'and Add.l and
2. May I take it that the General Assembly accepts the
.recommendation of the Security Council and adopts the,
draft resolution by acclamation?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 31/1).

89. It
congrat
furtller
self-det
90. Se
speak
Malawi

AGENDA ITEM 26
81. OJle of the great challenges of our time, and a task
with which I have had the privilege of being very closely
associated, is the establishment of a new international
regime for the world's oceans. This co·operative endeavour
is, in scope, complexity and impact, ';rlthout parallel in
history. A universally acceptable international agreement
regulating the use of such a vast area of the earth's surface,
and assurillc; to all countries, rich and poor alike, an
equitable share of its wealth, would be an outstanding
contribution to tile rational, just and stable order, both
political and economic, which the United Nations is striving
to create. The Third United Nations Conference on tile Law
of tile Sea, which only last Friday concluded its futh
session inconclusively, and the preceding deliberations have
now been going on for 10 years. Although some areas of
contention have been m.rrowed down to the point where
agreement appears to be within reach, on many issues of a
fundamental nature there are still sharp divergencies among
tile participants. We have reached a stage where the
successful conclusion of an agreement could be imperilled
by impetuous and precipiinte action. We have, one and all,
an obligation to act 'with extreme caution and patience and
witll a proper appreciation of the untllinkable risks and
consequences of failure. It is my hope that we shall be able
to look back witll satisfaction on the 1970s not merely as
having encompassed a decade of the oceans but as having
seen the creation of a new spirit of understanding and
co-operation among the nations of the world. .

88.
Assem
Seyche
cordial
United
progre

92. It
,;

j

l

I
I

...

Mrican
will a
colon'
Mrican
official
the a
Indian
Mrica.
and my
have ex
lames
Republi
dence.
93. Th
tIlat th
any ugl

ht meetlll8 - 21 september 1976

87. The PRESIDENT: I declare the Republic of Seychelles
admitted to membership in the United Nations.

The delegation of the Republic ofSeychelles wall escorted
to its place in the General Assembly hall.
88. The PRESIDENT: I am sure that all members of this
Assembly rejoice at the admission of the Republic of.
Seychelles to membership in the United Nations. I extend a
cordial welcome to the delegation cf Seychelles to the
United Nations and wish its people the blessings of peace,
progress and happiness.
89. It is appropriate that I should, at the same time,
congratulate the Govermnent of the United Kingdom on its
furCler demonstration of its adherence to the principle of
self·determination.
90. Several representatives have expressed a desire to
speak at this juncture. I call frrst on the representative of
Malawi, who will speak on behalf of The: Mrican States.

•

·j

1 "
I,

91. Mr. MUWAMBA (Malawi): In coming to the podium
to welcome the new State of Seychelles, I wish, on behalf
of the African group of States, to extend to you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations 011 your election to the presidency
of the thirty·first regular session of the United Nations
General Assembly. The African group, of which I have the
smgular privilege of representing as Chairman of the current
month, is proud of your contribution to the work of this
august body and is therefore happy and delighted to see
you grace that office. The African group recalls the
distingUished role you have played and are continuing to
play in the adjourned Conference on the Law of the Sea. It
is therefore the hope and prayer of my Group that you will
bring to the thirty-first regular session of the General
Assembly the same wisdom, understanding and dedication
which you generously placed at the disposal of the
adjourned Conference. Above all, it gives the African group
a great sense of pride and satisfaction that the thii:d world
should, within a period of two years, be privileged once
again to provide positive and qynamic leadership for the
highest international body. Accordingly, the African group
can do no more than assure you of its unflinching support
and co-operate throughout the duration of the current
session.
92. It will be recalled that onfl of the priorities which the
African group has set itself at the United Nations is, you
will agree, the total elimination of colonialism and neo·
colonialism where they exist in any form. Therefore, the
African group feels excited and inspired to note that the
official opening of the thirty-first regular session also marks
the admission to membership in this 'World body of the
Indfan Ocean Republic of Seychelles on the continent of
Africa. Accordingly, on behalf of both the African group
and my own country, Malawi, I wish to join all those who
have extended and will extend congratulations to President
James Mancham, the Government and people of that young
Republic on their well·earned and well-deserved indepen·
dence.
93. The Mrican group is par*icularly happy at the fact
that the transfer of power there has taken place without
any ugly incidents, thereby ensuring the continued eco-

., .

9

nomic and social development of the young Republic. In
this connexion, the African group would like to extend to
the former colonial Power, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, our very hearty congratula·
tions for bemg sincere and true to the spirit of the
agreement reached to extend to that Republic the desired
independence and sovereignty.
94. My own country has had occasion to work with
Seychelles as a Commonwealth member country since the
British occupation of that country. I recall, fOl' instance,
that I personally had occasion to visit the Republic in 1972
when I flew to Mah6 on the Air Malawi inaugural flight. I
was privileged to be received by the President himself and
one of his senior Cabinet Ministers. It is my sincere hope,
therefore, that the relationship between the two Republics
will wax from strength to strength, to theii' mutual benefit.
95. The African group notes with great satisfaction the
commitment by the Seychelles Government to the policy
of non·alignment, as well as its determination not to create
a climate in the Indian Ocean capable of attracting
big·Power confrontation. As that commitment reflects the
Organization of African Unity's desire for peace and
determination to achieve human dignity and equality for
the people of Africa, representatives can well understand
my group's joy on the admission of our sister African
country to membership in this august body. Therefore, we
look forward to working side by side with our brothers and
sisters from Seychelles until Qur goal has been realized.
96. Finally, in extending a warm welcome to our brothers
and sisters of the Seychelles, I should like to say that the
African group at the United Nations strongly believes that
their admission to the United Nations will enable them to
make a useful and positive contribution to the efforts and
activities of the world body in the promotion of world
peace and justice.
97. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Bhutan, who will speak on behalf of the Asian States.
98. Mr. TSHERlNG (Bhutan): Mr. President, my Foreign
Minister will be participating in the general debate and I am
quite sure that he would like personally to express his
felicitations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Genaral Assembly. In the meantime, it is most opportune
for me, in my capacity as Chairman of the Asian group of
States and on behalf of my own delegation, to extend our
warmest congratulations on your election as President of
the thirty·fust session of the General Assembly.
99. It gives me great pleasure indeed to see a distinguished
citizen from the same subcontinent of Asia occupying the
high post of President and it is a fitting tribute also to your
ancient country. We are very happy because we are familiar
with you by now in your important roles in various ad I-.oc
committees and as President of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea, in which you have
already demonstrated your wisdom, tact and skill. Those
qualities reaffmn our co-nfidence that the Assembly at this
session will be able to tackle successfully the problems that
will come before it.
100. I should also like to take this opportunity to convey
our warmest appreciation and congratulations to your

.

.- -

.

10

predecessor, Prime Minister Gastpn Thorn of Luxembourg,
for the manner in which he so successfully guided the
proceedings of the thirtieth session.
101. On 18 August 1976.l:lis Majesty the King of Bhutan,
while addressing the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government (If Non-Aligned Countries in Colombo,
welcomed the accession to independence of the Republic of
Seychelles and its entry into the fumily of the non-aligned
movement. It is now with great plea&ure and honour that I,
as Chairman of the Asian group of States, and on behalf of
my own delegation, welcome the admission of the Republic
of Seychelles to membership in the United Nations. The
Kingdom of Bhutan respects the important principle of
self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. In the present case, we welcome the collective
efforts of the people of Seychelles, the former administering Power, the United Kingdom, and the Special Committee on decolonization, whose efforts successfully and
peacefully brought about the independence of the Republic
of Seychelles. We believe that constitutes great progress in
the efforts of our Organization and offers one more proof
of the fact that decolonization efforts of the United
Nations are bearing fruit.

"

102. The admission to membership of the Republic of
Seychelles is an act in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and strengthens the goal of
universality'of the United Nations. The Kingdom of Bhutan
is fully committed to the goal of universality of the
membership of the United Nations. It is our sincere hope
that, as in the case of Seychelles, other States which are still
outside this great Organization, will be admitted as full
members in complete conformity and compliance with the
principles of our Organization.
103. We wish the Republic of Seychelles every success in
realizing the aspirations of the people and in their efforts at
nation-building. We also look forward to working in close
co-operation with the Seychelles in the belief that the
Republic of Seychelles will make great contributions to the
work of our Organization.
104. Before concluding, I should like also to associate
myself with the sentiments that were expressed at the
opening of the session on the sad demise of Chairman Mao
Tsetung. Chairman Mao Tsetung was a poet, a philosopher
and a beloved leader of his people. He was also the architect
of the modern history of China and devoted his life.
completely to his country. His d. votion and outstanding
statesmanship will long be remembered not only in his own
country and in Asia but throughout the world. The
Kingdom of Bhutan is an immediate neighbour of the
People's Republic of China, and I should like once again on
behalf of the Asian group of States and on behalf of my
own delegation to convey to the representative of China,
and through him to his delegation and Government and to
the bereaved family, our sincere condolences and sympathy
at their great loss.
105. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Romania, who will speak on behalf of the Eastern
European States.
106. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from
French): Sir. the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my

--..

_---~--_.

__._._---_._._-.-

-----",--,.,

country will have the pleasure, on behalf of the Government of Romania, to congratulate you on your election as
President of the thirty-fmt s6'iJsion of the General Assembly
and extend to you the congratulations of the delegation of
Romania. However, I should like to avail myself of this
happy and solemn occasion to express to you once again
my personal feelings of estaem and friendship, to wish you
complete success in the discharge of the lofty responsibilities entrusted to you and to ausure you that you will have
the complete co-operation of the delegation of Romania.
107. The General Assembly has just admitted by acclamation a new Member State, the Republic of Seychelles, to
the family of the United Nations. I should like, on behalf of
the countries of Eastern Europe, to offer on this occasion
our warmest congratulations to the representatives of that
country.

-

114
to

wis

ind
nat
pee
'¥ l

1l0. The admission of the Republic of Seychelles to the
United Nations once again illustrates the role and the
importance which all peoples that love peace and justice
accord to the United Nations. This is proof that the
international community still considers the United Nations
to be a vital and irreplaceable instrument for co-operation
among all States, as equals in rights and in duties.

Arr

li;
,~

I

308. The entry of the Republic of Seychelles to the
United Nations is yet another practical confirmation of the
right of all peoples to be represented in this world forum
and it is, at the seme time, a new step towards complete
universality of our Organization.
109. We rejoice at this event, which gives us !lI1 opportunity to express our most sincere conviction that the
Republic of Seychelles will make a valuable contribution to
the development of international co-operation within the
fields of activity of th" United Nations, while benefiting
from international co-operation and the support of our
Organization.

..

W
El

~

11C
fro
wh
gro
tod
its
Uni

yOl

11
pu
Me
del
unl
tU
Un
COl

all)

• •

Sin
ane
ind
°Pl
bili
obj

111. It is up to all of us not to disappoint those who place
their hopes for peace and progress in the United Nations.
This is the central idea which should guide our political will
towards the achievement of the universality of the United
Nations, by admitting all States which apply and which
meet all the conditions prOVided for in the Charter, both in
their words and in their deeds.

II
sub
wh
gen
wit
int
sid
ow
pal

112. Every step such as the one we have taken today
brings mankind doser to the end of a shameful chapter in
its history, marked by colonialism and imperialist domination. We are coming closer to the day when the last
remaining peoples still subject to colonial domination will,
by their arduous struggle, conquer the legitimate and
inalienable right to freedom, to life and to national and
human dignity.

nat
fol'l
per
reje
pro
are
tak

113. We are happy to note that this course is marked by
the efforts undertaken within our Organization, the most
important of which was the adoption· in 1960 of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples [resolution 1514(XV)J. It is now
the duty of all of us to redouble our efforts in solidarity, so
that we shall as soon as possible put an end to colonialiSt
and neo-colonialist practices which still persist throughout
the world and build a better world.

12
the
°PI
ope
end
,just
ens
dev

- - ---.,...,....-_. ---...-:-

-

12(

all

1st meeting - 21 September 1976

114. Inspired by these thoughts, we should like to express
to the representatives of the Republic of ~ey?helles our
wishes for complete success in the consohdatlon of the
independence of their IJoun'try as well as in their inter·
national activities, so as to realize the aspirations of their
people for peace, progress and prosperity.

l-

is

y

If
Is
n

u

115. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
El Salvador, who will speak on behalf of the Latin
American States.

i-

'e

116. Mr. GALINDO POHL (El Salvador) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, may I first ef all say to you
what a tremendous satisfaction it is for the Latin American
group of States and my country, Et Salvador, that you have
today been elected President of the General Assembly for
its thirty·first session. Your long and fruitful activities in
United Nations forums constitute the best qualifications for
your investiture today.

le
le

m

117. 'The General Assembly has just admitted the Republic of Seychelles as the one hundred and forty-fifth
Member of the United Nations, a decision to which the
delegations of the Latin American group have given their
unanimous consent.

te

Ir-

le

to

118. By its. very nature, and because of its objectives, the

le

United Nations has to be an organization of universal
composition in which all States, without any distinction of
allY kind, hold dialogues, debate and co-ordinate aIJtivities.
Since the objective9 of the United Nations are world-wide
and the problems of peace, security Md development are
indivisible, the United Nations must of necessity give an
opportunity to all States to assume their share of responsibility in the common tasks and in the attainment of
objectives freely agreed to.

18

ur

•I •

le
le

le
15
lR

119. The United Nations has at the international level
substantially changed the system of international relations
which preceded the two world wars and which afflicted the
generations of the twentieth century and, in accordance
with its philosophy and objectives, all members of the
international community, all States which can be considered members of the international community have,
owing to the interdependence in which we live, the right to
participate and the duty to contribute.

ce

IS.

ill
~d

ch
in

120. The Republic of Seychelles will enrich this international forum. Even though its independence became.
formal very recently, its social, historic and cultural
personality has been long established. It is cause for
rejoicing when a new Member of the Unuted Nations gives
proof by its presence that the last vestiges of colonialism
are truly disintegrating and that the United Nations is
taking further steps towards universality.

ay
in
la1St

ni,
nd
nd
,J

by
Jst
he
~al

JW

so

liSt

lut

"

121. The Latin American group, on whose behalf! extend
the warmest welcome to Seychelles, will seek every
opportunity to create closer ties of friendship and 1;0operation with this new Member and friend, in the common
endeavour to organize international relations on the basis of
,justice and progress. The agreed objective is specific: to
ensure for future generations peaceful enjoyment of the
development of science and technology and to recognize to
all peoples of the world their inalienable light to organize

11

their political and econonUc life and to develop their own
Pf.\rsona:ity in an stmosphere of respect and co·operation.
What I have said 011 behalf of the Latin American group is
also meant on behalf of my country, El Salvador
0

122. The PRESIDENT: I now call on tlte representative of
Icr,land, who will speak on behalf of the group of Western
European and other States.
123. Mr. INGVARSSON (Iceland): Mr. President, it gives
me great pleasure to extend to you, on behalf of the group
of Western European and other States, the warmest
congratulations on your election as President of the Genei'al
A~ssembly. I wish to add my personal best wishes. Your
election is a great tribute to your country and to your
personal qualities and great experie~ce in the affairs of the
United Nations. We look forward to working under your
able guidance and we assure you of our co-operation.
124. May I also express our profound thanks and appreciation to our former President, Mr. Gaston Thorn, who
dischlll'ged his heavy duti~s as President of the thirtieth
session of the General Asllembly in an exemplary manner
and with wisdom and tact.
125. As Chairman of the group of Western European and
other States, I am happy to welcome the admission of the
Republic of Seychelles to memb~rship in the United
Nations. We are gratified that this Organization is moving
closer to its goal of complete universality.
126. We look forward to fruitful co-operation with this
our newest Member and to its contribution to the work of
our Organization.
127. Speaking as the representative of a small country, I
am pleased to assure the delegation of Seychelles that
smaller Members have an lmportlUlt and positive role to
play in the United Nations.
128. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Yemen, who will speak on behalf of the Arab States.
129. Mr. SALLAM (Yemen)(interpretationfromArabic):
First, Mr. President, I should like on behalf of the Arab
group of States to welcome you and congratulate you on
your accession to the presidency of this sesSion of the
General Assembly.
130. I should like also on behalf of the Arab group,
including the Palestine Liberation Organization, which has
become a full-fledged member of the Arab League, to
express our sincerest and warmest congratulations to the
Republic of Seychelles on its adnUssion to our Organization. We congratulate that young State which has just
become a Member of our international Organization. We
congratulate the international community also on its firm
and constant support for the liberation of oppressed
peoples, some of which are still suffering under the yoke of
ilnperialism and foreign domination. Our international
community views with sympathy the development of the
situation in those countries that have not yet acceded to
freedom and independence. The international community
wishes to see the peoples that are still under the domination
of imperialism occupy their places among us as Members of

~... AMembly - 'l'hirty-ftnt SeWon - P!awy Meednp

12

this great Organization, so that the United Nations may
become universal, thereby fulfilling one of its main purposes: the establishment of international co-operation,
justice Md equality among peoples, 0..11. the basis of respect
for man's dignity and his right to live in peace in any part
of the world.
131. The Arab group congratulates the Republic of
seychelles, this young State that has now become a
Member of our Organization. At the same time, we
congratulate ourselves on the realization of another objective of the United Nations, which develops friendly
relations and equal rights among peoples, with self-determination for all.
132. On behalf of the Arab group, I welcome among us
the representatives of the Republic of Seychelles, which has
won its independence by means of its constant struggle and
its unending patience.
133. I would take this opportunity to state on behalf of
the Arab group that we deeply mourn the passing of
Chairman Mao Tsetung. We extend our condolences to the
great Chinese people. This is a loss not only for China but
for all peace-loving and freedom-loving peoples.
134. I started this statement by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your accession to your high post.. May I
conclude it by repeating our congratulations to you, on
behalf of the Arab group.
135. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the United States of America, the host country.
136. Mr. SCRANTON (United States of America): My
delegation wishes to add its condolences to the people of
the People's Republic of China on the passing of Chairman
Mao. Chairman Mao was a historic figure who changed the
course of events in the world and who had a tremendous
impact on the present and the future of his country. As
President Ford has noted, Chairman Mao's influence on
history extended far beyond the borders of China itself. My
country joined together with his to establish positive and
fruitful relations, and together our countries promise to
contn'bute to world puce and to its stability. All of us
here, I am sure, echo these sentiments for a world at peace;
they can serve as an InsPiration for our work in the United
Nations to strive for a peaceful and secure world. I sharethese sentiments del2ply and should like to express my
perso!19l condolences to iny Chinese colleagues.

139. It is a very special pleasule that my initial statement
in the General Assembly should be to welcome a new
Member to the United Nations. It is a further satisfaction to
be mal?ug it with s? distinguished a stat~sman presiding
over this great gathenng. Many congratulations to you too,
Mr. President, on your assumption of office. In the year
1976 you have presided over two sessions of the Third
United Nations Conference on the law of the Sea. In the
same year there has beeu the non-aligned Conference in
your home country, Sri Lanka. And now you are President
of the thirty-first session of the United Nations General
Assembly. I would make only one comment: what a
remarkable year for an extraordinary man!

i I

JI

I
,~

I
I

'"

140. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United Kingdom.
141. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
when he speaks in the course of the general debate the
leader of my delegation, the Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Mfairs, will be expressing his pleasure
at your assumption of the presidency. May I, however, take
this early opportunity of expressing my personal congratulations on your election to this distinguished office. We are
particularly pleased that the representative of a fellow
Commonwealth country and a fitm supporter of the
Commonwealth ideal should be in the chair. You add your
own particular touch of elegance. I only regret that the
flower shops of New Vork were not able to provide me
with a flower from your native Sri Lanka to match the
English rose which you regularly ~'Port with so much grace.
You bring a wealth of experience, both hard-won and
recent, to the presidency. For your sake, I hope that you
will find us an easier lot to deal with than the representatives to the Conference on the law of the Sea.

I

i

142. It is with the greatest pleasure that the United
Kingdom welcomes the Republic of Seychelles as the
newest Member of the United Nations. We have already had
an opportunity dUring the debate in the Security Council
on the admission of Seychelles to express satisfaction at the
accession to independence of another Britislll Non-SelfGoverning Territory. We treasure the 160 years of friendship between our two communities and we look forward to
developing a close but equal association in the years ahead.

137. As representative of the host country for tbe United
Nations, I offer smcere congmtulations on the occasion of
the acce~ion to membarship in our Organization of the
Republic of Seychelles. The United States delegation had
the pleasure of supporting the Seychelles' application at the
time of its consideration in the Security Council, on
16 August.

143. Seychelles has already taken its place in international
affairs through its membership in the Commonwealth and
in the Organization of Mlican Unity. It is now the turn of
the United Nations to have the benefit of the fresh and
vigorous ideas of this new nation-State. We look forward to
close co-operation with the delegation of Seychelles. The
country may be small but it has its own valuable contribution to make to the affairs of the region and the world as a
whole. It has historical ties not only with my countiy but
with France. It is a splendid example of multiracialism
where people of Mrican, Indian, Chinese and European
blood all contribute to make Seychelles the fascinating
place that it is. We wish them all well.

138. The dedication ofthe prople of Seychelles to the goalswhich we
share, of peace, freedom and the welfare of
mankind, surely will facilitate our joint task. For our part,
we assure our newest Member of the full co-operation and
assistance of the United States delegation.

144. We are particularly happy to do so in tile presence of
the distinguished President of Seychelles, Mr. James Mancham. It affords me personally particular pleasure to
welcome Mt. Mancham. I met him f1l'St in San Francisco
some five years ago, when he was in the course of one of his

an

..

..

11

\.

•

t-

-----~--------------_:~_.---~--·I
. .~c.... .

'-~

.

'~,

---- ---

----------'

.----~---

_._--~-_... - -

1st meeting - 21 September 1976

ement

a new
ion to
,siding
IU too.
e year
Third
In the
nce in
isident
ieneral
/hat a

.'

of the

sident,
Ite the
:orei8O
leasure
r, take
19ratu-

I

United
as the
dyhad
:ouncil
Iat the
In·Selffriendyard to
ahead.

ationai
Ith and
tum of
sh and
yard to
lS. The
ntribu
rId as a
Ely but
cialism
.ropean
inating
m

mceof
s Manure to
ancisco
, of his

145. Much can be said about the statesmanlike way in
which the Seychelles people have proceeded to indepen·
dence. I should like to do no more on this occasion than to
pay a tribute to the wisdom of the leaders of the two main
political parties, President Mancham and Prime Minister
Rene, who last year formed a coalition Government. We
pledge the Seychelles Govemment the full co·operation and
support of my Government in the years that lie allead, and
in earnest of this we have already agreed to provide
economic and technical assistance for the development of
the Seychelles.
146. May I fmally add that this happy occasion marks the
culmination of three years of co-operation between my
own delegation and the Special Committee on decoloniza·
tion under the able chairmanship of Ambassador Sali.m. We
share a common belief in the principle of self·determination. I think also that there is now a greater awareness of
the particular problems of our remaining small dependent
Territories, and we look forward to continuing our constructive exchanges.

We are

fellow
Jf the
dyour
lat the
ide me
ch the
Igrace.
m and
at you
esenta-

good-will tours, which have done so much to put his
country on the map. Two years ago I accompanied him on
a courtesy call on the Secretary·General, when, with the
good-humoured eloquence that he commands, he explained
to Mr. Waldheim that, whatever some theorists might tilink
about the problem of the so-called mini-States, Seychelles
fully intended to become a member of the United Nations
and to play a full part therein.

• w •

147. May I also add, Sir, that my delegation much
appreciated your own generous reference and those of
other representatives to the role of the United Kingdom in
bringing our former dependent Territories to independence.
148. Mr. KHAN (Bangladesh): At the outset I should like
on behalf of the people of Bangladesh, my Government and
myself to express deep grief and sincerest condolences at
the passing awl.!y of the great leader Mao Tsetung, a giant
among men and an immortal.

:1.3

Lanka but also to the continent of Asia, to which we both
belong. We extend to you our sincere congratulatipns and
felicitations on your election. As that of a statesman of
wide experience and proven ability, your name and
reputation are familiar and respected throughout the world.
You bring to this high office an outstanding record of
dedicated work in the service of your country and the
United Nations itself in the cause of intemational under·
standing and co-operation. We are confident that under
your astute guidance, wisdom and diplomatic skill, the
deliberations of this Assembly will be brought to a
successful conclusion.
152. Sir Harold WALTER (Mauritius) (interpretation from
French): Sir, I should first of all like to congratulate you
upon your election to the presidency of this august
Assembly. But at the same time I would remind you of the
immortal lesson of Shlikespeare, "Uneasy Hes the head that
wears a crown."
153. Secondly, I should like to extend my sincere condolences to the Permanent Representative of the People's
Republic of China at the great sorrow that has afflicted his
country in particular and the world in general. I hop'C that
the distinguished representative will find a great deal of
comfort in the words of the poet, because they apply
particularly to the great man who has lately left us: "The
man may disappear, but his work remains."
154. As Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity I greet wUh legitimate pride
the Republic of Seychelles on its admission to the United
Nations. Also, in my capacity as representative of a
neighbouring State of the Republic of Seychelles, with
which we have common interests and a long historical
association as well as legal and cultural bonds, and on
behalf of my Prime Minister and Head of Government,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity, and the people of Mauritius, I take pleasure
at this great honour which has fallen to the Republic of
Seychelles. We congratulate that country.

149. It gives me grest pleasure on behalf of the people and
Government of Bangladesh to welcome into the fold of the
international conununity Seychelles as the one hundred and
forty-fifth Member State of the United Nations. Bangladesh
is particularly committed to the goal of universality of
membership, and the admission of Seychelles marks
another important step in the fulfilment of this eminently
desirable objective.

155. Great Britain warrants our admiration and praise for
having with faith and determination pursued its policy of
decolonization. We rightly appreciate the liberation of a
quarter of the world's population, 800 million souls, in an
act of faith which deserves our congratulations.

iSO. As a newly emerging developing country, an Indian
Ocean neighbour and a sister Commonwealth nation, we
haye close ties of affmity and friendship with Seychelles
and their valiant people, a bond which we are confident will
grow ever stron, c,particularly through our participation in
the work of lJle United Nations. We look forward to
working in close and friendly co-operation with the
representatives of Seychelles in reaching the cormnon goals
and aspirations of our peoples and Governments.

157. The PRESIDENT: It is now my pleasure to invite the
President of the Republic of Seychelles, His Excellency
Mr. James R. Mancham, to address the General Assembly.

IS1. May I also take this opportunity to express our
pleasure at seeing you, Mr. President, preside over the
deliberations of this august Assembly. Your election is an
eloquent tnbute not only to your illustrious country Sri

156. I wish ilie young Republic of Seychelles a new era of
prosperity and peace.

158. Mr. MANCHAM (President of the Republic of
Seychelles): Sil, flli"1: let me congratulate you on your
assumption of the office of President of the thirty-frrst
session of the General Assembly, I have no doubt that you
will bring a wealth of experience to the discharge of the
heavy burden which lies on you from today.
159. Let me now thank all Member States that have
spokeI'. today for all the complimentary remarks they have
macie on Seychelles' achievement of independence as a

---""~

sovereign republic and on our 1tecoming the one hundred
and forty·fifth Member of the United Nations. In fact, it
was for me also a matter of great pride and satisfaction to
read the account of the debate which took place on
16 August, when the quelltion of our lldmission was being
discussed by the Security Council. 6

frontier. In fact, I will hasten to say that even the
colonialism which we have known has been totally non·
repressive and very benevolent. In such a situation we can
perhaps therefore afford to look objectively towards the big
world outside and ask, What is all this fratricide; what is all
this division and this madness of men all a~out'?

160. On looking at our past, I note that we were a French
colony for 40 years, and a British colony for 160. As a
matter of fact, it is the French who started the human
experience in our country, and the French impact survives
to this day. Britain, which took over from the French, has
guided us with an attitude of friendly enlightenment over
the years, and in this spirit readily and unreservedly granted
us independence on 29 June this year.

166. I think the time has come when we must ask
ourselves what will make the world a sane world. It is
evident that only sane people can, make the wo.>rld a sane
world-and among these people, to begin with, those of us
who have assumed responsibility for our people. And if
indeed we want a peaceful world, who else to bring this
about but leaders who have peace in their minds'?

161. It would, therefore, be ungenerous were I not to pay
a particular tribute to the United Kingdom for all it has
done for my country and for the generous spirit in which it
has forwarded our progress to independence, as well as for
the generous c;conomic assistance it is pr'Dviding us in this
very crucial period of taking off.
162. In considering the question of whether or not my
small country should apply for membership in the United
N8tions I realize that one of the conditions for acceptance
into this noble Organization is a commitl11fJnt to the love of
peace. ~, translated into the beautiful language of
modem diplomacy, should make us what is kn,')WD as
"another peace.loving State". I believe it is incumbent on
me today to say a few words about the modest role which
my country expects to play in the complex affairs of this
vast world.
163. Seychelles is an archipelago of 92 small islands
scattered over an extensive surface of the Indian Ocean. On
the day of our independence we inherited a defenceless
shore-no army, no navy, no air force and no treatY of
defence whatsoever-our only weapon being our etemal
smile. Against this background I have stated that our
Government would follow a policy of friendship to all, and
enemy to none-sometimes described as a policy of being
neither on the left nor on the right but straight forward.
164. In the speeches delivered in the Security Council
debate the multiracialism prevailing in our islands was
especially comment~ upon. I am of the fum conviction
that in this increasingly troublesome time, when the risks of .
new conflicts multiply and their causes diversify, the
Republic of Seychelles represents an oasis in what seems to
be becoming, if we do not stop it, an immense desert of
misunderstandings directed towards continumg misgivings,
dissensions and hatred. I believe, therefore, that our
contribution to world peace must be in that vital area-that
!s, to remain what we are, a shining example of the fact that
different races of thia world can indeed live and work
together in the unifying spirit oflove for others.
165. We in Seychelles must be thankful to God that there
is very little hate in our hearts, that we have never been the
direct subject of war or armed struggle, that we have no
hostile neighbour and only a wide ocean as immediate
6 See O/ficilll Recorlb 0/ the Stcuriry Council, DirtY·first YtilT,
19S1stand 19S2~ meetings.

~-----~

._.--._-_.

__

.

------, ..

-~

167. For too long the notion has persisted in human
beings that a state of sanity and peace can somehow be
produced by armed struggle and violence. That the end
justifies the means is a lie which has been swallowed by
almost everyone. It would be mach more accurate to say
that the end reveals the means.
168. We do not have to !ook very far or very closely to see
that there are simple and natural laws which work as surely
in human affairs as they do in the rest of creation. If you
sow a mango seed you get a mango tree. If you sow maize
you get maize. No exception to this simple law has ever
occurred or ever will. By the same token, if you sow the
seed of contention, the seed of violence and hatred, the
harvest will be more contention, more violence and more
hatred.
169. Society can only change by fust changing the
attitude of people who live in it-among whom, to begin
with, I repeat, the attitude of those who have the
responsibility to guide and to lead those people. To guide
and to lead the people where'? Towards progress-which
means peace-which is, after all, an essential condition for
real, true, lasting progress.
170. Perhaps the Republic of Seychelles, small as it is, can
start to giv'e an example of much needed universal change. I
hope that in becoming the one hundred and forty·flfth
Member of this intemational community, Seychelle's
example, however modest it may be, will be able somehow
to influence this sadly divided world towards rmding the
right solutions of the many problems which confront it on
all sides. The United Nations has a duty to help the
Seychelles remain that light at the end of the tunnel which
it bel~ves itself to be, that small light of hope foi' peace and
love among all the peoples of southem Mrica, among all
the peoples of the Middle East. and, indeed, wherever there
is war or the threat of war.
171. This is, indeed, our conviction. This is the hope
which we place in you today, Mr. President, and in all our
fellow representatives in this august international body,
which was, aeer all, founded to be of se!Vice t.o the whole
of humanity.
172. Finally, may I take this opportunity to add on behalf
of my Government and people our deep sentiments of
condolencl!s to the Government and people of the People's
Republic of China on the passing away of their great etemal
leader, Chairman Mao.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

!

I
.. If

~

",
II

~ i!

).-
