S/PV.8013

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8013th meeting

Wednesday, 26 July 2017, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-23088 (E)
*1723088*

S/PV.8013

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

stakeholders — representatives of civil society and
religious groups and members of the diplomatic corps,
as well as of the United Nations family.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United
Nations, in his capacity as the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Kafando.
Mr. Kafando: I would like to start by congratulating
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
It is an honour for me to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the first time. As members are
aware, the facilitator of the East African Community,
former President Benjamin Mkapa, was scheduled to
brief the Council with me. Because of a health-related
issue, he could not be here today. I wish him a speedy
recovery.
My briefing will focus on three aspects: first, my
meetings in Bujumbura; secondly, my preliminary
assessment of the situation in Burundi; and thirdly, a
possible way forward.
(spoke in French)
When I arrived in Bujumbura on 27 June, I
was received in turn by the Minister for External
Relations and International Cooperation, Mr Alain
Aimé Nyamitwe, and by the President, Pierre
Nkurunziza. I spent approximately an hour talking
alone with President Nkurunziza. My meeting with
the President was essentially a courtesy visit. In
Bujumbura I also met with various Burundian political
2/12

26/07/2017

In Tanzania, I was received by former the President
and facilitator of the inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, East Africa, Regional and
International Cooperation of the United Republic of
Tanzania, Mr. Mahiga. The facilitator said that he
had concluded his work for which the report had been
sent to President Museveni, the chief mediator of the
inter-Burundi dialogue.
In Addis Ababa, I also conducted talks on the
sidelines of the African Union Summit with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda and African
leaders — namely, the current Chairperson of the
African Union, Mr. Alpha Condé, as well as with
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki — who are closely following the
situation in Burundi.
I have just briefly listed the contacts with whom I
met within the framework of my first trip to Burundi
and the subregion. I imagine that members are now
wondering what assessment I took away from those
various meetings and exchanges. Based on those
meetings, there appear to be divergent assessments of
the political situation that prevails in the country. The
Burundian authorities are confident in their ability to
conduct the country’s affairs in serenity. They consider
that the general situation is calm, while condemning
foreign interference in the management of their internal
affairs and recalling their commitment to maintaining
their national sovereignty.
The representatives of the political opposition
and some civil society members are concerned about
what they deem to be abuse of power by the current
Government. They are calling, therefore, for greater
involvement by the region and the international
community to promote an inclusive dialogue, without
preconditions, in which all Burundians take part. They
are calling for the suspension of the constitutional
review process under way and for an end to violations
of their basic rights and the hostility of the authorities
towards those rights, which often go hand in hand,
they claim, with suppression by the forces maintaining
order and by Government-affiliated groups. However,
political parties and civil society organizations that
17-23088

26/07/2017

The situation in Burundi

support the Government have a completely different
point of view.
The economic situation continues to worsen
because of the tense political environment, which in
turn deters private national and international investors.
There is unemployment, in particular among young
people. That situation causes people to leave for
neighbouring countries, thereby increasing the number
of refugees.
The security situation has improved since the
beginning of the year. In Bujumbura, all appears calm
and people freely go about their work. Nonetheless, it
should be noted that there have been grenade attacks
over the past few weeks that have left many people
dead and injured. The reasons for those attacks have
not yet been made clear.
People want an atmosphere of peace in Burundi,
but under what conditions and at what price might
that be achieved? The first requirement must be to
give priority to inclusive dialogue, a sine qua non for
any settlement of the crisis. It is imperative for the
Burundian Government to acquiesce to the insistent
demands of the countries of the subregion and of the
African Union — which are supported in this by the
United Nations — to move to an inclusive dialogue that
would include members of the opposition in exile and
those in the country. I believe that that is the price to
be paid if we are to restore trust among Burundians,
to ensure credible, stable and democratic institutions
and to promote genuine national reconciliation.
From that perspective, the Arusha Agreement must
remain the reference standard, the cornerstone. All
non-governmental stakeholders with whom I have met
have acknowledged that, have demanded that.
The new prospects and guidelines that we must
develop to resolve the situation in Burundi must
converge, it seems to me, toward joint, collective action
by African leaders, first by those in the subregion, in
solidarity with the United Nations. Such joint collective
action must be aimed at convincing the Burundian
regime to accept appeasement measures, in particular
those put forward by the Facilitator and the more
general measures featured in the Arusha Agreement.
Joint action must also be geared towards
encouraging the Burundian regime to participate in the
inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue. The recent visit
paid by President Nkurunziza to President Magufuli of
Tanzania is an encouraging sign in that regard. Let us

S/PV. 8013

hope that that gesture indicates a willingness to move
the inclusive dialogue process forward. It is for that
reason that, in my capacity as Special Envoy, and now
that many high-ranking African officials have decided
to personally and fully take part in the resolving the
crisis, I suggest that more discernment be brought to
the analysis of the Burundi question.
As you know, Mr. President, I am on my first factfinding mission, and I intend to continue consultations
in the coming days. I truly believe in the subregion’s
commitment to working for peace in Burundi, with the
support of the African Union. I strongly recommend
that the United Nations firmly support those efforts.
Even if a bit more patience is required, we will certainly
reach a dynamic compromise. I repeat that all of our
efforts must demonstrate unwavering support for the
region and in particular the efforts of the Mediator and
Facilitator and those of the Government of Tanzania.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Kafando for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Council
on the latest activities of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As usual, the
following statement was submitted to and approved
by the members of the configuration, including the
country concerned, Burundi.
From 10 to 13 July, I undertook my fifth visit to
Burundi as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, concentrating this time
on socioeconomic cooperation. The main objectives
of my visit were, first, to pursue the dialogue on the
socioeconomic situation and international cooperation
with the Government and its partners in Burundi;
secondly, to insist on the relevance of the dialogue
process led by the East African Community (EAC)
and to refer to the large support it enjoys among the
States Members of the United Nations; and thirdly, to
have a first-hand impression of the developments in the
country.
I would like to start my briefing with a word of
thanks to the Government of Burundi for its hospitality
and confidence and to Ambassador Albert Shingiro,
the Permanent Representative of Burundi, for his
support in organizing the visit. During my visit of 10 to
13 July, I was received by the President of the Republic

17-230883/12

S/PV.8013

The situation in Burundi

of Burundi, the Minister for External Relations, the
Minister of Finance and the Secretary General of the
ruling party, the Conseil national pour la défense de
la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie.
I also held numerous meetings with Burundi’s
international partners, namely, with representatives of
the member States of the Configuration. Furthermore,
I met His Excellency Mr. Michel Kafando, the Special
Envoy of the United Nations Secretary-General; His
Excellency Mr. François Fall, the Special Representative
of the United Nations Secretary-General for Central
Africa; His Excellency Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the Special
Envoy of the African Union; and representatives of the
private sector and the United Nations country team. On
12 July, I participated in a retreat, which was organized
by the Minister for External Relations and dedicated to
the socioeconomic situation in Burundi.
All in all, the city of Bujumbura made a lively
impression when I was there, and the security situation
seemed calm. However, during my stay, some cases
of violence were reported. I also continued to hear
reports about the prevalence of a climate of fear and
repression. The importance of the EAC-led dialogue
and interaction among political parties was highlighted
by many interlocutors, including the Secretary General
of the ruling party. Most interlocutors also welcomed
the dialogue initiative with Burundi’s political parties,
which had been launched earlier this year by Burundi’s
ombudsman. Many interlocutors characterized the
economic situation as deteriorating and gave examples
on how that development affects them personally.
Burundi’s international partners described the
broad range of their engagement with Burundi, which
reaches from humanitarian assistance to structural
support for the health service and investments in the
energy sector. At the same time, they are confronted
with certain obstacles to their cooperation, such as
accessibility to foreign currency, the lack of reliable
data and the restrictive law on non-governmental
organizations and others.
A key event during my visit was the socioeconomic
retreat I mentioned, which took place on 12 July. That
retreat was the latest stage in the ongoing socioeconomic
dialogue that the PBC Burundi Configuration
had launched in November 2016 near Geneva, in
cooperation with the then Resident Coordinator, with
consultations among Burundi’s main multilateral
partners: the United Nations, the World Bank, the
European Union, the International Monetary Fund and
4/12

26/07/2017

the African Development Bank. In March 2017, I had
participated in a meeting between the Government and
United Nations agencies in Bujumbura, which focused
on the socioeconomic challenges in the areas of
agriculture and food security, health and education. In
the context of that March meeting, the Government had
expressed its wish to organize a retreat with partners in
Bujumbura on the challenges in the same three sectors
in summer 2017.
Besides the Chair of the PBC Burundi configuration,
the Foreign Minister had invited Mr. Garry Conille,
the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi,
representatives of several United Nations agencies,
the World Bank and the African Development Bank
in Burundi to the retreat on 12 July. Government
participation also included the Minister for Agriculture;
representatives of the Second Vice-Presidency; the
Ministry of Education; the Ministry of Public Health;
the Ministry of Finance; and the National Platform
for Risk Prevention and Disaster Management. The
main objective of the retreat was to specify the main
socioeconomic challenges in the three priority areas
of agriculture, education, and health and to discuss
possible responses.
In his opening remarks, the Foreign Minister
suggested that we focus on the most urgent needs of
the population and emphasized the readiness of the
Government to engage in a dialogue with its partners. In
my statement, I situated the socioeconomic dialogue in
the broader peacebuilding engagement of the PBC, and
underlined that sustainable peace is not possible if we
do not advance simultaneously within all three pillars
of United Nations engagement: peace and security,
socioeconomic development, and human rights.
Macroeconomic analysis was not the main focus
of the event, but the indicators cited during the retreat
showed that the situation remains concerning. For
instance, the Central Bank of the Republic of Burundi
rated headline inflation at 21.1 per cent for March,
driven mainly by a rise in food prices of 34 per cent.
Allow me to provide a few examples of the
socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges and of
the recommendations that were reflected in a joint
summary at the end of the retreat.
In the agricultural sector, the participants
identified low productivity, the impact of climate
change, insufficient infrastructure for stockpiling and
transportation for agricultural products, the lack of
17-23088

26/07/2017

The situation in Burundi

mechanization in the sector, the lack of fertilizers, and
plant diseases among the main challenges. In response,
the participants recommended measures such as the
agro-industrial transformation of agricultural products,
additional investments and addressing the problem of
land scarcity.
The continuing malaria epidemic was a priority
subject among health experts. Other challenges include
the high mortality of mothers and small children, HIV/
AIDS, demographic growth and malnutrition. The
participants concluded that additional qualified staff
and financial resources, better access to health data
and a range of other measures could help to meet the
current challenges.
The educational sector is facing challenges such as
insufficient school infrastructure and a lack of school
material and teachers, and 46 per cent of school-age
children are currently not attending school. According
to the participants, additional resources would be
needed to train teachers, improve infrastructure, build
additional school canteens, produce textbooks and
strengthen the peacebuilding perspectives in school
education.
With regard to the macroeconomic sector, one of
the recommendations of the joint conclusions states:
“In order for the country to gradually achieve
a balanced payment, assistance to the budget
is needed, for which the Government and its
development partners are invited to enter into a
dialogue.”
Apart from such specific elements, the participants
also formulated some general recommendations, such
as the need to obtain more reliable socioeconomic and
macroeconomic data, to align Burundi’s socioeconomic
priorities with the Sustainable Development Goals,
and to involve Burundi’s international partners in the
current elaboration of the National Development Plan.
One of the recommendations, which the Government
and the participating partners noted in their joint
summary and which is of particular relevance for the
Configuration, states that the socioeconomic dialogue
should continue and involve additional partners who
were not invited to attend the retreat of 12 July.
On 13 July, the President of the Republic received
me in Gitega, the second largest city of the country.
He reiterated his appreciation for the efforts of the
PBC Burundi Configuration. I thanked him for the

S/PV. 8013

cooperation between his Government and the PBC,
and informed him about my current engagement
and the outcome of the socioeconomic retreat of the
previous day. I mentioned that the regional engagement
in follow-up to the East African Community (EAC)
summit of 20 May and the report by President
Mkapa had received very positive feedback from the
members of the Configuration, adding that the broadly
shared expectation among Member States is that the
Government of Burundi fully engages in this process.
The President outlined Burundi’s national
development efforts, with a particular focus on
education, health, agriculture and energy supply,
mentioning both the progress achieved and challenges
remaining. He made clear that Burundi continues to
need international partners and expressed gratitude
for the current assistance. He also mentioned the
demographic challenges that the country is facing
and thanked the United Nations Population Fund in
particular for its support in this area.
Furthermore, the meeting with the President
was an opportunity for me to raise the questions of
national reconciliation, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the outstanding memorandums of
understanding with Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the African
Union in relation to the deployment and engagement of
human rights and military observers in Burundi.
Based on my latest observations and conversations
in Burundi, I have drawn the following conclusions
regarding peacebuilding in Burundi.
First, the international community should continue
to follow developments in Burundi carefully and take
all aspects of the current situation into account.
Secondly, the mediation efforts that President
Museveni and President Mkapa are undertaking
on behalf of the EAC deserve our full political and
technical support. The socioeconomic conversation
must complement those efforts and the work by the
Special Envoy of the United Nations Secretary-General,
Mr. Michel Kafando.
Thirdly, a frank and open discussion between
the Government and its international partners
on socioeconomic cooperation and a conducive
environment for effective assistance is necessary in
order to improve the economic situation and is thus
an essential element of peacebuilding in Burundi. I

17-230885/12

S/PV.8013

The situation in Burundi

therefore intend to pursue the socioeconomic dialogue
between the Government of Burundi and its partners.
Fourthly, it is important to pay increased attention
to the question of national reconciliation and dealing
with the past. I would suggest that the PBC and the
Peacebuilding Fund support efforts in this area.
Fifthly, I would like to underline the importance
of creating a good environment for the organization of
peaceful and democratic elections in 2020, including
through the full and equal participation of women.
I would like to conclude my statement by thanking
the Security Council for its continued interest and
support for the engagement of the PBC in Burundi.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lauber for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
for their briefings.
Uruguay notes that since the last briefing of the
Council on Burundi (see S/PV.7978), held on 20 June,
new events have taken place that in our opinion
are positive steps towards a resolution of the crisis
in Burundi. One of those steps was Special Envoy
Kafando’s visit to the country at the end of June,
which we hope will help to restore the dynamic of the
relationship between the Burundian Government and
the United Nations.
Special Envoy Kafando has just given us details
about his visit and the nature of the conversations that
took place on 27 June. We reiterate our support for
his work and hope that in carrying out his tasks, he
will involve a broad range of partners, both from the
Government and the opposition, as well as from civil
society. Furthermore, we acknowledge the constant
efforts carried out by the regional and subregional
bodies to unblock the political process in Burundi.
In recent summits, both the African Union and
the East African Community reaffirmed their full
commitment to a peaceful solution to the crisis and
underscored that dialogue is the only road possible.
We also have a road map that was presented by the
6/12

26/07/2017

facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, former
Tanzanian President Benjamin Mkapa, which contains
a series of specific steps that would help to relaunch
the political process and generate conditions for
transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections in 2020. In
that connection, Uruguay encourages countries in the
region to support Burund in a united and coordinated
manner. We also urge all of the Burundian parties to
commit to the proposed road map and to work on its
implementation as soon as possible, as was mentioned
by Ambassador Lauber.
We welcome the successful holding of the
socioeconomic retreat on 12 July, which brought
together national authorities and several international
partners. It identified the main challenges that the
country faces in socioeconomic matters and, on that
basis, will aid in seeking solutions. Uruguay notes the
important role played by the Peacebuilding Commission
in those efforts and encourages the continuation over
time of the dialogue platform that was created and the
involvement of new interested partners.
Uruguay cannot help but reiterate its concern
over the deterioration of the human rights situation in
Burundi. We strongly condemn each and every one of
the abuses and violations in the area of human rights,
no matter who committed them. That includes cases of
extrajudicial executions, sexual violence in the context
of the political crisis, arbitrary arrests and detentions,
forced disappearances, and harassment and intimidation
of civil society organizations and even journalists, as
well as restrictions on fundamental freedoms.
Given the situation, we regret the fact that the
Government of Burundi has not yet resumed its
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights since it was suspended
in October 2016. We call for the swift conclusion of a
memorandum of understanding for the resumption of
the Office’s activities in Burundi. We also call for full
cooperation between the Government to Burundi and
the Commission of Investigation on the human rights
situation established by the Human Rights Council.
Full respect for the human rights of all Burundians is
a necessary condition for the holding of an inclusive
and credible political dialogue. It is also necessary for
the creation of an environment conducive to organizing
peaceful and democratic elections in 2020.
17-23088

26/07/2017

The situation in Burundi

Mr. Bessho (Japan) I also thank Special Envoy
Michel Kafando and Ambassador Jürg Lauber for their
informative briefings.
I would like to focus on two main points regarding
Burundi. The first concerns the need to re-establish
trust between the Government of Burundi and the
international community.
We welcome Special Envoy Kafando’s engagement
with Burundi and regional Governments. We call on
the Government of Burundi to work constructively and
cooperatively with the Special Envoy. We fully support
the Special Envoy’s efforts. We also thank Ambassador
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi Configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his proactive
role. It exemplifies how usefully the Peacebuilding
Commission can support the work of the Council.
A year has passed since the adoption of resolution
2303 (2016), which remains unimplemented. The
situation in Burundi remains fragile, and we are
concerned by the worsening socioeconomic situation,
as well as serious, ongoing human rights violations. In
June, our colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Burundi, told the Council that a resumed presence of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (UNHCHR) in Burundi was a
certainty. Yet, as I see it, there has been no progress
on resumed cooperation between the Government
of Burundi and UNHCHR. Despite repeated calls by
the international community, only a limited number
of human rights observers of the African Union (AU)
have arrived in Burundi. While the Council has urged
the Government of Burundi to cooperate fully with the
deployment and activities of the United Nations police
component, it has not yet been established. We call on
the Government to Burundi to promptly address those
concerns.

S/PV. 8013

elections is vital for peace and security in not only
Burundi, but also in the wider region as a whole. We
call on the Government of Burundi to seriously commit
to an inclusive national dialogue without conditions.
We also call on the Heads of State in the East African
Community (EAC) to further enhance their engagement
in the situation in Burundi. In response to the call by
our colleague, Ambassador Lauber, I am confident that
the Council will continue to support the EAC-mediated
dialogue process moving forward.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
our briefers, Special Envoy Kafando and Ambassador
Lauber, for their insights and efforts made so far to
continue negotiations between the Government of
Burundi and all stakeholders in the country.
We welcome the recent appointment of Mr Kafando
and believe that he will do everything in his power to
ease the situation in the country. As we can see from
his briefing, during his short but very productive
visit, Mr. Kafando was able to establish good working
relations with the Government of Burundi and
other actors in the country, as well as with regional
organizations.
Kazakhstan supports the East African Communityled inter-Burundian dialogue and the work of the
Tripartite Joint Commission. We are concerned by slow
progress in the political negotiations. We reiterate our
call to all parties in the country to actively participate
in the dialogue with no preconditions. That process
must be supported and reinforced by the regional
organizations, including the African Union (AU) and
its mission in Burundi, which monitors the overall
situation.

I believe that the maintenance of cooperative
relations with the United Nations, the AU and other
international partners is clearly in Burundi’s own
national interest. A neutral international presence in
Burundi would have a very positive effect in building
confidence between Burundi and the international
community. The Council must act to ensure that
presence.

We also support the active engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a great platform for
dialogue between Burundi and all international
partners. We welcome the outcome of the socioeconomic
retreat, which was recently held in Bujumbura. We
urge the Burundian Government to sign the relevant
memorandum of understanding with the African Union
for the deployment of the rest of the 200 AU military
and human rights observers. We also commend the
European Union for supporting the deployment of 48
AU observers.

My second point concerns regional efforts on
Burundi. We thank President Museveni and President
Mkapa for their mediation efforts. Progress on an
inclusive national dialogue in advance of the 2020

The full implementation of the provisions of the
Arusha Agreement is vital to prevent a further escalation
of violence and maintain peace and security in the
country. It is our hope that all parties in the country

17-230887/12

S/PV.8013

The situation in Burundi

will start to implement the Arusha Agreement. Another
round of negotiations will facilitate that process.
Another problem that concerns us is the worsening
humanitarian situation, which is affecting the entire
Great Lakes region. Its causes are not just political;
there are other reasons, such as a poor macroeconomic
situation and drought. In that connection we call upon
the international community to continue supporting
all of the regional States that are hosting Burundian
refugees. Humanitarian actors must further scale up
their response in order to meet the needs of nearly
3 million people in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to express our firm
belief that the political sovereignty and integrity of
Burundi must be preserved in strict compliance with
the principles of international law. Also, it is critically
important that the Government of Burundi maintains
a political dialogue with the United Nations and its
agencies, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and all other
members of the international community.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the briefings
provided by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Michel Kafando, and the Ambassador of
Switzerland, Mr. Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Bolivia commends the mediation carried out by the
former President of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
and the President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni,
with respect to the Arusha Accords and the Burundian
Constitution. Bolivia once again encourages all parties
to support that mediation process and to work together
to achieve a negotiated political settlement.
We agree with the past statements of Mr. Mkapa to
the effect that, if the peace process is to be successful,
all parties must work on confidence-building measures
and constructive dialogue in good faith. In that respect,
we encourage and acknowledge the efforts of the joint
working group, the East African Community and the
team from the Office of the Special Envoy, and the
work of the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Similarly, we encourage
the parties to implement the road map proposed by
Mr. Mkapa, based on the spirit of peace of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
8/12

26/07/2017

We welcome the positive outcome of the recent
meeting in Bujumbura convened by the Special Envoy
and the authorities of Burundi, including President
Pierre Nkurunziza, in which they agreed to continue the
inter-Burundian dialogue in an inclusive environment.
We also welcome the decision by the African Union
at its twenty-ninth summit, held 27 June to 4 July in
Addis Ababa, to reaffirm its commitment to a peaceful
settlement of the crisis in Burundi through a swift
resumption of the inter-Burundian dialogue under the
stewardship of the East African Community, with the
support of the African Union.
Likewise, we take note of the retreat on 12 July, in
which the Government met with various international
partners to assess the current challenges facing the
country in the macroeconomic sphere, in agriculture,
health, education, risk prevention and disaster
management, with a view to working on the country’s
socioeconomic recovery. We commend the work of the
Government of Burundi and the country’s Ombudsman
for their awareness-raising efforts to facilitate refugees
returning to their country, and we encourage them to
pursue that objective.
Bolivia urges that actions in the negotiating process
in future continue to be carried out in a progressive
manner and in coordination with the country’s
authorities, including, inter alia, coordination of the
presence of the observers and the United Nations police
component in accordance with resolution 2303 (2016),
if future security conditions so require. We reiterate
that coordination must be carried out in respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Burundi, observing the obligation of States to provide
security and protection for their citizens.
Given the complexity of the process, it is our
firm belief that it is vital to continue solidifying the
foundations to ensure definitive stability in Burundi,
through initiatives that may be needed and with the full
and committed support of the international community,
based on the framework of law, justice, reconciliation
and peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I am speaking under your
presidency, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for the invaluable support that your country, the
17-23088

26/07/2017

The situation in Burundi

People’s Republic of China, continues to provide
to African countries in general and to my country,
Burundi, in particular, especially in terms of respect
for the sacred principles and values of our common
Organization. We are very grateful for that.
Allow me also to thank the other members of
the Council for their ongoing support for Burundi’s
sovereignty and political independence since the
outbreak of the insurrectional movement in 2015 and
the attempted coup d’état on 13 May 2015.
My thanks also go to Ambassador Jürg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) — who, as he noted, has just
returned from a field visit to Burundi from 10 to
13 July — for his ever-increasing role in mobilizing
resources in support of Burundi’s socioeconomic sector.
I hasten to welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Michel Kafando, who has just provided his first
briefing to the Council since his appointment as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and his first
visit to Burundi, from the end of June to the beginning
of this month.
In my statement, I shall stress the political,
security and human rights situation. I shall also say
a word about freedom of expression, refugees and
reconciliation, as well as the efforts of the Government
of Burundi to rebuild the frayed confidence of some of
its development partners.
With regard to the political situation, I am pleased
to inform the Council that the inter-Burundian political
dialogue process is ongoing, with some progress
made. The dialogue has not stalled, as some people
would have us believe; it is following an evolutionary
path. The internal process, which was led by the
Government-established National Commission for
the Inter-Burundian Dialogue has ended and a final
report has been sent to the national authorities. The
recommendations of the report are the result of a
dialogue involving more than 26,000 Burundians,
and they will be combined with the conclusions of the
dialogue process at the subregional level to eventually
produce a solid road map for peaceful elections in 2020.
Meanwhile, another promising dynamic of
internal dialogue among all stakeholders is ongoing
under the facilitation of the Burundian Ombudsman.
It is following a positive trajectory and has already
organized several inclusive dialogue workshops with

S/PV. 8013

our partners in Bujumbura. All of those processes
complement each other without competition, thereby
strengthening the culture of dialogue in our country.
We remain convinced that by strengthening
democracy in a country like ours, which is still working
to build peace, justice and security, there is no solid
pillar on which the rule of law can rely other than the
holding of free, peaceful and transparent elections.
Any alternative attempts to take power through
unconstitutional shortcuts are unacceptable and will
go nowhere.
The coups d’état that Burundians have experienced
in the past represent the nightmare that they are trying
to wake up from today. Since the democratic elections
of 2005, that dark chapter of our history has closed, a
hopeful one has opened and we are gradually building
a culture of democracy, despite a number of new
challenges that we still have to tackle. That is why
our President has asked Burundi’s political parties,
which today number around 30, to regroup, conduct
an in-depth review of their internal policies on unity
and discipline and raise awareness among their militant
adherents about the importance of remaining united
and respecting democratic principles. He has advised
them to totally reject divisiveness, refrain from any
provocations or manoeuvres that could goad them into
murdering one another on the pretext that they have
different political or social affiliations and, as far as
possible, avoid polluting Burundi’s ever-changing
political space.
In that regard, the President has asked civil-society
groups to refrain from involvement in political affairs
and from deeds or words that could sow division and
dissension of any kind or become an incitement to
killing such as we saw during the insurrection in 2015.
Rather, he urged them to concern themselves with the
welfare of the population, including by giving support
to his efforts to restore society and community. He
also appealed to religious leaders to continue with the
mission that God has entrusted to them by preaching
the gospel throughout the country and refraining from
political acts that could turn them away from the path
of righteousness, and encouraged them to continue to
get involved in the country’s development efforts and
in the promotion of human rights and the values of
ubuntu in Burundi.
With regard to constitutional matters, we should
recall that this issue is exclusively in the domain of

17-230889/12

S/PV.8013

The situation in Burundi

national sovereignty and should be discussed only
within a national framework. As the Council is aware,
no one has the right to deprive the Burundian people
of their sovereign right to define a political future
that suits them and is tailored to their needs, and that
applies to all the peoples we represent here.
Turning to the issue of security, we all know that
it is central to every issue, since no development is
possible without peace and security, and vice versa.
Burundians are devoted to peace and equality and
are absolutely determined in their commitment to
safeguarding peace night and day. Our country is
now calm, as all those who spoke here this morning
have acknowledged. Peace and security reign, thanks
to excellent cooperation between the forces of law
and order, the Administration and the people. Where
anything else is concerned, we all know that ordinary
criminality is as old as humankind, and like everyone
else, Burundi has to deal with it every day.
On the human rights front, it is generally agreed that
no country in the world is so perfect in this area that it
is in a position to lecture others about it. Just like other
countries, and in what we should remind the Council is
an especially difficult post-crisis environment, Burundi
is continuing its efforts to promote human rights and
ensure that they are protected. We firmly believe,
and will continue to insist, that only international
cooperation and a mutually beneficial partnership that
respects the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations can make an effective contribution to
the genuine protection of human rights in Burundi or
anywhere else. Excessive or selective political pressure
should give way to cooperation and dialogue. My
country has promised to continue working to make
progress and improve its cooperation with all goodfaith actors in this area.
We cannot speak of the state of human rights
without mentioning the prison situation. We have
taken steps to reduce crowding in the prisons and,
more recently, to promote national reconciliation. The
President has ordered the release of more than 2,500
prisoners, in addition to the 3,416 released in 2015, the
6,136 in 2016 and, very recently, the 2,247 in 2017 from
among the 2,500 who, as the Council is aware, received
a presidential pardon at the end of 2016, a commendable
measure that deserves the Council’s support and to be
recognized as a gesture of peace for Burundians.
10/12

26/07/2017

With regard to the freedom of the press — and
contrary to the pronouncements of various politicians
and journalists who, as the Council is aware, describe
Burundi as they wish it to be rather than as it is — the
Government of Burundi has never shut down any private
media outlets. Of the three or four private media outlets
that were partially destroyed in the wake of the foiled
coup d’état of 13 May 2015, two have already reopened
and the others are functioning normally. Today more
than 20 national and international private radio stations
are broadcasting freely in Burundi, and we will continue
working to improve things in an area that is so essential
to the promotion of democracy in our country. We are
trying as best we can to find a good balance between
the protection of human rights and the consolidation of
the rule of law. We are also pleased about the fact that
no journalists are imprisoned in our country, contrary
to what we see elsewhere.
With regard to refugees, our Head of State has
asked the Burundi Ombudsman to continue with
efforts to raise awareness among refugees and
non-violent political actors about returning home in
order to prepare for the 2020 election deadlines. We
know that the repatriation of refugees is a marker of
subregional stability, and it has now been admitted that
some of those who fled the country, including minors,
were recruited, trained, supervised and enrolled in
anti-Burundi rebel movements, all of it in flagrant
violation of the Charter, the 1951 Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees, the 1989 Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region of 24 February 2013.
During his visit to Tanzania last week, the President
and his counterpart in the United Republic of Tanzania
made a heartfelt appeal to refugees to return to their
homeland. I should emphasize that they also appealed
to organizations dealing with refugees to avoid any
deliberate exaggeration of their numbers and to
acknowledge that more than 150,000 refugees have
already returned to Burundi. In that regard, we call
on countries that are hosting refugees — and which
I would like to thank, incidentally — and the United
Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees
to cooperate fully in order to facilitate their voluntary
return home, since some of them have been held
hostage for purely political and business purposes or
to maintain or fuel a crisis situation that is increasingly
more artificial than real.
17-23088

26/07/2017

The situation in Burundi

In addition to the return of refugees, the two Heads
of State exchanged views on strengthening bilateral
relations, intensifying trade among the two peoples,
security on shared borders and the situation in the region
overall. They welcomed the Tanzanian railway project
linking Tanzania, Burundi and other countries in the
region. The visit also was a testament to the interest that
the Heads of State of the region attach to the regional
dimension, which is crucial because we have observed
in some areas that there is an increasingly wide gap
between the positions of some regional actors and the
positions of actors in New York. Regional actors need
to be listened to. They are the ones who know us and
know about our history and culture. They need to have
their views heard when decisions are taken, regardless
of the context.
With regard to national reconciliation, the
Government of Burundi, under the enlightened
leadership of President Nkurunziza, set up the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, which, as the Council
is aware, marks the final stage in the establishment
of the institutions provided for in the 2000 Arusha
Agreement. The members of the Commission were
called upon to promptly inform the Burundian people
of the successes and failures of the past with a view
to definitively turning the page on the politico-ethnic
antagonisms that have punctuated the dark history
of our country, and thereby build a bright future for
present and future generations.
As a complement, last week the National Assembly
of Burundi adopted a draft law on the functioning of the
National Council for National Unity and Reconciliation,
which is a very important body. That Council will be
composed of seven individuals of integrity and will
reconcile the Burundian people — with the aim of unity
and equity — and will be at the forefront in upholding
the Burundian values of ubuntu, ubushingantahe,
hbugabo and hbupfasoni: all positive values inherent in
the Burundian people.
At the macroeconomic level, the balance of
payments was to an extent impacted by the unilateral
suspension of external direct support by some partners.
In order for the country to gradually achieve balance, as
the Chair of the Burundi configuration mentioned, the
retreat held in Bujumbura on 12 July, which included
the Government and its multilateral partners and United
Nations agencies present in Burundi, recommended the
provision of direct budgetary support. The Government
and development partners have been invited to engage

S/PV. 8013

in a sincere and frank dialogue on this topic with a
view to surmounting the obstacles that persist in terms
of cooperation between Burundi and some countries.
As far as cooperation with our partners is
concerned — and several peakers mentioned
this today — we greatly value our partners. Any
improvement in our relations with them is most
welcome. Representatives are certainly aware that
recently the Burundian Government has been working
for a resumption of peaceful relations with its partners,
and with the United Nations in particular. In order to
mend our relations with the United Nations, Burundi
expeditiously consented to the visit of the visit of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in late June and
early July. During his visit, the Special Envoy, and he
can attest to this, enjoyed the legendary hospitality of the
Burundian people and the full cooperation of national
authorities, which enabled him to carry out his mission
in Burundi. We expect that, given his experience in
diplomacy, that his reports will uphold the principles,
practices and values of
​​ the United Nations and, above
all, the aspirations of the Burundian people for a
political future that suits them and is tailored to their
needs. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Central Africa and the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, who
visited Burundi at the same time, benefited from the
same degree of cooperation, attention and hospitality,
both in Bujumbura and the countryside.
Negotiations on a new, mutually agreed host
country agreement will enable cooperation to be
resumed between the Government of Burundi and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, which many speakers alsoreferred to
this at this meeting. That dialogue is under way. We
anticipate that we wil meet in the next few weeks to
finalize the text to guide our cooperation, which we
hope will proceed normally. As I said at the previous
meeting (see S/PV.7978), keeping the Office’s presence
in Burundi is no longer a concern. I assure the Council
that that has already been determined, and the Council
can count of Burundi’s commitment in that regard. The
only thing left to do is to finalize the text. We call for
flexibility on the part of all parties in order to reach a
successful outcome to the discussions. I would point
out that these are discussions between two parties.
Similarly, military and human rights observers
of the African Union are already deployed on the
ground in Burundi and are working freely without

17-2308811/12

S/PV.8013

The situation in Burundi

any hindrance. They enjoy the full cooperation of the
Burundian Government and all its services, including
those of national sovereignty, which certain countries,
as representatives are aware, would not extend to
foreign observers. With regard to the deployment
of additional observers, the obstacles pertain to
the African Union and are budgetary in nature. We
therefore call on partners to support the African Union
to enable it to deploy additional observers. Burundi is

12/12

26/07/2017

very open and the observers currently on the ground
are working normally. We will continue to work
together to overcome any obstacles in their path in an
amicable way.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

17-23088
