V.

Lebanon, and to take the necessary steps to ensure that
their offices at Beirut are adequately staffed at the senior
leve!;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/200.

Special economic assistance to Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/198 of 8 December 1986 and
its previous resolutions on assistance in the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Chad, emergency
humanitarian assistance to Chad and special economic assistance to that country,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on special economic assistance to Chad, 95 relating, ínter alia, to the economic and financia! situation of Chad,
the status of assistance provided for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction ofthe country and the progress made in organizing and executing the programme of assistance for
that country,
Considering that the war and the drought are compromising ali the reconstruction and development efforts of
the Government of Chad,
Concerned at the recent invasion of locusts, which has
aggravated the already precarious food and health situation in Chad, in particular that of the people displaced as a
result of the war and the drought,
Taking note of the numerous appeals launched by the
Government of Chad and governmental and nongovernmental organizations regarding the seriousness of
the food and health situation in Chad,
Taking note also of the appeal made by the Government
of Chad for a round table on the rehabilitation and reconstruction needs of the northern region, which has suffered
the most from the effects of the war,
Recognizing the need for emergency humanitarian assistance to Chad,
Also recognizing the need for assistance in the reconstruction and development of Chad,
Recalling the round table on assistance to Chad convened by the United Nations Development Programme at
Geneva on 4 and 5 December 1985, in accordance with the
arrangements agreed upon at the International Conference on Assistance to Chad, held in November 1982,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States and governmental and non-governmental organizations that responded
and are continuing to respond generously to the appeals of
the Government of Chad and of the Secretary-General by
furnishing assistance to Chad;
2.. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for h1s e!forts t? make the international community aware
of the d1fficult1es of Chad and to mobilize assistance for
that country;
3: Rene~s the re9ue~t made to States, competent
Un!ted Nat1ons orgamzatlons and programmes and internatlonal economic and financia! institutions to continue:
(a) To provide the necessary humanitarian assistance
to the people of Chad, who have suffered as a result of the
9s See A/42/442, sect. 11.C.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

war, the effects of the drought and the invasion of locusts
and predators;
(b) To contribute to the reconstruction of Chad;
4. Again invites States and agencies to take part in the
sectoral meetings scheduled at the round table on assistance to Chad and to honour the commitments they made;
5. Rer¡:Jests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to implement the interim
development plan submitted at Geneva;9 6
(b) To continue to assess, in close collaboration with
the humanitarian agencies concerned, the humanitarian
needs, particularly in the areas of food and health, of the
people displaced by the war and the drought;
(e) To mobilize special humanitarian assistance for
persons who have suffered as a result of the war, the
drought and the invasion of locusts and predators and for
the resettlement of displaced persons;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to organize, in collaboration
with the competent United Nations organizations and
programmes and the Government of Chad, a round table
to formulate an emergency assistance programme for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the northern region
and for the resettlement of persons displaced by the war;
7. Calls upan the Secretary-General to keep the situation in Chad under review and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/201.

Special assistance to front-line States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/199 of 8 December 1986,
Having considered the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral on special assistance to front-line States and other
bordering States, 97 namely the establishment of a focal
point at United Nations Headquarters, the formation of
an informal inter-agency consultative group and the setting in motion of a contingency planning process,
Deeply concerned at the continuing deteriorating situation in southern Africa, which has aggravated the economic problems confronting the front-line States and
other bordering States, arising from the apartheid policies
of the Pretoria régime,
Conscious of the responsibility of the international community to address the problems of the region,
Commending the concerted and determined efforts of
the countries of the region to cope with the prevailing adverse conditions by strengthening their economic cooper_ation an~ lessening their dependence on South Africa,
partlcularly m the areas of transportation, communications and related sectors,
Reaffirming the importance of close co-operation between the United Nations and the front-line States,
Mindful of Security Council resolutions 568 (1985) of
21 June 1985, 571 (1985) of 20 September 1985 and 581
(1986) of 13 February 1986, by which the Council, inter afia, requested the international community to render
assistance to the front-line States,

96/bid., sect. 11.C.4.
97 See A/42/422 and Add. l-4.
