26

General Assembly-Thirty-seconrl Sesshm

Having examined the report of the Conference" 1
submitted by the presiding officers of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the United
Nations Council for Namibia in pursuance of paragraph 5 of resolution 31 / 145,
Having also examined the relevant parts of the reports of the Special Committee"~ and the United Nations Council for Namibia," 3
Reiterating the special responsibility of the United
Nations to support the struggle of the peoples of Z:imbabwe and Namibia to exercise their inalienable nght
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in Genern.l
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Bearing in mind the continuing need to intensify the
widespread dissemination of information on the struggle
for liberation being waged by the peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia,
1. Approves the report of the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977;
2. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of decolonization to accord priority
to the full implementation of the relevant provisions of
the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia and the Programme of Action
for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia; 54
3. Expresses its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of Mozambique for the contribution they have made to the success of the Conference
and, in particular, for providing the necessary facilities
for its meetings, as well as for the kind hospitality and
cordial reception accorded to it throughout its duration;
4. Expresses its particular gratitude to the Organization of African Unity for its assistance and co-operation in ensuring the effective organization and successful
conclusion of the Conference;
5. Expresses its deep appreciation to those Governments which made generous contributions to the funding
of the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to effect the
widest possible dissemination of the accomplishments
of the Conference through all the media at his disposal;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and the United Nations Council for Namibia to follow closely the implementation of the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the Programme of Action for
the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, in the dis51 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
52 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1 ), vol. I, chaps. I
and IV-VI, and vol. II, chaps. VII and VIII.
53 Jbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).
64 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.

charge of the mandates entrusted to them by the General Assembly.
96th plenary meeting
7 December 1977

:~2/ 42.

Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples," 5
Taking info account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
anlNamibia.'' 6 adopted by the International Conference
in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and ths Lagos
Declaration for Action against Apartheid," 7 adopted
by the World Conference for Action against Apartheid,
held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977.
Recalling its n:solutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the
programme of :1ction for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in
particular resolution 31/143 of 17 December 1976,
as well as the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repression of millions of Africans, in Namibia by the
Government of South Africa through its persistent,
illep:al occupation of the international Territory, and
in Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority regime,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take all the
necessary measures to bring about the speedy and complete elimination of the last vestiges of colonialism,
particularly with respect to Namibia and Zimbabwe
where efforts to perpetuate illegal racist minority rule
have brought untold suffering and bloodshed to the
peoples of those Territories,
Strongly deprecating the policies of those States
which, in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, continue to collaborate with the Government of South Africa and with the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, thus perpetuating their domination of the peoples in the Territories
concerned,
A ware that the success of the national liberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have
provided the international community with a unique
opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards
5 5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1).
5 11 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
5 7 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

27

the elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism
in Africa,
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by
the Special Committee with a view to securing the
effective and complete implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations,
Noting also with satisfaction the co-operation and
active participation of the administering Powers concerned in the relevant work of the Special Committee,
as well as the continued readiness of the Governments
concerned to receive United Nations visiting missions
in the Territories under their administration,
Reiterating its conviction that the total eradication
of racial discrimination, apartheid and violations of the
basic human rights of the peoples in colonial Territories
will be achieved most expeditiously by the faithful and
complete implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, in particular in Namibia and Zimbabwe, and
by the speediest possible complete elimination of the
presence of the racist minority regimes therefrom,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621
(XXV) and all other resolutions on decolonization and
calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with
those resolutions, to take all the necessary steps to
enable the dependent peoples of the Territories concerned to exercise fully and without further delay their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
2. Affirms once again that the continuation of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations-including
racism, apartheid, the exploitation by foreign and other
interests of economic and human resources, and the
waging of colonial wairs to suppress the national liberation movements of the colonial Territories in Africais incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and poses a serious threat
to international peace and security;
3. Reaffirms its determination to take all necessary
steps with a view to the complete and speedy eradication of colonialism and to the faithful and strict observance by all States of the relevant provisions of the
Charter, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the guiding principles of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;
4. Affirms once again its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of the peoples under colonial and
alien domination to exercise their right to self-determination and independence by all the necessary means
at their disposal;
5. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 1977, including the programme of work envisaged
for 1978;58
6. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe

and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the
Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, adopted by the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, and the Lagos Declaration for
Action against Apartheid, adopted by the World Conference for Action against Apartheid;
7. Calls upon all States, in particular the administering Powers, and the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system to give
effect to the recommendations contained in the reports
of the Special Committee 55 and of the International
Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia 59 for the speedy implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
8. Condemns the intensified activities of foreign
economic and other interests which arc impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with
respect to the colonial Territories, particularly in southern Africa;
9. Strongly condemns all collaboration, particularly
in the nuclear and military fields, with the Government of South Africa and calls upon all States concerned to cease forthwith all such collaboration;
10. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, to withhold
assistance of any kind from the Government of South
Africa and from the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia until they restore to the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence and to refrain from
taking any action which might imply recognition of
the legitimacy of the domination of the Territories by
those regimes;
11. Calls upon the colonial Powers to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally their military bases
and installations from colonial Territories and to refrain
from establishing new ones;
I 2. Urges all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, to provide all
moral and material assistance to the oppressed peoples
of Namibia and Zimbabwe and, with respect to the
other Territories, requests the administering Powers,
in consultation with the Governments of the Territories
under their administration, to take steps to enlist and
make effective use of all possible assistance, on both
a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the strengthening
of the economies of those Territories;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) in all Territories which have not yet attained
independence and, in particular:
(a)
To formulate specific proposals for the elimination of the remaining manifestations of colonialism and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session;
( b) To make concrete suggestions which could
assist the Security Council in considering appropriate

58 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. I,
paras. 145-157.

59 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1977.

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

28

measures under the Charter with regard to developments in colonial Territories that are likely to threaten
international peace and security;
( c) To continue to examine the compliance of
Member States with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and with other relevant resolutions on decolonization,
particularly those relating to Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia;
(d) To continue to pay particular attention to the
small Territories, including the sending of visiting missions thereto, as appropriate, and to recommend to
the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be
taken to enable the populations of those Territories
to exercise their right to self-determination, freedom
and independence;
( e) To take all necessary steps to enlist world-wide
support among Governments, as well as national and
international organizations having a special interest in
the field of decolonization, in the achievement of the
objectives of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and in
the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, particularly as concerns the oppressed
peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe;
14. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue to co-operate with the Special Committee in the
discharge of its mandate and, in particular, to permit
the access of visiting missions to the Territories in
order to secure first-hand information and ascertain the
wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and services required for the implementation of the present resolution, as well as of the various resolutions and decisions
on decolonization adopted by the General Assembly
and the Special Committee.
96th plenary meeting
7 December 1977
32/ 43.

Dissemination of
colonization

information

on de-

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization, 60
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, 61 adopted by the International Conference
in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and the
Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, 62
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,
60 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. II.
6 1 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
6 2 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, including in particular General Assembly
resolution 31 / 144 of 17 December 197 6,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countri_es and Peoples and mindful of the pressing need
for: ~akmg_ all possible steps to acquaint world public
opmion with all aspects of the problems of decolonization with a view to assisting effectively the peoples of
the colonial Territories to achieve self-determination,
freedom and independence,
. Aware of the increasingly important role being played
m the widespread dissemination of relevant information
hy a number of non-governmental organizations having
a special interest in the field of decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Comm\ttee on the Situati<;>n with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. R_eaffi,:ms the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declarat10n m Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the
Liberati?n of Zimbabwe and Namibia, adopted by the
I~ternat10nal Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, and the Lagos Declaration for
Action against Apartheid, adopted by the World Conference for Action against Apartheid;
3. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest
possible dissemination of information on the evils and
dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts o[
the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination freedom. and indepe1:dence _and on the assistance 'being
provided by the mternational community towards the
elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism m
all its forms;

4. Reque~ts the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee and of the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, to continue to take concrete
measures through all the media at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization and inter
alia:
'
(a) . To continue, in consultation with the Special
Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic
material, studies and articles relating to the problems
of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to
publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other
publications, special articles and studies and to select
from among them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks
referred to above;
( c) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in Western Europe;
(d) T? rt?aintain a ~lose w~rking relationship with
the Orgamzat1on of Afncan Umty by holding periodic
