S/PV.7138

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7138th meeting

Saturday, 15 March 2014, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-26614 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1426614*

Ukraine

S/PV.7138

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.

illegal the planned referendum of 16 March whereby
the people of the Crimean republic will themselves
determine their future.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malta, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/189, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, the Netherlands, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement before the
voting.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Many times, we have put forth in this Chamber
the essence of the Russian position regarding the cause
and development of the internal crisis in Ukraine. That
general context is important to understanding our view
of the draft resolution submitted by the United States
(S/2014/189) for the Council’s vote today.
It is a secret to no one that the Russian Federation
will vote against the draft resolution. We cannot go
along with its basic assumption, which is to declare

2/12

15/03/2014

The philosophy of the sponsors of the draft
resolution runs counter to one of basic principles of
international law, the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples, enshrined in Article 1
of the Charter of the United Nations. That principle
is confirmed in the 1970 Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, and in a number of
other decisions of the General Assembly, as well as the
Helsinki Final Act of 1975.
We do not dispute the principle of the territorial
integrity of States. It is indeed very important. It is
also understandable that the enjoyment of the right
to self-determination involving separation from an
existing State is an extraordinary measure, applied
when further coexistence within a single State becomes
impossible. Moreover, as practice has demonstrated, in
the majority of cases, the realization of peoples’ right to
self-determination is achieved without the agreement
of the central authorities of the State.
With respect to Crimea, that case resulted from a
legal vacuum generated by an unconstitutional armed
coup d’état carried out in Kyiv by radical nationalists
in February, as well as by their direct threats to impose
their order throughout Ukraine.
It should also be noted that generally agreed
principles of international law are closely interlinked and
that each should be considered in the light of the others,
the relevant political context and historic specificities.
The political, legal and historic backdrop of the events
of today in Ukraine is extremely complicated. In that
context, it is useful to recall that up until 1954, Crimea
formed part of the Russian Federation. It was given to
Ukraine in violation of the norms of that time under
Soviet law and without taking into account the views
of the people of Crimea, who nevertheless remained
within a single State — the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
When the Soviet Union fell, Crimea automatically
became part of Ukraine. The view of the people of
Crimea was once again ignored. After the fall of the
Soviet Union, for more than 20 years Crimea attempted
to exercise its right to self-determination.

14-26614

15/03/2014

Ukraine

In January 1991, a referendum was conducted in
Crimea, resulting in the adoption of a law in Ukraine
regarding the establishment of autonomous Crimea.
In September 1991, the High Council of Crimea
adopted a declaration on State sovereignty. In 1992, the
constitution of Crimea was adopted, declaring Crimea
an independent state within Ukraine. However, in 1995,
through a decision of the Ukrainian authorities and the
President of Ukraine, the constitution was annulled,
without the agreement of the Crimean people.
We set out a number of other arguments in favour of
the legality of the Crimean referendum at the Council
meeting on 13 March (see S/PV.7134).
In conclusion, we wish to confirm that we will
respect the will of the Crimean people during the
referendum of 16 March.
The President (spoke in French): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstention:
China
The President (spoke in French): There were 13
votes in favour, 1 vote against and 1 abstention. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The
United States deeply appreciates the support from
our colleagues around the table and from the many
States that have called for a peaceful end to the crisis
in Ukraine. This is, however, a sad and remarkable
moment. It is the seventh time that the Security Council
has convened to discuss the urgent crisis in Ukraine.
The Council is meeting on Ukraine because it is the job
of this body to stand up for peace and to defend those
in danger.

S/PV.7138

We have heard a lot, each time that the Security
Council has met, about the echoes and relevance of
history. We have heard, for example, about the pleas of
the brave democrats of Hungary in 1956 and about the
dark chill that dashed the dreams of Czechs in 1968. We
still have the time and the collective power to ensure
that the past does not become prologue. But history
has lessons, for those of us who are willing to listen.
Unfortunately, not everyone was willing to listen today.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Russian Federation has the power to veto a Security
Council draft resolution. But it does not have the power
to veto the truth. As we know, the word “truth” — or
“pravda” — has a prominent place in the story of modern
Russia. From the days of Lenin and Trotsky until the
fall of the Berlin Wall, Pravda was the name of the
house newspaper of the Soviet communist regime. But
throughout that period, one could search in vain to find
“pravda” in pravda.
Today one again searches in vain to find truth in
the Russian position on Crimea, on Ukraine or on the
proposed Security Council resolution (S/2014/189)
considered and vetoed a few moments ago. The truth
is that the draft resolution should not have been
controversial. It was grounded in principles that
provide the foundation for international stability and
law, Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the prohibition of the use of force to acquire territory
and respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Member States. Those
are principles that Russia agrees with and defends
vigorously, all around the world; except, it seems, in
circumstances that involve Russia.
The draft resolution broke no new legal or
normative ground. It simply called on all parties
to do what they had previously pledged through
internationally binding agreements to do. It recalled
specifically the 1975 Helsinki Final Act and the 1994
Budapest Memorandum, in which Russia and other
signatories reaffirmed their commitments themselves
to respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity and to refrain
from aggressive military action toward that country.
The draft resolution called on the Government of
Ukraine to do what it had promised it would do: to
protect the rights of all Ukrainians, including those
belonging to minority groups.
Finally, the draft resolution noted that the planned
Crimean referendum, scheduled for tomorrow, has no

14-266143/12

S/PV.7138

Ukraine

legal validity and will have no legal effect on the status
of Crimea.
From the beginning of the crisis, the Russian
position has been at odds not only with the law, but
also with the facts. Russia claimed that the rights of
people inside Ukraine were under attack, but that
claim had validity only in the parts of Ukraine where
Russia and Russian military forces were exercising
undue influence. Russia denied that it was intervening
militarily, but Russian troops have helped to surround
and occupy public buildings, shut down airports,
obstruct transit points and prevent the entry into
Ukraine of international observers and human rights
monitors. Russian leadership has disclaimed any
intention of trying to annex Crimea, then reversed
itself and concocted a rationale for justifying just such
an illegal act.
Russia claims that its intentions are peaceful, but
Russian officials have shown little interest in United
Nations, European and American efforts at diplomacy,
including Secretary of State Kerry’s efforts yesterday
in London. Russia has refused Ukraine’s outstretched
hand while, as we speak, Russian armed forces are
massing across Ukraine’s eastern border. Two days
ago, in this very Chamber, Ukraine’s Prime Minister
appealed to Russia to embrace peace (see S/PV.7134).
Instead, Russia has rejected a draft resolution that had
peace at its heart and law flowing through its veins.
The United States offered the draft resolution
in a spirit of reconciliation, in the desire for peace,
in keeping with the rule of law, in recognition of the
facts and in fulfilment of the obligation of the Council
to promote and preserve stability among nations. At
the moment of decision, only one hand was raised to
oppose those principles. Russia — isolated, alone and
wrong — blocked the draft resolution’s adoption, just
as it has blocked Ukrainian ships and international
observers. Russia put itself outside the international
norms that we have painstakingly developed to serve as
the bedrock foundation for peaceful relations between
States.
The reason only one country voted against the
draft resolution today is that the world believes
that international borders are more than mere
suggestions. The world believes that people within
those internationally recognized borders have the
right to chart their own future, free from intimidation.
The world believes that the lawless pursuit of one’s
ambitions serves none of us.
4/12

15/03/2014

Russia has used its veto as an accomplice to
unlawful military incursion. That very veto was given
nearly 70 years ago to countries that had led an epic
fight against aggression. But in so doing, Russia
cannot change the fact that moving forward in blatant
defiance of the international rules of the road will have
consequences, nor can it change Crimea’s status. Crimea
is part of Ukraine today. It will be part of Ukraine
tomorrow. It will be part of Ukraine next week. It will
be part of Ukraine unless and until its status is changed
in accordance with Ukrainian and international law.
Russia prevented the adoption of a resolution
today, but it cannot change the aspirations and
destiny of the Ukrainian people, and it cannot deny
the truth, displayed today, that there is overwhelming
international opposition to its dangerous actions.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): It is
with a sense of disbelief that we find ourselves here
today — disbelief at the situation that developed before
our eyes with the Russian Federation’s determination to
annex Crimea.
Nothing is lacking from those things that we hoped
were relegated to the vaults of history: the military
maneuvres at the borders, the henchman who yesterday
was no one and today has suddenly been designated
President of the Crimea, the occupation denied against
all evidence, the torrents of propaganda, and now the
charade of a referendum that is not only illegal, rushed
and without electoral campaigns but is reduced to a
choice between two ways of saying yes. Crimeans will
not even be able to express their will.
The violation of international law is so obvious at
this point that one almost feels pity at seeing Russian
diplomacy — so formalistic, so finicky in its respect for
proprieties and its invocation of texts — struggling to
find a legal basis for the coup. One day, they brandish an
alleged letter from the Head of State who is on the run,
and only an unsigned version of that letter is released,
disappearing as quickly as it appeared. The next day,
they recall the issue of Kosovo. Finally, after what was
probably a feverish search through the archives, they
even exhume a decolonization case from 1976: the
question of Mayotte. They are trying so hard to use all
available means in Moscow that they do not want to
see that in the latter example, Russia having taken the
opposite position from the one it is taking today, that
shaky comparison — even if one accepts it — proves
that Russia was wrong in 1976 or is wrong now, in 2014.
It must choose.
14-26614

15/03/2014

Ukraine

I think, however, that my Russian colleague and I
will find common ground in a key sentence from the
speech of the Soviet Permanent Representative in 1976
on the question of Mayotte, who said:
“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total
disruption of the national unity and the integrity
territory of a country is incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.” (S/PV.1888, p. 8).
In reality, nothing will come of those pathetic
efforts — certainly not the basis for any legal
reasoning. The vetoing of a text that is nothing more
than a reminder of the basic principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations is clear proof
of that. The headlines can be simple: Russia has vetoed
the Charter of the United Nations.
In desperation, therefore, Moscow invokes the
pretext of protecting Russians who are supposedly
threatened in Crimea. I am sure that neighbouring
countries that host Russian minorities appreciate this
right to interfere that Russia has suddenly claimed for
itself . But again, they are out of luck. There has been
no violence, as confirmed by journalists and noted
by the High Commissioner on National Minorities
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and no trace, as confirmed by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
of the hundreds of thousands of refugees that were
predicted. Where have they gone? Do not worry; they
never existed.
The supposed right does not exist, and there is no
violence taking place. We therefore look to history.
Crimea was Russian from 1783 to 1954. What does that
mean? Will we take out our history books to review our
borders or challenge or defend them? What date will we
go back to? After all, Crimea was Russian for 170 years
but a vassal of Turkey for three centuries. We know
only too well that anything can be justified by history,
particularly the unjustifiable.
Out of all of this — their confused flurry of activity,
the speeches that are denied as soon as they are given
and the arguments that are forgotten as soon as they are
made — only force remains. Basically, it is simple: the
Russian veto today is telling us that might is right.
Well, no. Force cannot override the law. That would
be too serious and too dangerous for every Member
State. Our duty is to raise the fragile barrier of law
against the brutal nature of international relations,

S/PV.7138

which has led us into two world wars and has cost, as of
this very moment, thousands of innocent lives in Syria
and elsewhere. To accept the annexation of Crimea
would be to give up everything that we are trying to
build in this Organization. It would make a mockery of
the Charter of the United Nations. It would once again
make the sword the supreme arbiter of disputes.
The vast majority of Member States will prove, by
their refusal to recognize the annexation of the Crimea,
that they know that the territorial integrity of one of
them is the guarantor of the territorial integrity of all.
There are minorities all over the world. What would
become of us if they became the pretext for any kind
of adventure to be undertaken by an ambitious and
enterprising neighbour? What will be the next Crimea?
The annexation goes beyond Ukraine. It affects us all.
The veto should be a defeat for Russia alone. It
should not take us with it. We must remain steadfast in
our commitment to the principles it embodies, which
are at the heart of the Charter of the United Nations, are
our best defence against the return of a past in which
Russian aggression against Ukraine emerges.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
draft resolution (S/2014/189) was designed to prevent
a further escalation of the crisis in Ukraine. It invited
Council members to uphold the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of a United Nations State Member
and to reaffirm core United Nations principles. It was
about sending a clear signal that holding a referendum
in Crimea would take us further away from a diplomatic
solution. The resounding message from today’s vote
is that Russia stands isolated in the Council and in
the international community. Russia alone backs
the referendum. Russia alone is prepared to violate
international law, disregard the Charter of the United
Nations and tear up its bilateral treaties. That message
will be heard well beyond the walls of the Chamber.
The position of the international community is
clear. If the referendum is held tomorrow, it will have
no validity, no credibility and no recognition.
We trust that Russia will take notice of its isolation.
On Thursday, we heard a clear message from the Prime
Minister of Ukraine that Ukraine was willing to engage
in dialogue with Russia to address its stated concerns
(see S/PV.7134). The ball is now firmly in Russia’s court.
If Russia fails to respond to Ukraine’s outstretched hand
and instead continues with its military adventurism or
seeks to take advantage of the illegal referendum, it

14-266145/12

S/PV.7138

Ukraine

will lead to further escalation of tension in the region
and further consequences for Russia.
We ask Russia to hear the collective voice of the
international community today to rethink its actions
and to take the decision to work with Ukraine and with
the rest of the world to find a peaceful solution.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): My delegation
is profoundly troubled by Russia’s veto of the draft
resolution (S/2014/189) on the illegality of the
referendum in Crimea, and we are worried about its
consequences for the future of peace and security in
the region and internationally.
On 31 May 1997 in a ceremony at the monument
of the Liberator Soldier in Kiev, the late President
of Russia, Boris Yeltsin, during his historic visit to
Ukraine solemnly declared, “Ukraine is an independent
country, and we will hold this promise sacred”. Russia
“does not lay claim on any part of Ukraine or on any of
its cities”.
And yet, in defiance to the Budapest Memorandum,
whereby the Russian Federation reaffirmed its
obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of Ukraine, contrary to the Treaty on Friendship,
Cooperation, and Partnership between Ukraine and
the Russian Federation of 1997, which affirms that
both countries agree to respect each other’s territorial
integrity and confirm the viability of the borders existing
between them, and in violation of the obligations and
commitments undertaken by Russia during its accession
to key regional and international organizations,
Ukraine is about to be carved up. While the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Council of Europe and individual world
leaders have been trying hard in the past few weeks
to get Russia to engage with Ukrainian authorities in
order to avoid a veritable crisis over Crimea, and while
the Ukrainian authorities repeated their readiness to
accept international monitors and mediation efforts,
Russian troops and equipment were being amassed in
Crimea, accompanied by aggressive anti-Ukrainian
propaganda and hurried anti-constitutional acts by
the Crimean Parliament to prepare the ground for an
illegal referendum and eventual annexation of Crimea
by Russia. Tomorrow a farce of a referendum will be
held, in flagrant violation of the Ukraine and Crimean
Constitutions and international law.

6/12

15/03/2014

The historical inhabitants of the peninsula, the
Crimean Tartars, who see their future in and with
Ukraine, said they would boycott this illegal happening.
All others who care for the sovereignty and indivisibility
of the country, including Crimea’s Ukrainians, will
be left voiceless by this hastily concocted plebiscite,
because the “yes” option to Crimea’s future in Ukraine
is simply not on the ballot.
Our Russian colleague has spoken about selfdetermination and the independence of Crimea. Let me
quote the self-proclaimed Prime Minister of Crimea,
Aksyonov: “No, we will not have independence”, he
said to the press,“Crimea should join Russia”, and it may
happen in the next week or so. It is in that context that
the Council has voted for a draft resolution condemning
the illegal referendum in Crimea, saying yes to the
non-use of force in relations between the States; yes
to the sovereignty, territorial integrity, inviolability
and political independence of Ukraine, and by way of
extension, of any sovereign State. My country’s yes
to the draft resolution is a yes to non-aggression, to a
nation’s free choice of its destiny and its alliances, to
democracy, to the rule of law and to the internationally
accepted rules of behaviour based on the norms and
principles of international law.
Today’s veto is not business as usual. By vetoing
the draft resolution, built on the core tenants of the
Charter of the United Nations, which clearly states that
“All members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity of political independence of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent for
the Purposes of the United Nations”
and that
“The parties to any dispute, the continuance
of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort
to regional agencies or arrangements or other
peaceful means of their own choice”.
The Russian Federation is challenging the very
principles on which this Organization, the United
Nations, is built and which supported the international
system for the past seven decades. We deplore this
veto. The world cannot allow a repetition of 1956,
1968 or 2008 in Europe. We call on all Member States

14-26614

15/03/2014

Ukraine

and regional and international organizations not to
recognize the results of the referendum in Crimea
and not to recognize any alteration of the status of
Crimea carried out in clear and obvious violation of
the Constitution of Ukraine, a United Nations founding
Member.
We call on Russia to disown the illegal referendum
in Crimea. International observers, monitors and
mediators have been invited by the Ukrainian
Government and must be allowed to do their job. We
also urge Russia to reaffirm its treaty obligations
vis-à-vis Ukraine, including respect for its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, and to
withdraw without delay its armed forces to the areas
of their permanent stations. Only political dialogue
and full respect of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law can put an end to the crisis and
prevent further bloodshed.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda wishes to explain
its vote on the text of the draft resolution (S/2014/189)
before us. It is unfortunate that we have come to this
today, as the situation could have been avoided. Voting
for the text before us was a hard decision we had to
make, and that is so because we are not convinced that
the timing of the draft resolution was productive to
the objective and purpose of the Security Council. It
is hinged on the timing of the planned referendum in
Crimea, which may not resolve the entire crisis. More
cynical is the objective being stated in these corridors
and in some capitals to isolate each other, including
important stakeholders, in our search for a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Ukraine. There is no need to
isolate; however, there is a need for a real and frank
dialogue. That is why we are in the Chamber, all of us,
as a United Nations.
The situation in Ukraine has rapidly unfolded. We
are concerned that the rhetoric of, and pressure from,
many actors have blinded us from carefully analysing
the situation and understanding the root causes, thereby
preventing us from finding a suitable solution and, in
the process, de-escalating the crisis. Why, then, did we
vote in favour? The draft resolution contains important
principles on which we all agree: respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries and the need for a de-escalation of the crisis.
Most important to us is the fact that the draft text calls
for a Ukrainian inclusive political dialogue.
We believe that the crisis in Ukraine can be settled
primarily by a more vigorous campaign geared towards

S/PV.7138

winning the hearts of all Ukrainians and ensuring the
protection of all. To date, we have not seen such steps.
There has not been intercommunal dialogue. It is time
for Ukrainians to listen to their hearts. It is time to see
statesmen on all sides helping their communities to
identify that silver thread that has kept them together
as a united and prosperous nation for all these years.
In that regard, we appeal to all conflicting blocs
in Ukraine to pause a little, close their ears to all
aggravating rhetoric and give intercommunal talks a
chance. If there is a need for credible mediators, the
United Nations should rise to playing that role.
Once again, we invite both sides to consider
the mutual interests of the people of Ukraine and to
uphold their commitment to bilateral and multilateral
agreements. We call on the international community to
fulfil its obligation, to ensure no further deterioration
and to respect the principles of peace and security.
Finally, this situation is not a win or a loss to any of
us. Also, it should not be seen as bringing dishonour to
any of us. But let it be a lesson to us all to truly commit
and constructively work towards finding a sustainable
solution to the process.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The current
situation in Ukraine is highly complex and sensitive
and has regional and international repercussions. The
international community should together engage in
pushing through a political solution to the crisis in
Ukraine so as to truly maintain peace and stability in
the region. What we are seeing Ukraine today is the
result of a complex intertwinement of historical and
contemporary factors. The situation in Ukraine, which
seems to be accidental, has elements of the inevitable,
and therefore calls for a comprehensive and balanced
solution.
China always respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States. Those are long-standing and
fundamental elements of China’s foreign policy. At the
same time, we note that foreign interference is also a
significant factor, giving rise to violent clashes on the
streets of Ukraine and resulting in the crisis in the
country.
The failure to implement the 21 February agreement
has further exacerbated the turmoil in Ukraine, with
serious social and economic consequences for the
country. We condemn and oppose all extreme and
violent acts.

14-266147/12

S/PV.7138

Ukraine

The key to resolving the crisis in Ukraine is to
act within the framework of law and order, seeking an
early solution to the differences through dialogue and
negotiations, with due respect for the legitimate rights
and interests of all those in the various communities
and regions. All parties should move forward in the
overall aim of maintaining regional peace and stability
and of protecting the fundamental interests of all the
communities in Ukraine in order to keep calm, exercise
restraint and prevent a further escalation of the tension,
while resolutely seeking a political solution so as to
find a specific way out as soon as possible.
China has been calling for constructive efforts
and the good offices of the international community
to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine. We note
the new developments and proposals in that regard.
Drafting a resolution at this juncture will only lead to
confrontation and further complicate the situation. It is
not in line with the common interests of both the people
of Ukraine and the international community. On the
basis of the above, we could only abstain in the voting
on the draft resolution (S/2014/189).
China holds a fair and impartial position on the
issue of Ukraine. We will continue to mediate and to
promote dialogue so as to play a greater contructive role
in seeking a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
To that end, we would like to make three proposals.
The first proposal is the establishment as soon as
possible of an international coordination mechanism,
comprising all the parties concerned, in order to explore
means for the political settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
Secondly, in the meanwhile, all parties should refrain
from taking any action that may further escalate the
situation. Thirdly, international financial institutions
should start to examine how to help to maintain the
economic and financial stability of Ukraine.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile voted in favour of the draft
resolution (S/2014/189) because we believe that it is
the appropriate response of the Council to the current
crisis in Ukraine. Given that situation, at stake here are
fundamental principles of international law, such as
abstaining from the threat or use of force and respecting
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
For its part, the Budapest Memorandum requires
that the signatory parties observe the independence,

8/12

15/03/2014

sovereignty and current borders of Ukraine and refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of Ukraine.
The holding of a referendum on the status of Crimea
is inconsistent with the Constitution of Ukraine, a
unified State of which Crimea is an integral part. It is
therefore fundamental that the rule of law be observed
in Ukraine nationally and internationally.
It is for the people of Ukraine alone to determine
their future in a democratic and inclusive process that
guarantees the rule of law, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and respect for the rights of minorities. The
crisis must be resolved peacefully and through dialogue,
in accordance with the norms of international law.
Chile regrets that the United Nations organ that
has the primary responsibility for the maintainance of
international peace and security has not been able to
adopt a draft resolution. Today, owing to the use of the
veto, the Council has not fulfilled its obligation.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina): The delegation of
Argentina believes that there is not much sense
in making declarations about future events and
hypothetical consequences. However, we voted for
the draft resolution contained in document S/2014/189
because it reasserts the primacy of the principle of
territorial integrity. We did so in the hope that the draft
resolution could contribute to promoting constructive
dialogue in Ukraine and a search for solutions through
peaceful means and which includes all political and
social actors who today disagree.
We trust that all the parties in Ukraine will refrain
from unilateral action that could hamper dialogue or
obviate opportunities for a peaceful and negotiated
solution. We believe that it is for the Ukrainians to
manage their internal affairs and to interpret those
actions.
It is not for the Security Council to define this
situation. Our responsibility is to maintain international
peace and security. We therefore hope that all countries
will respect the principle of non-interference in internal
affairs and uphold their commitment to act strictly in
compliance with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, with the goal of achieving a
peaceful solution in the country.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia is seriously
disturbed that the draft resolution contained in
document S/2014/189 before us was vetoed. Its purpose

14-26614

15/03/2014

Ukraine

was to reaffirm the fundamental principles and norms
governing relations between States in the post-1945
world — obligations that form the core of the Charter
of the United Nations — respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, the obligation
to refrain from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, the illegality of the acquisition of territory
through the threat or use of force and the obligation to
settle disputes by peaceful means.
As the body mandated under the United Nations
Charter with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a primordial responsibility to
uphold those obligations. As Council members, we do
so on behalf of all Member States. The draft resolution
directly and carefully reflects those fundamental
norms. There is nothing in it that any State Member of
the United Nations could reasonably oppose. Russia’s
decision to veto the resolution is therefore profoundly
unsettling.
The referendum to be held tomorrow in Crimea
is dangerous and destabilizing. It is unauthorized and
invalid. The international community will not recognize
the result nor any action taking on the basis of it.
With or without a resolution, the message
from Council members and the wider international
community has been overwhelming. The de-escalation
of the current crisis is imperative. Russia must pull back
its forces to their bases and decrease their numbers to
agreed levels. It must allow international observers
access to Crimea. It must demonstrate its respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine,
including by desisting from any recognition of or action
on the basis of the results of the Crimean referendum.
It must engage in direct dialogue with Ukraine, as
Ukraine has repeatedly requested, either bilaterally
or through a diplomatic mechanism such as a contact
group.
Russia can be under no misapprehension about the
action the international community is demanding it take.
Should it fail to respond, there will be consequences.
The international community will demand it.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea voted in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document S/2014/189, as we firmly believe that the
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine should be
fully respected and that the future of Ukraine should

S/PV.7138

be decided by the Ukrainians themselves without
any intervention or influence by outside forces. We
think that the draft resolution clearly embodies those
principles.
It is regrettable that the draft resolution was not
adopted by the Security Council today. Still, we very
much hope that today’s failure will not close the window
on a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the crisis.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria voted in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/2014/189
because it reflects the principles embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations, which obliges all States
to refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any Member State. The United Nations
Charter also obliges States to settle their disputes by
peaceful means. All throughout the crisis in Ukraine,
Nigeria has consistently and unequivocally called on all
concerned to abide by those principles in the interests
of international peace and security.
The draft resolution, which is not a country-specific
draft resolution but one that underscores universally
agreed principles and the sanctity of international law,
also mentions the Budapest Memorandum of 1994,
which provides a framework within which the crisis
could be peacefully resolved. We have consistently
called for dialogue, mediation, restraint and an end to
hostile rhetoric. Therefore, Nigeria is fundamentally
opposed to the threat or use of force in settling
international disputes. The lessons of history are not
far-fetched, and we remain vigilant that the mistakes of
history not be repeated by those alive today.
Nigeria has consistently advocated for mediation
and the pacific settlement of disputes, including
territorial disputes. Our willing submission to the rule
of the International Court of Justice in our dispute with
the Republic of Cameroon should serve as a beacon and
an inspiration to law-abiding nations.
Nigeria is vehemently opposed to unilateral
secession or forceful excision of territory designed to
alter the configuration of States in their internationally
recognized boundaries. Standing on that fundamental
principle, Nigeria is opposed to any unilateral
declaration by a component part of a State that will alter
the configuration of the State to which it appropriately
belongs.
It is therefore needless to restate that the impending
referendum in Crimea is not in consonance with the

14-266149/12

S/PV.7138

Ukraine

Constitution of Ukraine. The consequences of any
defiance are better imagined than described.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Since the
beginning of the Ukrainian crisis, Chad has consistently
expressed its commitment to the territorial integrity
and unity of Ukraine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. The intangibility of borders
and territorial integrity of States is a sacred principle
set forth in the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
Chad’s vote in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document S/2014/189 reflects that commitment.
Chad takes note with great concern the persistence
of the escalation of the crisis in Ukraine, which
is taking place despite the repeated appeals of the
international community, and particularly the Security
Council, for restraint and calm. We believe that it is
still possible for the parties to open the way towards
national reconciliation and maintaining Ukraine’s unity
by engaging in inclusive dialogue among the various
components with respect for diversity, human rights
and in particular the rights of minorities.
Chad reiterates its call for respect for territorial
integrity, the non-use of force and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

15/03/2014

Luxembourg deeply regrets that the draft resolution
(S/2104/189). proposed by the United States of America,
on the situation in Ukraine was not adopted because of
the vote against it by Russia, a permanent member of
the Council.
Luxembourg voted in favour of the draft resolution
and is also a sponsor of the text, as did many United
Nations States Members. Why? Because the draft
resolution was based on principles and dialogue.
First, with regard to the principles, the draft
resolution was intended to recall the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, as set out in particular
in Article 2 of the Charter. The draft resolution was
intended to reaffirm the Security Council’s support for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and the territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. The Security Council should be
unanimous in upholding those principles. The Charter
of the United Nations states that in discharging its duties
the Security Council “shall act in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations”. Today,
the Russian veto prevented the Security Council from
complying with that provision.

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): Jordan has voted in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2014/189 out of its
respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence and non-interference in its
internal affairs. Moreover, it calls for adherence to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially Article 1, and to the use of peaceful
means to settle disputes.

With regard to dialogue, in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, the
draft resolution under consideration by the Council
this morning was intended to urge all parties to seek
a peaceful settlement immediately through direct
political dialogue, to exercise restraint, to refrain
from any unilateral action and any inflammatory
rhetoric that might increase tension and to engage
fully in international mediation efforts. However,
the referendum organized for tomorrow in Crimea is
intended to change the status of the Ukrainian territory
against the will of Ukraine. If the referendum were to
take place, it would constitute a unilateral act that could
very seriously destabilize Ukraine and the entire the
region.

Jordan confirms the importance of upholding the
territorial integrity of Ukraine and subjecting all its
territories, including Crimea, to Ukrainian sovereignty,
in accordance with the principles of international law
and relevant international resolutions, including the
1994 Budapest Memorandum and the 1997 Treaty on
Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership.

Pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations,
Member States have conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Today, the Russian
veto prevented the Security Council from assuming
that responsibility in the interest of peace and security
in Ukraine and Europe.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Luxembourg.

The referendum organized for tomorrow in
Crimea runs contrary to Ukraine’s Constitution, which
stipulates that the territory of Ukraine is indivisible

Also, we would like to once again call for calm and
restraint. We believe that the solution to the crisis can
only be a political and negotiated one.

10/12

14-26614

15/03/2014

Ukraine

and inviolable. The referendum is also contrary to the
Constitution of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
The international community can in no way recognize
its outcome.
The referendum of 16 March is part of a vicious
cycle. The decision taken on 1 March by the Council
of the Russian Federation to authorize the use of the
Russian armed forces on Ukrainian territory, and the
subsequent actions undertaken, constitute a flagrant
violation of international law. Those actions violate the
commitments Russia entered into with regard to Ukraine
within the framework of the Budapest Memorandum
of 1994 and the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and
Partnership Agreement between Russia and Ukraine,
signed in 1997. Had it been adopted, the draft resolution
would have helped to put an end to that vicious cycle
and the nationalist escalation that accompanies it.
Today’s vote is a failure — a failure for the Security
Council and the United Nations, but also, and above all,
a failure for Russia.
Would it be naive to hope that, despite that failure,
we can still find a peaceful solution to the crisis that
Russia is imposing on Ukraine and the international
community? For its part, Luxembourg will not abandon
that hope. Even if diplomatic efforts have not yet borne
fruit, they must continue to achieve a solution that
respects the political independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in the interest of
peace, stability and prosperity in Europe.

S/PV.7138

that the other one, the fifth guarantor, the Russian
Federation, violated its own obligations.
All the appeals by the united membership to the
wisdom of the Russian leadership were not successful.
I received a call 40 minutes ago as we were discussing
the crisis in Crimea, Ukraine. Members noticed that
somebody called me. Russian troops entered the
mainland from the south, from Crimea. Now we are
facing a new development and we are to face an even
more dangerous stance of the Russian Federation.
I appeal to all Council members to find the means
and measures in the Security Council and the United
Nations, as well as at the bilateral level, to do the utmost
possible to stop the aggressor, the Russian delegation,
present in the Chamber.
For us it is no surprise that Russia has vetoed
today’s draft resolution. For that permanent member
of the Council, it has become the custom to veto any
measure aimed at maintaining international peace and
security.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

We remember the vetoes of draft resolutions on
peacekeeping missions in Syria, which brought about
thousands and thousands of deaths. I am confident
that when Council members gather together next week
with Ambassador Tanin to speak about the reform of
the Security Council, the issue of the right of the veto
will be discussed. Two cases, Syria and Crimea, will
certainly be considered as examples of the behaviour
of a permanent member of the Council when peace is
needed.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

(spoke in Russian)

Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to express
my sincere gratitude to the members of the Security
Council for their overwhelming support of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2104/189, as well
as for their support in trying to resolve the crisis by
diplomatic and political means.
I would like to thank all the sponsors of the draft
resolution for their support. In this difficult time for
my country, we really need their support, and I want to
assure them that it is highly appreciated by the people
of Ukraine.
I would like to particularly thank the Member States
who are the guarantors of the Budapest Memorandum
who supported Ukraine — the United States, the
United Kingdom, France and China — and who several
times spoke in favour of territorial integrity. It is awful

The representative of the Russian Federation
has stated many times in this Chamber that Russia’s
right of the veto was gained through the blood of the
Second World War. I would like to recall that it was the
collective bloodshed of Ukrainians, Belarusians and
Georgians. To manipulate the issue of the bloodshed is
absolutely unacceptable. Moreover, it is a manipulation
of the right of the veto before the new blood on one’s
hands. Previously it was Georgian blood — now it is
Ukrainian. I believe that such chaos should end now.
Today I take an optimistic view of the situation.
Why so? Because I am convinced that the statement
made by the Russian representative expressed not the
voice of the Russian Federation, but rather the voice of
the Soviet Union. The genuine voice of Russia today
can be heard on the streets and squares of Moscow,

14-2661411/12

S/PV.7138

Ukraine

St. Petersburg, Samara and Yekaterinburg, where
thousands and thousands of people have gone to
express their support and desire to protect Ukraine and
its territorial integrity. That represents the democratic
future of Russia and the basis on which we will build
our fraternal ties.
Today the question of how to stop the aggressor
concerns all of us. It involves the loss of the entire
system of values established over the years through the
untiring efforts of Member States towards a collective
security system and non-proliferation.
(spoke in English)
I am confident that today the entire United Nations
family demonstrated its unity. Tragic and dramatic
events in Ukraine have united all of us. We must
demonstrate that we are capable of protecting the
United Nations system and the global security system
through a new approach. I am absolutely confident that
we will be able to do that.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to take the floor
again to make an additional statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Some colleagues today have achieved high
levels of rhetoric. I must mention that the Ukrainian
colleague nevertheless went far beyond anything
permissible. If one is to speak of blood, indeed the blood
is not on our hands but on the hands of his friends the
nationalist radicals — the blood of those Ukrainians
who were shot by snipers on days in February of this
year — whose ideological fathers he defended not very
long ago in the halls of the United Nations, stating that
Nazi Ukranian henchmen did not kill anyone and that
those were falsehoods made up by the Soviet Union.
With regard to other statements, I must note that
something has caught my attention. Colleagues that have
taken the floor discussed poorly developed arguments,
on the whole — it was not the argumentation put forward
by my delegation, but distorted images or elements of
our position. I will not comment on everything heard
today — all of the highly unacceptable comments. I
will, however, make a few comments.

12/12

15/03/2014

The French colleague did not notice the smallest
hint of violence in Ukraine. It is possible that he was
unaware of what occurred on Saturday in Kharkiv,
where two citizens were killed by fighters from other
regions of Ukraine. In fact, the violence had to be noted
as it took place during this month in Kyiv and in other
regions of the country. There is a continuing threat of
violence and a continuing threat of it spreading to other
regions of Ukraine. Yet the violence has not occurred in
Crimea, due to measures taken there.
The Permanent Representative of the United States
blamed Russia for illegally pursuing its ambitions. That
does not apply to us; it is a phrase taken from the foreign
policy arsenal of the United States. Ms. Power spoke of
truth. The world would be very interested to know if
Washington, D.C., would in fact tell the truth about its
role in the development of the crisis in Ukraine. Finally,
Ms. Power spoke of dreams and aspirations. But why
has she negated the right of the people of Crimea to
express their will tomorrow during the referendum?
To conclude, one of our colleagues said that Kyiv
had extended a hand to Moscow and that we had refused
to reciprocate. But the problem is not with Moscow; it
has to do with the fact that Kyiv should have been the
one to extend a hand to its people and regions, instead
of intimidating them with repression and banning
the use of the Russian language. Why, for instance,
was the constitutional assembly not convened, and in
reality, in the course of the constitutional process, it
was not proved that the ideology and practice of radical
nationalism did not prevail in Kyiv?
It is unfortunate that much time has been lost.
Nevertheless, we would appeal to all to put an end to
the confrontation and to begin constructive cooperation
with a view to a long-term settlement of the situation in
Ukraine, in the interests of all of the people, including
those in the eastern and south-eastern regions.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

14-26614
