United Nations

S/PV.6271

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6271st meeting
Tuesday, 16 February 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009)
(S/2010/76)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-24053 (E)

*1024053*

S/PV.6271

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009)
(S/2010/76)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Melkert to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2010/76, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1883 (2009).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ad Melkert. I now give him the floor.

Mr. Melkert: This is a significant moment at
which to brief the Council on developments and
prospects in Iraq. When I spoke here three months ago,
the electoral law that had just been adopted by the
Council of Representatives after a complicated set of
negotiations was vetoed by Vice-President al-Hashemi.
That set in motion another round of deliberations that
eventually were concluded with an amended law with
stronger and broader support than the first version.
That was very much constitutional democracy in
action, with the United Nations in a position to respond
to calls from the wide spectrum of representatives to
assist in building bridges towards consensus. It was an
important moment for Iraq to rally broad support
behind the 7 March election date, which will mark the
transition from the first full term of a democratically
elected Parliament to the next term.
There are still forces against that national
agreement that seek to interfere violently in the
reconstruction and reconciliation processes that the
overwhelming majority of the Iraqi people would like
to succeed. While, regrettably, those forces continue to
kill and target innocent pilgrims, public servants,
police officers and election candidates, they cannot
reverse the progress that is taking place in Iraq. The
determination of Iraqis to resist the return of the perils
of the past is real and strong — stronger than the
heinous forces behind the attacks. However, more
international attention and engagement are needed to
allow the people of Iraq to determine their future in
their own way. Allow me therefore to share some
thoughts on the forthcoming elections and the
transition to the next Parliament and Government.
First, I would like to caution against the
persistent skepticism and impatience that characterize
much of the discourse and reporting on Iraq. Yes, it is
not difficult to note imperfections, gaps and
contradictions in the ongoing process, but that is not
the heart of the matter if one considers the decades of
conflict and crime that have gravely affected Iraq’s
society, economy, administration and international
standing. The crux is now to see whether there is a
genuine effort under way to reconstruct and innovate.
That is what, in many different ways, is happening. It
deserves to be seen and properly understood,
unprecedented as it is in the course of a long and
distinguished history.
Secondly, it is important that lessons be learned
in the process and properly applied in the future in

2

10-24053

S/PV.6271

order to minimize the re-emergence of contentious
issues. From the perspective of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), it will be highly
relevant to advise the new Government on the general
fundamentals of electoral legislation and parliamentary
procedures, as well as to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the three powers, as that is necessary
to strengthen the authority of the institutions.
Thirdly, there has been much attention paid to the
so-called de-Baathification of candidates for the
elections. It should be noted that the principle of
drawing a line between a former dictatorial regime and
a newly developing democratic order has been seen in
other places. The application of the principle is entirely
an Iraqi responsibility. What has made matters
complex, however, from the perspective of general
international standards for preparing free and fair
elections is the lack of transparency that has marked
the process from the outset. UNAMI has consistently
emphasized the due process requirements and
abstained from judging the outcomes.
While reason for concern remains with regard to
their impact, decisions on the candidate lists should be
assessed in the context of the electoral process as a
whole. What eventually will matter most is the
acceptance by the Iraqi people of the election results.
We will continue to do our utmost to advice and
remind all stakeholders of the need to respect
fundamental standards and to strive for consensusbuilding in reconciling the polarized past with a more
harmonious future.
A fourth and different point in preparing for the
transition has been the adoption of the budget. It is
expected that this will allow for short-term support
commitments by the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank in order to deal with the setback of oil
price decreases during the past few years. However,
transforming the budget into a strategic instrument for
prioritizing and directing expenditures and investments
remains a big task ahead.
The integrated United Nations Mission is
preparing its advice and support to the new
Government. It is doing so by seeking closer
cooperation with the World Bank in particular. It is
hoped that everyone will step up to the plate. Iraq
needs fewer projects and more strategic advice. It
needs to be connected to global standards of
governance that will be of great benefit to the business

10-24053

climate, and it should urgently respond to the social
deficits that squarely put the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals high on the agenda as
a moral imperative and economic necessity, as the
skills of its workers will define whether and when Iraq
can live up to its full potential.
Fifthly, full transparency and combating
corruption in revitalizing the oil industry would have a
major impact on the future and will improve investor
confidence.
It should be welcomed that Kurdistan Regional
Prime Minister Saleh has taken the initiative to address
the issue of transparency with regards to the contracts
signed by the Kurdistan Regional Government.
Clarifying the competencies between the federal and
the regional governments is an indispensable aspect of
transition towards a more stable future. At the same
time, with the successful conclusion of important oil
contracts, urgency has returned to the stage of avoiding
the pitfalls of monoproduction and the quick-win
exploitation of resources. After all, stability and
prosperity are closely intertwined.
I would like to say a few words on the role of the
United Nations in the important priority areas.
First, on the preparations for 7 March, elections
are not only about politics, but require a lot of hard
work on the ground. The United Nations electoral team
has continued to play a key role in advising and
technically supporting the Independent High Electoral
Commission. As a result of a huge collective effort, the
infrastructure is in place to allow approximately
18.9 million Iraqi voters to visit 48,000 polling stations
on election day. Preparations are also under way for
out-of-country voting in 16 countries that host large
Iraqi communities in diaspora.
Security is a vital consideration for these
elections, in relation both to the integrity of the process
and to voter confidence. The Government of Iraq and
the Iraqi security forces have the lead in this important
area.
Furthermore, observation of the electoral process
plays a pivotal role in ensuring the credibility of the
elections and their oversight. The United Nations is
playing an active role in assisting civil society to
assume this role through the funding of an initiative
that has trained over 29,000 domestic observers.
International observers are being coordinated through

3

S/PV.6271

the good offices of the European Union in cooperation
with the Independent High Electoral Commission.
Although UNAMI will not observe the elections due to
its role in supporting the Commission, our Mission will
undertake its own poll-watching activities, sending
teams to different locations in the country as a
confidence-building initiative.
Acceptance of the results is of paramount
importance and will be the litmus test for the success
or failure of the process. UNAMI is supporting the
Independent High Electoral Commission in developing
a robust and timely complaints mechanism to ensure
that the credibility of the results is not eroded by a
delay in adjudication of complaints. While it is
expected that preliminary results will be published in
the days following 7 March, final results could take
considerable time, with the Federal Supreme Court
certifying the election results once all appeals have
been resolved.
The next point I would like to make is on the
national coexistence agenda. For the near future,
cementing long-term stability between the federal State
of Iraq and the Kurdish region is of paramount
importance. Different signs of goodwill, including on
joint security arrangements, seem to signal potential
for further progress.
In the High-level Task Force that has continued to
meet under UNAMI auspices, progress has been made
to address issues that stand in the way of normal life
and business in disputed areas, including property
matters. I recently traveled to Kirkuk to support the
work of the Kirkuk property committee in their
inaugural meeting. In my visit to local multi-ethnic
communities, I got a strong impression that daily issues
are the same for all communities and that much of the
discussion on boundaries and competences is
considered “higher” politics, not necessarily connected
with the average citizen’s practical concerns about
living together. This should hopefully serve as a
reminder and inspiration for the inevitable “high”
political dialogue that is ahead of us.
UNAMI intends to interact with key
representatives of the different communities in order to
encourage progress on outstanding questions that are
fundamental for security, stability and economic and
social progress in Iraq as a whole. The coexistence
agenda and the process towards solutions will have to
be decided by the Iraqi parties themselves. The United

4

Nations is ready to facilitate these steps at the request
of parties. I have observed growing consensus that the
time has come to address the administrative
arrangements for Kirkuk and other areas and to ensure
long-term agreements on revenue-sharing and
provision of security.
Next, a word on the Chapter VII mandates. A next
post-election priority will be the endeavour to promote
constructive neighbourhood relations between Iraq and
Kuwait, in conclusion of a period of turbulence. My
visit to Kuwait in January and the consultations with
the Government of Iraq prior to the visit were intended
to provide me with a first-hand impression of the
positions of the two sides. I was pleased with the keen
interest demonstrated by my interlocutors on both sides
in resolving all outstanding issues in the period ahead.
This would be an important step in the Council's
deliberations on resolution 1859 (2008) and will
hopefully pave the way for a new era in the
relationship between Iraq and the United Nations.
On the policy agenda and development
assistance, with a new Government starting its work in
the course of the year, there is an opportunity for the
United Nations to transform its support of primarily
humanitarian tasks into a more development- and
policy reform-oriented advisory role. Integration will
be the name of the game for United Nations
contributions. The United Nations family in Iraq has
identified four key areas where the United Nations has
specialized knowledge and demonstrated experience:
post-election activities, including census and civil
registration; broader engagement in the disputed
internal boundaries areas in the context of local area
economic and social development; reform of the public
distribution system and the development of social
safety nets; and water resources management and
relevant issues of transborder cooperation.
We are also in the final stages of producing the
first United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) for Iraq for the period 20112014, prepared in close consultation with the
Government of Iraq and concurrently with the
preparation of the Iraq National Development Plan.
The agencies, funds and programmes have also
discussed practical measures to ensure that the UNDAF
will be fully funded, particularly in the light of the
closure of the United Nations Development Group Iraq
Trust Fund as from 30 June 2010.

10-24053

S/PV.6271

Finally, a word on the future United Nations
presence in Iraq: I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to this in anticipation of a more specific
analysis on the next reporting occasion. With its
National Development Plan, the Government of Iraq
counts on enlarged support by the United Nations,
increasingly operating from and in the country. Against
the backdrop of the drawdown of the United States
Forces in Iraq security and logistical support, there will
be considerable implications for the way that the
United Nations can organize itself to respond to future
demand for presence and programmes.
In close cooperation with United Nations
Headquarters, we are currently exploring the
arrangements for the future. Continued presence, let
alone increasing the United Nations footprint in
different parts of Iraq, will come with a higher price
tag. For the plans of the new Government and for our
own operational preparation, it will be important to
count on the Council’s attention and guidance.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my gratitude to the
men and women who, in still difficult circumstances,
continue to keep the United Nations flag and spirit
high. It is a privilege to work with this truly
international community in assisting the people of Iraq.
I was happy to recently welcome the new Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Jerzy Skuratowicz of Poland, who in many places
in the world has proven to be another true United
Nations ambassador. In leading the mission together
with him and the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, Christine McNab, I look
forward to the Council’s ongoing guidance and
support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Melkert for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China,
for his distinguished efforts during his presidency in
the month of January. Our thanks also go to Mr. Ad
Melkert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, and to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) team in Iraq and New York

10-24053

for their tireless work to assist the Government and
people of Iraq.
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
the new members of the Security Council, the friendly
countries of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria on assuming their duties as nonpermanent members of the Security Council. We wish
them success in their work. I wish to express Iraq's
deep appreciation to those members of the Security
Council whose terms ended in December — the
friendly countries of Burkina Faso, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Viet Nam —
for the great efforts exerted throughout their
membership in the Council to assist the Iraqi people.
My delegation took note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of UNAMI, issued in
document number S/2010/76, and would like to make
the following comments.
On the political and security levels, on
7 December 2009 the political blocs were able to adopt
an amended Election Law and came through this
difficult phase in which heated political controversy
threatened to disrupt the political process. The Iraqi
people have overcome many difficulties and challenges
and are determined today to benefit from this
experience, which gives them a strong motive for
broad participation in the upcoming elections to select
their representatives wisely.
The approval of the amended Election Law
proves that the Iraqis have the ability to overcome their
differences through dialogue in order to resolve
outstanding issues. They were able to lift the final
obstacles in order to pave the way to an epic campaign
to strengthen national unity, build the rule of law and
institutions, consolidate the democratic experience and
achieve their national aspirations.
The Iraqi Government is working now to develop
a security plan for the coming elections so that the
atmosphere is conducive to holding elections on
7 March 2010, as specified in the Constitution, despite
the determined efforts of the enemies of Iraq and the
Iraqi people — such as Al-Qaida and the remnants of
Saddam's dictatorial regime — to block the march of
democracy, freedom and the rule of law. Two days ago,
the leader of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq, which
is affiliated with the Al-Qaida terrorist organization,
threatened to disrupt the election process and to attack
Iraqis who would participate in the elections.

5

S/PV.6271

In the context of developments in the upcoming
national parliamentary elections, I would like to stress
that the Accountability and Justice Commission is a
constitutional and legal body, the establishment of
which is stipulated in the Iraqi Constitution. The Iraqi
Council of Representatives has also approved the
Accountability and Justice Law. Today, however, we
are witnessing political debates concerning the
decision of the Accountability and Justice Commission
to exclude a number of candidates. Following the
recent meeting of the Presidency Council, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of the House, attended by the
Chief Justice, it has been agreed that the Court of
Cassation will only review the files of 177 candidates
excluded from the elections and reach a decision before
the start of the election campaign.
In an Al Arabia interview on 12 February, Prime
Minister Nuri Al-Maliki emphasized that the majority
of those excluded from the upcoming elections are Shia
and that the majority of Sunnis are happy with the
steps that have been taken and are expected to
participate widely in the elections. The Prime Minister
also mentioned that many senior military commanders
from the time of Saddam are still in their positions
because they did not commit any crime against the
Iraqi people. Many were forced to join the Baath Party,
the Prime Minister acknowledged, and will have no
action taken against them so long as they respect the
new Iraqi Constitution and laws.
It should be noted that the exclusion of certain
candidates is related to the issuance of court rulings for
non-political crimes or false documentation, and is not
because of the Accountability and Justice Law.
The Independent High Electoral Commission
announced on 9 February, at the Rashid Hotel in
Baghdad, that the date of the start of the election
campaigns of the candidates nominated by political
entities and of the advertising campaigns would be
12 February 2010. The President of the Independent
High Electoral Commission announced the preparation
of 52,000 voting stations and the appointment of
350,000 staff members to manage the electoral process,
which will involve 19 million voters. The Commission
is also preparing for the voting that will take place in
16 countries in which Iraqis live abroad. Iraqis will be
able to vote from Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, the
United Arab Emirates, Iran, Austria, Sweden, Germany,
the Netherlands, Denmark, the United Kingdom,

6

Australia, Turkey, Canada, and the United States of
America.
The security situation in Iraq continues to
improve, despite occasional attacks targeting Iraqi
civilians. The latest statistics from the Ministries of
Defence, Interior and Health indicate that 196 Iraqis
died in attacks during the month of January 2010 — a
56 per cent decrease from December 2009, which
witnessed 306 casualties.
I should also point out that the recent terrorist
attacks that killed dozens and wounded hundreds of
unarmed civilians, including men, women and children,
targeted visitors who walk on foot from various regions
of Iraq to visit the holy shrine of Imam Hussein bin Ali
bin Abu Taleb, the grandson of Prophet Mohammad
who was killed along with all of his family and
followers in 680 A.D., during the time of the Umayyad
Dynasty. Since that time, visitors have traditionally
visited his grave. Saddam's regime tried to prevent
visitors to the Imam Hussein shrine from travelling on
foot, but they insisted on continuing to practice their
faith, whatever the sacrifice, which led to clashes
between the repressive apparatus of Saddam's regime
and the visitors, who were killed and injured. The
bombings prove that the enemies of Iraq, such as
Al-Qaida and the violent remnants of Saddam's regime,
will not hesitate to kill innocent men, women and
children, and that there is no alternative for the Iraqi
Government but to fight and destroy them in order to
preserve the lives of its citizens.
Here, I would like to recall the letter of the Prime
Minister dated 30 August 2009, in which he requested
the establishment of an independent international
commission of inquiry to investigate the terrorist
attacks that rocked the country, since key elements
involved in these attacks fell outside the jurisdiction of
the Iraqi State. Hundreds of Iraqis have been killed and
thousands wounded in these attacks, and my
Government still looks forward to a positive response
from the Security Council to stop the bloodshed in
Iraq.
As part of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
improve the security situation in the city of Baghdad,
the Ministry of Planning is now studying a project to
install 10,000 surveillance cameras in Baghdad, aimed
at securing greater monitoring and investigation
capacity. Also, with a view to strengthening the
capacity of the Iraqi Air Force, the month of February

10-24053

S/PV.6271

witnessed the graduation of 17 helicopter pilots who
completed their training, the first group of its kind
since 2003.
The improved security situation and the
systematic plans for the Iraqi Government to bring
home Iraqis displaced abroad have led to an increase in
the number of Iraqis who have returned to the country.
For example, the latest report issued by the
International Organization for Migration indicates the
return of 350,000 displaced Iraqis to their home areas.
The problems faced by the majority of these people are
the lack of employment opportunities and the lack of
resources. In this context, the Ministry of Displacement
and Migration, in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration, has implemented the
Programme of Human Security and Stability in Iraq to
help some 8,500 families who have returned to their
homes across Iraq, through financial support and the
creation of jobs to eliminate unemployment in these
families.
The recent poll conducted by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said
that about 200,000 displaced people want to return to
Iraq, and explained that many Iraqis were eager to
return home given the remarkable stability of the
security situation. On 3 December 2009, the Iraqi
Government signed a memorandum of understanding
with the International Organization for Migration to
facilitate that organization’s work in providing services
to displaced persons and returnees and to strengthen
the ties of cooperation with the Iraqi Government,
especially after the significant improvement in the
security situation.
The Iraqi people’s enjoyment of their
fundamental rights, especially the freedom of
expression, as stipulated by the constitution, is a
cornerstone of the ongoing political process in the
country. Iraq’s participation in a recent poll by World
Opinion in Washington which was conducted in 24
countries demonstrates that Iraq has become one of the
countries that make and adopt opinion polls in
complete freedom and transparency, and represents
international recognition that Iraqis enjoy freedom of
expression.
For the first time, Iraq was elected to membership
of the Executive Board of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, for the period from
2010 to 2012, during the Meeting of States Parties to

10-24053

the Convention held at The Hague from 30 November
to 4 December 2009.
On the social and economic level, under the
auspices of Prime Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki, on
11 December 2009 the Iraqi Government held a second
round of competition for offers for oil-field service
contracts. Here the Prime Minister stressed that the
Government will provide all facilities for those
companies that win oil licenses. This resulted in 15
companies from around the world winning service
contracts for seven Iraqi oil fields. The holding of this
round of oil and gas licensing is a second important
turning point in the process of construction and
reconstruction
through
open
and
transparent
investment of oil wealth and is in the interest of the
Iraqi people after decades of oil wealth having been
disabled because of the policies of the former regime.
It is expected that oil-field development projects
will increase Iraq’s oil production and that average
production will reach 6 million barrels per day during
the next six years, and nearly 12 million barrels per
day by 2020 — a strategic objective that the Iraqi Oil
Ministry is now working towards. Exported oil
production for the month of January 2010 increased to
1.98 million barrels per day, and the Iraqi Government
is planning to increase the amount of oil exports in
2010 to 2.325 million barrels per day.
The Oil Minister, Mr. Hussain al-Shahristani, has
announced the establishment of a fourth national oil
company to oversee the development of oil fields in the
middle of Iraq. This company will also be responsible
for developing the oil fields located in Baghdad and
surrounding provinces. Oil commissions have also
been established in Dhi Qar in the south and Nineveh
in the north in order to oversee the implementation of
oil contracts in those provinces.
The Iraqi Government is working to ensure that
its citizens benefit directly from the projected increase
in oil production. Studies indicate that the average
person’s share of Iraqi oil revenues will rise from
$1,534 in 2010 to $3,361 in 2015, and to $9,488 in
2020. Federal budget expenditures in Iraq are also
predicted to increase, to $132 billion in 2015 and to
$256 billion in 2020, which will be reflected in
accumulated investment allocations totalling $138
billion between 2010 and 2015, and $496 billion
between 2010 and 2020. These accumulations will

7

S/PV.6271

attract and encourage both domestic and foreign
investment in Iraq.
As part of the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
ensure the highest degree of transparency in the
investment and management of oil wealth, on
10 January 2010 Iraq joined the Extractive Industries
Transparency
Initiative
(EITI)
following
the
recommendation of the EITI Initiative Department that
Iraq be among the 34 countries that have joined so far.
Last month, the Iraqi Council of Representatives
approved a federal budget for 2010 totalling
$72.4 billion, which includes $51 billion to fund
operating expenses and $19.5 billion to be invested in
financing reconstruction projects in the country.
On 29 January 2010, Baghdad witnessed the
laying of the foundation stone of the largest tourist
hotel in Iraq, with twin 26-storey towers and 550
rooms at an estimated cost of $150 million. The mayor
of Baghdad announced the beginning of more than 25
such investment projects in the third instalment of
investment projects for the development of the city.
These will include the establishment of major
residential, industrial and shopping areas, hotels,
modern restaurant chains and infrastructure projects.
The National Investment Commission is also working
to make 2010 a year of achievement, and has
developed an investment plan involving 750 projects in
Iraq.
The Iraqi Council of Ministers approved the
national poverty reduction strategy recommended by
the Ministry of Planning and Development
Cooperation in collaboration with the World Bank.
This strategy aims to increase the income of the poor
and improve the quality of health and educational
services provided to them, with the provision of
adequate housing and effective social protection, in
order to reduce poverty by 30 per cent from 2007
levels.
As part of the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
reactivate the central supermarkets, the Central
Supermarkets Company made profits estimated at
$15.8 million in 2009, an increase of 169 per cent on
2008 profits.
In the context of regional and international
openness, the recent period witnessed the visit of
United States Vice-President Joseph Biden to Baghdad
on 22 January 2010 to discuss strengthening bilateral

8

relations, and the visit of Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic
Mr. Jan Kohout on 25 November 2009. The visit of the
European Union Commissioner for Energy, Mr. Andris
Piebalgs, on 18 January 2010 witnessed the signing of
a cooperation agreement in the field of energy between
Iraq and the European Union.
On 7 January 2010, Iranian Foreign Minister
Manouchehr Mottaki visited Iraq and held talks about a
number of files of bilateral interest to both countries
and the formation of many of the relevant functional
commissions to resolve outstanding issues. Of special
importance was the issue of borders and the entrance of
the Iranian forces into the Alfaka oil field inside Iraq,
where the Iraqi Government was able to resolve the
problem through negotiations that led to the
withdrawal of Iranian forces from Iraqi territory.
Prime Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki visited
Cairo on 21 December 2009 and met with His
Excellency President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak to
discuss the prospect of developing bilateral relations,
and with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Amr Moussa, to discuss ways of enhancing the
Arab presence in Baghdad. Vice-President Adil AbdulMahdi visited Washington, D.C., on 14 January to
discuss the withdrawal of United States forces from
Iraq. On 1 February, Vice-President Tariq al-Hashemi
also visited Washington, D.C., where he met with a
number of senior United States officials to discuss
political developments in Iraq. The Kurdistan Regional
President, Mr. Masoud Barzani, also visited
Washington, D.C., on 25 January in response to a
formal invitation from President Barack Obama.
The Foreign Minister, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
visited Rome and met with his Italian counterpart,
Mr. Franco Frattini, during the meeting of the IraqiItalian Joint Commission on 14 December, and on
14 January participated in the Manama Dialogue
conference, which discussed issues of regional security
in the Gulf. Mr. Zebari also visited Oslo and met with
Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Støre on
17 January to discuss the opening of a Norwegian
embassy in Baghdad, its role in the development of
bilateral relations, and the role of Norwegian
companies in the development of the Iraqi oil industry.
On 1 February, in the framework of Iraq’s efforts
to resolve outstanding issues with Kuwait, the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs published an announcement

10-24053

S/PV.6271

requesting that Iraqi citizens possessing documents or
any other Kuwaiti property seized by the former
regime during the occupation of Kuwait in 1990
deliver them to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in
order that they be returned to Kuwait.
In his report to the Security Council on the
review of resolutions pertaining specifically to Iraq,
the Secretary-General states:
“It is important to recognize that the Iraq of today
is very different from Iraq prior to 2003. It is my
hope that the Security Council will consider this
report with a view to taking appropriate decisions
that would help Iraq to fulfil its outstanding
obligations in a timely manner.” (S/2009/385,
para. 67)
In regard to this, I refer to the letter from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs to the President of the
Security Council, dated 19 January 2010, regarding the

10-24053

obligations of Iraq in the field of disarmament, which
requested that the Security Council urgently look into
the removal of all restrictions imposed pursuant to its
resolutions on Iraq pertaining to disarmament and
weapons of mass destruction, including resolutions 687
(1991) and 707 (1991).
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude to the Security Council for the
role played by UNAMI in Iraq and for Mr. Melkert’s
support, offered at the Government’s request and based
on mutually agreed mechanisms.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussions on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

9
