UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/54
16 September 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3425th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 September 1994,
in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Central
America: efforts towards peace", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has received the Secretary-General’s report of
26 August 1994 (S/1994/1000) on the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL), submitted pursuant to resolution 920 (1994). The
Council is encouraged by the Secretary-General’s observation regarding
El Salvador’s transformation from a country riven by conflict into a nation
on the path to reconciliation.
"The Security Council welcomes the steps taken by the President of
El Salvador, since his inauguration on 1 June 1994, to ensure compliance
with the outstanding provisions of the Peace Accords. It notes that, while
some delays and difficulties still persist, progress has been achieved in
areas of the ’Agreement on a timetable for the implementation of the most
important agreements pending’ of 19 May 1994 relevant to the strengthening
and modernization of the democratic institutions of El Salvador.
"The Security Council reaffirms the need to ensure that, under
appropriate verification by ONUSAL, the police and public security
provisions of the Peace Accords are scrupulously observed. In particular,
the Council expects that the Government of El Salvador will accelerate the
demobilization of the National Police, as foreseen in the Peace Accords and
as announced by the President of El Salvador.
"The Security Council also shares the Secretary-General’s concern at
the limited progress of the land-transfer programme, delays and distortions
in other reintegration programmes and the unresolved problem of the human
settlements, which was originated in the course of the conflict. The
Council calls for the removal of remaining obstacles and the prompt
fulfilment of the programmes, in conformity with the timetable agreed by
the parties. It calls upon States, as well as international institutions,
to contribute promptly and generously in support of those programmes.

94-36412 (E)

160994

/...

S/PRST/1994/54
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reiterates the need for full implementation of
the recommendations of the Commission on the Truth. In this regard, it
welcomes the unanimous election of an independent Supreme Court of Justice
as an important step in the process of reform of the judicial system.
"The Security Council welcomes the steps taken by the SecretaryGeneral to reduce the size of ONUSAL to the lowest possible level of
personnel and to contain its costs, consistent with the effective
performance of its duties. The Council reaffirms the commitment undertaken
by the United Nations to verify the implementation of the Peace Accords
and, in this context, expresses the hope that significant further progress
will be made in implementing the Accords."

-----
