SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RE’CORDS
(JH

THIRTY-FOURTH

NEW

YEAR

[fgg

A h”

JUN 1 4 ‘I982

YORK

CONTENTS.

Page

...........................
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2140)
Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 5 April 1979 from the Permanent Representative of the Ivory
Coast to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13223) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2140

_ ,, _..

._.

”

,.

,”

‘I
”

,\

,’
I.

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letterscombmed
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a Umted Natrons
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppiem~ents of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2140th MEETING
Held in New York on llmrsday, 5 April 1979, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD

3.. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is meeting’
today in accordance with the request made by the Group of
African States at the United Nations in a letter dated 5 April
from the Permanent Representative of the Ivory Coast to
the President of the Council /S/13223].

(Norway).

Present The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

4. Members of the Council also have before them a letter
dated 5 April from the Permanent Representative of Sri
Lanka to the President of the Council /S/13224]. I have also
received a letter dated 5 April from the Charge d’Affaires of
the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the SecretaryGeneral [S/13225’.

Provkional agenda (S/Agenda/2140)
1. Adoption of the agenda

5. In view of the urgency of the matter, it has been agreed
among the members of the Council that there shall be two
speakers only; and the other members of the Council have
decided not to ask to take part in the debate.

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 5 April 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of the Ivory Coast to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13223)

6. The first speaker is the representative of the Ivory
Coast, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chairman of the African Group for the month of April. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

The meeting was caIled to order at 5.15 p.m.
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: In view of the gravity and urgency
of the matter about which this meeting of the Security
Council has been convened, I intend to defer the expression
of thanks to the President of the Council for last month,
Mr. Leslie Harriman of Nigeria, to a later stage andl hope
that he will understand.

7. Mr. THIEMELE
(Ivory Coast) (interpretation from
French): On behalf of the African Group at the United
Nations and the delegation of the Ivory Coast, I should like,
first of all, to extend to you, Sir, wehdeserved congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. I am sure that your
experience in this international Organization and your
qualities of a seasoned diplomat will enhance the work of
this lofty forum.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 5 April 1979 from the Permanent Representative of the Ivory Coast to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Seemity Council
(S/13223)

8. I should like also to express the profound gratitude of
my delegation to you and the other members of the Council
for having allowed me tospeak and in particular for having
convened a meeting with such diligence to examine, at the
request of the African Group, the situation in South Africa
in light of the growing repression prevailing there.

2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the representative
of the Ivory Coast in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of the
Ivory Coast to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

9. The German philosopher Hegel wrote in his introduction to the Philosophy orHistory: “The history of the world
is none other than the progress of the consciousness of
freedom; a progress whose development according to the
necessity of its nature it is our business to investigate”.
10. More than 30 years-after the Second World War,
which gave a new dimension to the idea of freedom, and
almost 20 years after the accession to political independence of the great majority of African States-two
events which to a large extent have contributed to the
restoration of human dignity throughout the African

At the invitation of the President, Mr. l%it?m&! (Ivory
Coast) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
t

continent-the
rulers of South Africa still wish to row
against the current of history by applying that ignominious,
inhumane, retrograde phenomenon which has no real
future, called upurrheid, based on “separate development*‘,
that is to say, in fact, on the existence ofseveral categories of
citizens in the same country based only on the colour of
their skin.

Africa of the graveconsequences of the execution of
freedom fighters and declares that freedom fighters cap
tured during the struggle for liberation must be entitled to
prisoner-of-war status in accordance with the relevant
Geneva Conventions. That resolution also urges the Secretary-General and Member States to take appropriate steps
to save the lives of Solomon Mahlangu and other captured
freedom fighters.

11. The racist South African regime, which has not yet
grasped the meaning of history, not only seeks to maintain
that policy by bantustanization but, faced with the revolt of
the majority of the South African population, is reacting
with a disturbing exacerbation of the political, economic
and social consequences of that policy. The Sharpeville
massacres, whose nineteenth anniversary we observed with
profound emotion on 21 March, are still a heavy weight on
the conscience of all mankind. The cmckling and avenging
flames of Soweto have not yet been extinguished. Arbitrary
arrests, all kinds of banishment, death sentences and
summary executions are the daily lot of blacks in South
Africa, of anti-apartheid militants and particularly of those
in the South African nationalist movements. Many are
those who have lost their lives in this struggle and been
maimed or will suffer its effects throughout their lives.
Yesterday, the entire world learned with amazement of the
death of Steve Biko, a South African black, a militant and
the champion of the Black Consciousness movement.
To&y, thanks to the liberation movements and the antiapartheid organizations, we have learnt that another black,
a militant in the African NationaI Congress, Solomon
Mahlangu, will be executed by the South African racists for
having wished, likeso many others in this country, andlike
so many in Africa and throughout the world, to live the life
of a free and respected man, without needing to know
whether he had a yellow, red or white skin.

14. The African countries which ‘are Members of the
United Nations have noted with a great deal of satisfaction
the appeals made by several heads of-State throughout’the
world, the Secretary-General and you, Mr. President, in
favour of Solomon Mahlangu. That concern- shown by
high-ranking political leaders can only give encouragement
to-the African Group, which hopes that at this meeting the
Security Council willbe able to take a decisionwherebynot
only the Life of Solomon Mahlangu will be saved but also
put an end to the barbarous repression so rampant in South
Africa and that prisoner-of-war status ‘be given to the
nationalist militants arrested by the Pretoria authorities.
We feel that that is the least the Organization can do to
shoulder its responsibility to the South African people and
liberation movements.
..
15. Mr. HARRIMAN
(Nigeria): Mr. President, you will
forgive me if I do not shower encomiums on you, in
conformity with the tradition when a new President takes
the Chair. In view of the solemnity of the occasion of our
gathering here today, I am sure you will permit me to
postpone carrying out these peripheral functions of my
delegation.
16. Normally, the Security Council should not be concerned with violations of human rights: the question of
human rights belongs to the Economic and Social Council
and to the Commission on Human Rights and otherorgans
of the General Assembly. It would certainly be the uniformed who would relegate the problem of South Africato
the sphere of human rights. But we succumb t0such.a stand
to&y because our objectives are limited.
I

12. Indeed, Solomon Mahlangu, a young man of 22 who
sold apples in trains so as to be able to help the poor and
orphan children of the district where he lived, is in a
condemned cell in the Pretoria prison because he partici;
pated in the revolt of the black communities in 1976 and
1977. He is accused of murders, of offences against the
Terrorism Act and, particularly, of being a militant in the
African National Congress. He is condemned to death on
the basis of the Doctrine of Common Purpose, and his cry
protesting his innocence will not be heeded.

17. For quite some time now the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council, has been increasingly
preoccupied with the deterioration in the situation in South
Africa-particularly
the increasing repression against the
indigenous people of that disturbed country.. For that
reason, the General Assembly has taken innumerable
decisionsdesigned to contain this deteriorating situation in
South Africa. The General Assembly has declared that
apartheidis a crime against humanity. It has condemned the
upurzheid regime and declared that its policies and practices
constitute a threat tointernational peace and securify. It has
called for the supportof the international community in all
spheres, including assistance in the military struggle to
overthrow the apartheid regime. It has declared that the
United. Nations has a very special responsibility ior the
oppressed people of South Africa.

13. How can we fail to react to so much injustice and
inhumanity when our international community and in
particular our Organization have made of the struggle
against apartheid, that crime against humanity, a noble
cause for which all means must be mobilized? The numerous General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
which have all condemned that shameful practice and
which have emphasized that its continuation is a serious
threat to international peace and security have surely done
much to promote and encourage the.struggleof the South
African nationalist movements and those of independent
Africa to put an end to it. Thus Council resoluton 417
(1977) demands that the racist regime of South Africa
should end violence and repression against the black people
and other opponents of upurtheid and release all persons
imprisoned under arbitrary security laws and all those
detained for their opposition to apartheid.’ Thus; also,
General Assembly resolution 331183 F, adopted without a
vote on 24 January 1979, warns the racist r6gime of South

18. Furthermore, in its resolution 33/183 F, the General
Assembly, as indicated by the representative of the ivory
Coast, Chairman of the African Group, has already warned
that the execution of Mr. Mahlangu and other patriots
convicted under the obnoxious laws of the apartheid r6gime
for participation in the sacred struggle for freedom cannot
but have grave repercussions.
2

19. Had the General Assembly been gathered here, it
would doubtless have expressed the expectation that these
patriots would be treated as prisoners of war, in accordance
with resolution 331183 F and the relevant Geneva Conventions. Solomon Mahlangu was captured while participating
in a struggle that has been sanctioned6y the international
community. Moreover, in paragraph 4 of its resolution 392
(1976), the Security Council recognized “the legitimacy of
the struggle of the South African people for the elimination
of q&z&
and racial discrimination’*.
20. I remind those present who are members of the
Commonwealth that the heads of State and Government of
the Commonwealth have taken definitive decisions not to
prejudge the methods utilized by the liberation movements
in order to secure self-determination and independence.
21. Also, in its resolution 417 (1977). the Security Council
inrer.aIia, expressed “its support for, and solidarity with, all
those struggling for the elimination of apartheid. . . and all
victims of violence and repression by the South African
racist r&me”. The Council then demanded the release of
“all persons imprisoned under arbitrary security laws and
all those detained for their opposition to aparrhek?“.
22. Those were decisions taken by the Council. But at this
point the sort of support we arc calling for is not material
but moral-moral
in the sense of an international appeal
which spans a very broad spectrum. Since Solomon
Mahlangu’s application for a trial as turned down by the
Supreme Court at Pretoria in November 1978, a number of
Governments and organizations have appealed to the
South African Government, and we understand that, as a
last resort, the lawyers of Solomon Mahlangu’s family have
also appealed for “clemency” for this poor young individual
23. The subject of our discussion this afternoon is the life
or death of Solomon Mahlangu and others like him. We

have refrained from discussing the situation in South
Africa, as this is not our immediate preoccupation. At this
stage-now-we call on all people of goodwill throughout
the world and the many white people in South Africa itself
who believe in peace and freedom and justice to join in this
international plea to the Pretoria regime to spare the life of
Solomon Mahhngu.
24. The PRESIDENT:
We have now heard the last
speaker. After consulting the members of the Council, I am
author&d as President to make the following statement
[S/13226]:
“The Security Council expressesits grave concern lest
the Government of South Africa proceed with the
execution of Mr. Solomon Mahlangu despite appeals
from various countries and a number of world leaders, as
well as the Secretary-General.
“It also recalls the appeal for clemency made by the
family of Mr. Mahlangu to the South African authorities
through his lawyer. The Security Council also recalls the
efforts of the General Asembly to save the lives of Mr.
Mahlangu and other South African leaders of the
African people under sentence of death.
“Members of the Security Council hereby endorse the
appeal already made by their President. They make a
solemn call on the Government of South Africa to spare
the life of Mr. Mahlangu and others facing the same fate
in South Africa.”
The text of that statement will be conveyed immediately to
the State President of the Republic of South Africa.

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

I

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

COMMENTSEPROCURERL~SPUBLICATIONSDESNATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
i : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Cenbve.
EtAI

IIOJIYYHTlb

Bi3JJ.AHSftf

Or;bE~UHEHHhIX

HAlSiH

asmax w arenrcmax
EO ace% pafionax
mpa.
Hasomre
capaaxu
aauIe&I ~HH~CROY waramHe
HJIH naumfe
no anpecy : OpraHXsauHR
HauHR.
CexqHn no npoaaxe
Hs~arrHR. Hbm-Fiopx
WIH XeHesa.

06 mI(axaax
06zenmeHHbrx

OPX-AHH3AIUiH

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: sus.

a

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

1.M

79-70002-January

1982-2.250
