UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3317
18 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Thursday, 18 November 1993, at 6.10 p.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MÉRIMÉE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-87213 (E)

S/PV.3317
2

The meeting was called to order at 6.10 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN SOMALIA
FURTHER REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL SUBMITTED IN PURSUANCE
OF PARAGRAPH 19 OF RESOLUTION 814 (1993) AND PARAGRAPH A 5 OF
RESOLUTION 865 (1993) (S/26738)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Ethiopia and
Somalia in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with

the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Hassan (Somalia) took
a place at the Council table; and Mr. Eteffa (Ethiopia) took the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

S/PV.3317
3

The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the further report of
the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of paragraph 19 of
resolution 814 (1993) and paragraph A 5 of resolution 865 (1993),
document S/26738.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26767,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
Members of the Council have received photocopies of a letter
dated 18 November 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Eritrea
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, which will be issued as document S/26766.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the representative
of Ethiopia.

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and

to make his statement.
Mr. ETEFFA (Ethiopia):

Let me first of all congratulate

you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November.

We have no doubt that with your

extensive experience and diplomatic skills the deliberations of the
Council will be very fruitful.
We should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg of Brazil, for his effective
leadership during the month of October.
We also want to express our deep appreciation and gratitude to
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
for his comprehensive and detailed report (S/26738) of 12 November,

S/PV.3317
4

(Mr. Eteffa, Ethiopia)
which will contribute immensely to the alleviation of the problems
in Somalia.
We are well aware of the complexity and sensitivity of the
situation in Somalia.

We have no illusion that a solution is in

sight in the immediate future.

However, the proposal of His

Excellency President Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia, inter alia, to
reinitiate the Addis Ababa Agreements and establish a fact-finding
mission would greatly facilitate the reconciliation process and
eventually lead to the formation of civil society in Somalia.

In

dealing with the Somali factions, inclusiveness is important, not
only as a pragmatic approach, but also because democracy entails
the participation of all the people and/or their representatives.
It is in this spirit that President Meles Zenawi suggested certain
procedures to be followed.
We have no prescriptions for solving the human tragedy in
Somalia.

Solutions have to be sought collectively by the Somalis

themselves with the help of the international community, and we are
hopeful that solutions acceptable to all parties concerned will
evolve in due course.

The present draft resolution and resolution

885 (1993), in the opinion of my delegation, will encourage the
wider participation of the Somali people.
In helping Somalis help themselves, the United Nations,
through the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II), in
collaboration with the people of the subregion, could make
invaluable contributions and make a difference.

As pointed out by

President Meles Zenawi, a genuine partnership between the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the countries of the subregion
and the United Nations is important to the political process.

The

S/PV.3317
5

(Mr. Eteffa, Ethiopia)
activities of UNOSOM II should proceed with the explicit
understanding of such a partnership.

Here it is necessary to learn

from past successes as well as failures.
One of the aspects in which UNOSOM II could make substantive
contributions is the undertaking of comprehensive disarmament,
since this was one of the items in the Addis Ababa Agreements.
This would, among other things, involve negotiations, convincing
the Somalis and to a certain extent using pressure and even
coercion to fulfil the wish of the majority to live in peace.
Therefore, it is crucial that UNOSOM II be present and that it have
the mandate to take the necessary actions to implement the Addis
Ababa Agreements.
The efforts being made in Mogadishu to establish a security
committee are commendable and should be vigorously executed, and
additional efforts should be made to form similar committees in
other areas.

This would help consolidate the cease-fire in

Mogadishu and elsewhere in Somalia and make a positive contribution
to the implementation of the comprehensive disarmament.
Effective implementation of the Security Council resolutions,
among other things, would involve a change of attitude, commitment,
neutrality and impartiality on the part of the people who are
entrusted to implement them.

Therefore, the people who implement

the Security Council decisions should be very carefully selected.
We are dealing with a tragic situation in which over 300,000
Somalis have already perished, over 1 million are refugees in
neighbouring countries and Somalis everywhere have become stateless
because Somalia as a State does not exist, as rightly pointed out

S/PV.3317
6

(Mr. Eteffa, Ethiopia)
by the Secretary-General and many others at different times.

In

short, we are dealing with a horrible human tragedy.
The international community and the Somalis themselves have
reached the conclusion that this human tragedy can be brought to an
end only through negotiations, using different methods of mediation
and conflict resolution and all other methods involving human
relations.

All these methods also entail effective communication,

and effective communication is generally hampered by many factors,
among them the involvement of the egos of those communicating.

The

point of this is not to introduce academic discussions, but to
appeal to all actors, whether they are Somalis or members of the
international community, to keep their egos out of the political
process in Somalia.

Personal involvements and real or perceived

roles should not be allowed to jeopardize the political process or
the reconciliation process in Somalia or, for that matter, anywhere
else.

It would be an act of statesmanship to be involved

disinterestedly in the alleviation of a human tragedy, whereas
linking the basic issues to our roles may affect the outcome
negatively.

Any actor in this human drama should be above

self-interest or self-aggrandizement.
In this regard, the Somali faction leaders and others should
be convinced that the great men of history are not those who win
wars but those who make peace.

I am saying this because the main

issue in Somalia today and our main preoccupation should be
peacemaking, and our commitment and our utmost endeavours should be
directed to that end.

Peacemaking is more cost-effective than

peace-keeping or peace enforcement, but it is not cost-free.
Negotiations, mediation and the management and resolution of

S/PV.3317
7

(Mr. Eteffa, Ethiopia)
conflicts also require financial resources.

If the international

community is willing to pay a huge sum of money for peace-keeping
and peace enforcement, it should be ready to invest a modest amount
in peacemaking.
The international intervention on behalf of Somali victims of
conflict can be successful only if Somalis come to terms with one
another.

There is no doubt in our minds that the Somalis in

general are appreciative of the international community’s passion
and compassion and its commitment to alleviating the horrible human
tragedy in their country.

It is my delegation’s conviction and

firm belief that the international community’s commitment will be
sustained until the Somalis are in a position to form a civil
society based on democratic principles.
Finally, allow me to thank all the members of the Council for
their unwavering commitment to restoring peace and stability in
Somalia.

S/PV.3317
8

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Ethiopia for

his kind words addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements before the voting.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

In his comprehensive and

forthright report (S/26738) on the current situation in Somalia,
for which we are extremely grateful, the Secretary-General
correctly advises us that in addressing the complex situation in
Somalia the Council will have to display flexibility and firmness
in any decision it takes while renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II).

We have come a long way

in our involvement there, as the many resolutions we have passed,
the energy expended, the funds spent and the lives which have been
risked and lost all attest.

It has been a learning experience for

us as well, for, again as the Secretary-General notes in his
report,
"The international community has had no precedent to guide it
in dealing with the tragic situation in Somalia." (S/26738,
para. 80).
It goes almost without saying that the actions, the commitment and
the sustained level of effort to rectify the situation is setting
vital precedents.

As much as we are re-establishing Somalia, we

are all defining the United Nations.

All things considered, and

particularly taking into account recent events, we feel that the
draft resolution affords us a bit more time to reflect on the most

S/PV.3317
9

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
prudent course of action after the withdrawal of a number of key
contingents early next year.
The efforts of the United Nations thus far are well
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report.

They indicate a

widespread and comprehensive pattern of achievement in dealing with
many of the constraints and problems, from famine relief,
homelessness and sickness to banditry and lawlessness.

The United

Nations has met these challenges, sufficiently so to take us beyond
the emergency phase into that of rebuilding and reconstruction.

In

all of this, we have proceeded with the undoubted support of the
vast majority of the Somali people.

This is attested to, all over

the country, by the many ways in which the Somalis are resuming
active participation.

Were there an environment of peace and

security in Somalia, there is every likelihood that the targets set
for the assumption of the reins of government by Somalis, from the
district to the national level, could be met, and that the goal of
completing the United Nations mission in Somalia by March 1995
would become a reality.

But that is our problem - that the

opportunity to establish the right environment for peace and
security in Somalia has too often eluded us, and too often we have
had simply to be content with damage control.
Our previous resolutions show that the problem of the
widespread holding of arms was recognized.

In fact, some have held

that in reality the problem in Somalia was not famine - for there
has always been enough food - but the denial of access to food, as
a political manoeuvre, by rival clans and warlords, which they were
able to do because they possessed arms.

S/PV.3317
10

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
While we have made some significant headway, clearly it has
not been enough.

The hope that there would be a voluntary

disarmament, cantonment, disbanding and reintegration of the
militia into civilian life has not been realized.

A pervasive

feeling seems to be taking root in some of the clans that others
are re-arming in anticipation of an expected United Nations
withdrawal some time in 1994.

If allowed to continue, this

attitude will certainly dash all prospects for peace, development
and a national government in the foreseeable future.

It can only

strike terror in the hearts of the average Somali, who wishes only
to be allowed to resume a normal life, free of intimidation, threat
and hopelessness.
The unavoidable bottom line is that Somalia must disarm and
that the United Nations must be seen to be making a multi-pronged
effort to bring this about.

The present reported posture of

turning a blind eye to the open sale and distribution of weapons is
regrettable.

It seems we are readily succumbing to the status of

"violence monitors".

Our presence may be in danger of assuming the

appearance of resignation and retreat, of avoiding any activity
prior to withdrawal.

It is certain that this will present an open

invitation to some elements, perhaps threatening the safety,
stability and future of Somalia for a long time to come.

It could

make our previous resolutions simply words on pieces of paper and
reduce the positive balance of our combined efforts to near zero.
We support the Secretary-General in his efforts to bring
together as wide an array as possible of key groups, including the
USC/SNA, to initiate a political dialogue, following the passage of
resolution 885 (1993) this week.

Those of us in the area -

S/PV.3317
11

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
countries, leaders and regional organizations - undoubtedly will
assist in every way possible, for the pace and manner of our own
destinies are interwoven in many ways with that of Somalia.

In

this respect, it is pertinent to mention the ongoing diplomatic
efforts in the region, led by President Meles Zenaoui of Ethiopia,
to assist the United Nations efforts to bring all Somali parties to
the negotiating table.

When the United Nations has completed its

mission, it should be a near impossible task for any individual or
group to have the wherewithal to return Somalia to its dark days.
Security and government should by then have passed the take-off
stage to self-sustaining growth.
Finally, the United Nations must actively and effectively
utilize the short periods we have delineated to continue what has
been not only the perception but the fact of progress.

The United

Nations is a group of nations of the world, and we must demonstrate
our resolve to assist those in need in the manner, at the level and
in the time that we can, so that the United Nations as a whole is
always seen to be making a sustained effort.

Where we can counsel,

offer our good offices, send troops, personnel and material, or
assist the funding of the Somalia Trust Fund, we should.

We must

remove the conditionality in the Secretary-General’s statement:
"if Member States are willing to stay the course." (S/26738,
para. 106).
In the final analysis, though, as the resolution underscores,
it is the people of Somalia who bear the ultimate responsibility
for a viable political process and reconstruction of their country.
Somali society, which is extensively fragmented, needs to overcome
its lingering ills quickly, before the pervasive international good

S/PV.3317
12

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
will and patience begin to show irreversible wear and tear.

It is

our hope that it will.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):
critical stage.

The situation in Somalia is now at a

As the Secretary-General stated in his last

report, it is essential that the international community remain
committed to helping the Somalis in their efforts to accelerate the
process of political reconciliation and economic and social
rehabilitation.

My Government supports the efforts of the Somali

people to achieve these goals.
The international community owes a debt of gratitude to the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II).

That members of

the peace-keeping forces as well as a number of civilian aid
personnel have been killed or injured while serving in the region
is a tragedy which touches all of us.

Japan once again calls on

all parties to ensure that acts of violence and armed attacks
against persons engaged in humanitarian activities cease
immediately.

S/PV.3317
13

(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
The ongoing violence demonstrates that disarmament continues
to be important for achieving lasting peace and stability
throughout Somalia.

In this connection Japan is of the view that

the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) should try to
avoid coercive methods as far as possible, and we urge the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to redouble their
efforts to promote political reconciliation and negotiation, in
close cooperation with the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the countries in the region.

I wish to say that I was much

encouraged by the statement just made by Ambassador Eteffa of
Ethiopia.
Finally, like the Ambassador of Djibouti, I wish to say that
while international support is essential, it is the leaders of
Somalia and the people of Somalia who bear the ultimate
responsibility for establishing peace in their country.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

The draft resolution we are

considering is the result of a careful examination of the
circumstances in Somalia, particularly as they relate to the work
of the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II).

Let me

express our gratitude for the input received in this process from
the Secretary-General.

His report on the situation in Somalia and

on UNOSOM II is an extremely useful instrument that has provided us
with crucial elements of judgement and that will certainly continue
to be of great help in the coming months as we seek to map out the
future presence of the United Nations in Somalia.
We are encouraged by the positive aspects of the situation in
Somalia as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General.

Above

all, we are heartened by the fact that in many areas of the country

S/PV.3317
14

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
the most immediate problems related to the humanitarian emergency
have, to a large extent, been addressed.

It is scarcely necessary

to highlight the fact that serious problems remain.

Events in

Somalia over the past few months have caused deep concern.

The

Brazilian Government has strongly condemned the outrageous
incidents of violence against UNOSOM II forces and against those
working with UNOSOM II in Somalia.

Those incidents have

underscored the urgency of a political solution to the Somali
crisis.
As regards the humanitarian situation, we agree with the
Secretary-General that the sustained support of the international
community will be critical as the efforts of the United Nations and
other organizations operating in Somalia move from relief to
rehabilitation.

In our view, the concept of a continuum from

relief to rehabilitation and development applies fully in the case
of Somalia.

A smooth transition from emergency assistance to

development, a transition unencumbered by political obstacles of
any kind, is essential to prevent a repetition of the very
situation that gave rise to the urgent need for humanitarian
relief.
In that connection it is our understanding that paragraph 14
of the draft resolution is meant as an indication of the importance
of rehabilitation and reconstruction projects in Somalia within the
context of progress towards national reconciliation.

The

definition of guidelines or priorities for assistance by the
international community for rehabilitation and reconstruction
clearly does not fall within the competence of the Security
Council.

S/PV.3317
15

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
It is also encouraging that greater attention is now being
paid to the need to support and accelerate efforts towards national
reconciliation involving all Somali parties.

The initiatives taken

by the States of the region, including through the Organization of
African Unity, are particularly welcome.

We support those

initiatives, and we are hopeful that they will soon bear fruit.
It is appropriate to stress, as the draft resolution does, the
important links between the work of UNOSOM II and the process of
national political reconciliation among the Somali parties.

As

indicated in resolution 865 (1993), supporting the efforts of the
Somali people towards national reconciliation constitutes the
highest priorities in the activities of UNOSOM II.

Besides, the

contribution that the United Nations can and must bring to
promoting peace and security in Somalia can hardly be understood if
it is not placed in a context of vigorous political efforts towards
peace by all the Somali parties that have been involved in
conflict.
It has been rightly pointed out that the United Nations cannot
impose peace in Somalia or anywhere else if the parties involved
are not willing to make peace themselves.

To them belongs the

heavy responsibility of taking the steps that may be necessary to
achieve a negotiated solution to their differences.

It is

appropriate that in that effort they be able to count on the
support and assistance of the United Nations.

These thoughts are

essential components of the traditional and time-tested concept of
peace-keeping - that is, of endeavours undertaken to help the
parties ensure respect for and consolidation of peace agreements.
In the near future the United Nations will be faced with
important decisions concerning the situation in Somalia and the
role that is to be played by the Organization in promoting peace

S/PV.3317
16

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
and security in that country.

This is indicated in the draft

resolution, which makes provision for a fundamental review of the
mandate of UNOSOM II by early February 1994.

The policy options

outlined by the Secretary-General in his report, as well as any
further recommendation he may wish to make before the Council
reconsiders the issue, will no doubt have to be taken into due
account.

The evolution of the situation on the ground, including

the progress achieved on such crucial issues as political
reconciliation, disarmament and other matters, will also have a
direct bearing on our deliberations.

Brazil will be ready to work

with other members of the Council with a view to taking the
decisions and making the choices that will be required in defining,
in a constructive and realistic way, the foundations for an
effective and result-oriented presence of the United Nations in
Somalia.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now put to the vote the draft

resolution contained in document S/26767.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution
886 (1993).
I shall now call upon those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

The United

Nations Operation in Somalia is one of the most difficult the

S/PV.3317
17

(Mrs. Albright, United States)
Organization has had to confront.

Carrying out the mandate this

Council established six months ago has required sacrifices by many
States, including my own.

Some of our people have made the

ultimate sacrifice to support the international effort aimed at
helping the Somali people escape the catastrophe in which they
seemed trapped.
There are those who have voiced the opinion that these
sacrifices were too great and that the Organization and its Members
could not bear them.

Even in the face of escalating losses, the

United Nations will not abandon efforts to bring peace and
political reconciliation to the people of Somalia.

With this vote

today the Council demonstrates that it will not abandon Somalia and
pledges that it will help the people of this shattered land rebuild
their lives and their country.
This resolution also sends a message to the Somali people that
the United Nations can only help.

The Somali people must show the

will and the courage to bring about true national reconciliation.
If they are prepared to make this investment in their future,
UNOSOM and the international community stand ready to give them
every assistance.

But if they cannot work together to solve their

own problems, they cannot expect the United Nations to do it for
them.
The resolution today, therefore, is a reaffirmation and a
challenge.

It reaffirms the efforts of the community of nations

that have already accomplished so much.

At the same time, the

international community challenges the Somalis to demonstrate that
they have the will and the perseverance to restore their country’s
institutions.

S/PV.3317
18

Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

The

resolution just adopted by the Security Council, which extends the
mandate of the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) for
six months, is evidence of the ongoing commitment of the
international community and of the United Nations to the
restoration of political institutions in Somalia.

France, which

has made an important contribution to UNOSOM, is convinced that the
Somali people - and this point has been stressed by the SecretaryGeneral - is in favour of the maintenance of the United Nations
presence to support the process of reconciliation and
rehabilitation agreed to at the Addis Ababa meetings in January and
March.
My delegation wishes to recall that the achievements of that
presence over several months are considerable, even if they tend to
be eclipsed by the unstable situation in South Mogadishu.

The

primary purpose of international intervention was to put an end to
famine.

That humanitarian objective has now been fulfilled.

UNOSOM has also facilitated the restoration of a public-health
policy and the resumption of agricultural and commercial
activities, and it is seeking to establish judicial and police
structures conducive to the normal functioning of a civilian
society.

UNOSOM is also trying to encourage organs of democratic

expression.

My Government hopes that by the beginning of next year

the Transitional National Council of Somalia will have been
established and will embody the sovereignty of Somalia, for - and
this is something that my delegation wishes to stress once more the United Nations cannot take the place of the Somali people.

The

role of the United Nations is to provide assistance, but it is the
Somalis themselves who will determine the process of national

S/PV.3317
19

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
reconciliation and the restoration of political structures in
Somalia.
France hopes that the Somali parties will heed the voice of
reason and national interest and will suppress their selfish
concerns and devote themselves, in a true spirit of national unity,
to the enormous endeavour of rebuilding the country.

My delegation

hopes that the fourth Coordination Meeting on Humanitarian
Assistance for Somalia - to be held in Addis Ababa, beginning on
29 November - which, I hope, will bring together all components of
Somali society, will provide an opportunity for political dialogue.
France pays a tribute to the efforts, in this regard, of the
countries and organizations of the region to help find a settlement
to the Somali crisis, and we encourage them to continue their
efforts.
My Government commends the work done, under the authority of
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, by the UNOSOM team
and pays a tribute to those who sacrificed their lives to help the
Somali people rebuild their nation.
France has agreed to the renewal of the UNOSOM mandate, in
keeping with the recommendations of the Secretary-General.

In due

course - depending on how the situation in the country evolves - it
will study the options he proposes.
Finally, I wish to draw attention to one point: France
welcomes the contribution of the United States to UNOSOM - a
contribution that has been decisive.

However, for reasons of

clarity and consistency, and also because this problem may arise in
the case of other peace-keeping operations, we should have
preferred to see the status of the United States forces vis-à-vis

S/PV.3317
20

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
UNOSOM clarified in this resolution.

A certain number of formulas

were tried, but, in the end, none of them was deemed satisfactory.
My delegation regrets that that important element - important by
reason of the numerical strength of the force concerned as well as
its impact on an operation placed under the authority of the
Council - was omitted from the resolution.
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 837 (1993) the
situation in Somalia has been at the centre of the international
community’s attention.

The United Nations, the Organization of

African Unity and the Arab League have made valuable efforts to
help the Somali people to extricate themselves from their plight
and secure national reconciliation and lasting peace.

Encouraging

changes have taken place in Somalia, but there are still many
unstable elements.

There is a long way to go before genuine peace

can be achieved in Somalia.
The Chinese delegation has always been in favour of a
political settlement of the Somali question.

The key to such a

settlement lies in widely based reconciliation of all the Somali
parties.

We are glad to note that the fourth Coordination Meeting

on Humanitarian Assistance for Somalia will be held in Addis Ababa
at the end of this month.

This will provide a good opportunity for

all the Somali parties to return to the process of national
reconciliation and political settlement.

We believe that the

current reconciliation efforts are of crucial importance, and their
result will be a decisive factor in determining the future mandate
and the size of UNOSOM II.

S/PV.3317
21

(Mr. Li Zhaoxing, China)
The ups and downs in Somalia have shown once again that any
problem in a country can be solved only by the people of that
country themselves and that the affairs of a region should be
settled by the countries and peoples of that region through
discussion and consultation.

In the case of any dispute or

conflict - no matter how complicated and difficult - so long as
there is patience, there is hope of its resolution through dialogue
and negotiation.

The international community can play only a

supplementary and facilitating role in the promotion of a final
settlement.

The overall objective of UNOSOM II should be to

promote national reconciliation, and it should fulfil its mandate
by relying on the Somali people, using peaceful means.
It is hoped that, in this connection, the positive role of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of countries in the region
will be brought more fully into play and that, with the gradual
realization of national reconciliation, UNOSOM II will in the near
future become a peace-keeping operation in the traditional sense.
The Addis Ababa Agreements are the basis for the peaceful
settlement of the Somali question.

The Chinese delegation

sincerely hopes that the various Somali parties will put the
national interests above everything else and will cooperate with
the United Nations, the OAU and UNOSOM II to create the conditions
for an early political solution of the Somali question.
For those reasons, the Chinese delegation supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on the extension of the mandate
of UNOSOM II and voted in favour of the resolution that has just
been adopted.

S/PV.3317
22

Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

The Secretary-General,

in his valuable and admirably clear report to the Council,
describes a situation in Somalia vastly different from that
obtaining this time last year.

We share his assessment that the

United Nations has come a long way in the process of remedying the
massive human disaster of 1992 and in laying the foundations for
rebuilding Somalia.

The humanitarian situation, above all, has

dramatically improved.

Clearly, the security situation in some

areas remains a matter of concern, but it is important to recognize
that in most parts of the country a lot has been achieved.
The United Kingdom pays a tribute to the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative and to the
outstanding bravery of the thousands of United Nations troops and
civilians and personnel from non-governmental organizations who
have worked so hard in such very difficult circumstances in
Somalia.

It also pays a tribute to the key role played by the

United States in coming to the rescue of millions of Somalis at the
end of last year.

We express our deepest condolences to all those

who have suffered losses.
This resolution clearly demonstrates that the international
community is determined, if that is at all possible, not to give up
on the millions of Somalis who have welcomed and supported the
United Nations action.

That is why the Security Council has

extended the mandate of the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM II) for a further six months.

But the Somali people need

to be clear that we are approaching a crossroads.

Without the

active cooperation of the Somali people the international community
may simply be forced to reconsider its future involvement.

So the

nature and scale of that involvement will be decided by the Somalis

S/PV.3317
23

(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
themselves and by the results of their efforts to work together for
early political reconciliation.
hands.

Their future lies in their own

As the resolution just adopted makes clear, the people of

Somalia bear the ultimate responsibility for national
reconciliation and the reconstruction of their country.

We can

help but we cannot do it for them.
In any review of policy towards Somalia it is all too easy to
overlook those parts of the country which have not been affected by
the violence and anarchy of South Mogadishu but whose need for
assistance is very real.

But they require every bit as much the

sustained attention of the international community.

We attach

importance to moving ahead with rehabilitation assistance in those
regions where security conditions permit and to providing support
and resources to the men and women working in the field at this
critical juncture.
The disorder which still affects parts of Somalia has an
impact beyond its borders.

My Government is concerned at the

destabilizing effects of cross-border arms flows into neighbouring
countries.

We are therefore pleased that the resolution we have

adopted emphasizes the importance of doing what can be done to
protect the security of neighbouring countries.

We would like to

see the cessation of all cross-border arms transfers in the region.
No later than the beginning of next year the Security Council
will have to review the future role of the United Nations in
Somalia.

Our decisions then will depend crucially on early efforts

by all Somalis to demonstrate that they will be able and willing to
work together with the international community for the peaceful and
stable future of their country which we all seek and to which so
many lives and so many resources have already been devoted.

S/PV.3317
24

Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
First, we would like to express our satisfaction with the report
presented by the Secretary-General in document S/26738.
wide-ranging, comprehensive and balanced document.

This is a

After referring

to the serious situation in which the Somali people
find themselves - and it was that situation which led to the
Organization’s presence in the country - the Secretary-General in
his report gives a balanced presentation of the work done by the
United Nations in Somalia as it endeavours to rebuild the
political, social and material infrastructure of the country.

We

are happy to note the very positive results that have been
achieved.

This has considerably lessened the suffering of the

Somali people which goes back to the earlier tragic and explosive
situation that led to the international community deciding to
provide emergency humanitarian assistance and to ensure that the
humanitarian work would proceed with this peace-keeping operation,
the largest, most complex and most important ever carried out by
the United Nations.
We would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and all the personnel
of UNOSOM II for their achievements.
In our opinion the resolution just adopted correctly places
the future efforts of the United Nations clearly and unequivocally
within the framework of the new orientation to be given to United
Nations action in Somalia.

As the Secretary-General states in his

report, the overwhelming majority of the Somali people want the
United Nations to continue to support the process of reconciliation
agreed upon by their representatives in Addis Ababa in January and
March 1993.

Hence we believe that it is appropriate to stress, as

S/PV.3317
25

(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
the resolution does, that the fundamental mission of the United
Nations in this new stage at which it finds itself, as the mandate
is being renewed for an additional six-month period, is primarily
to promote stability, rehabilitation and political reconciliation
in Somalia.

This is clearly the general thrust of the resolution.

We also believe that it is timely and appropriate, as the
resolution states, to send to the Somali people a clear and precise
message that the international community is prepared to continue
and intensify its efforts to help further the process of national
reconstruction and to promote the stability, rehabilitation and
political reconciliation of the country, recalling at the same time
the high priority being given by UNOSOM II to continuing to help
the Somali people to promote the process of national reconciliation
and establishment of democratic institutions.
We therefore agree with the fundamental approach of this
resolution in focusing on and emphasizing the efforts to achieve a
political solution involving the Governments of the region, the
regional organizations and all the parties, particularly the people
and those leaders and organizations wielding influence on the
political life of the country and able to contribute to furthering
national reconciliation.
Those are the main reasons why my delegation voted in favour
of the resolution we have just adopted.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

The United Nations Operation in

Somalia (UNOSOM II) is now at a crucial stage.

The complexity of

the current situation is amply reflected in the excellent report
submitted by the Secretary-General.

We are carefully studying the

three options which have been so lucidly outlined in the report.

S/PV.3317
26

(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
My delegation is most grateful to the Secretary-General for
the report and for his dedicated efforts at ameliorating the
situation in Somalia.

The Secretary-General’s Special

Representative in Somalia and the brave UNOSOM II personnel have
also earned our gratitude for the commitment and determination they
have displayed in discharging the mandate assigned to them.
The successes achieved by the United Nations in the
humanitarian, economic and social fields in Somalia are indeed
impressive.

In the bulk of Somalia, civic life is gradually

returning to normal.

Only a year ago reports of lawlessness and

inter-clan warfare in Somalia and images of emaciated and dying
Somalis had moved the international community to intervene in order
to help a collapsed polity.

Today children are going to school,

hospitals are functioning, agricultural activity is returning to
normal, commerce is picking up, and clean drinking water, which had
become a rarity, is again available to a large number of Somalis.
All this has not been achieved without cost to the United
Nations, and my delegation deems this to be an appropriate moment
to pay tribute to those members of UNOSOM II who have made the
supreme sacrifice in the furtherance of humanitarian activity.
This includes some of my own countrymen.
Unfortunately, satisfactory results have not been possible in
the spheres of disarmament and political reconciliation.

Security

also remains a problem, particularly in South Mogadishu.

The

recent rise in incidents of banditry and inter-clan clashes is
indeed most disturbing.

The responsibility in this regard squarely

lies with certain elements in Somalia.

No amount of international

good will, assistance or commitment can help unless the Somalis

S/PV.3317
27

(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
themselves demonstrate the political will necessary to put their
house in order.
Our Somali brethren have to realize that international help
cannot continue indefinitely if progress towards a stable
democratic order is not made in their country.

Despite the

setbacks of the recent past and the sacrifices of the UNOSOM II
personnel, for the time being the decision of the Security Council
is to continue with the United Nations effort at the existing
level.

We fully endorse this course of action.

However, we need

to review this decision early next year in the light of
developments over the coming weeks.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

New Zealand strongly supports

the renewal of the United Nations mandate in Somalia.

New Zealand

has supported the United Nations in all three phases of its
mission.

We have contributed personnel first to the United Nations

Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM), secondly to the Unified Task Force
and thirdly to UNOSOM II.
The United Nations went to Somalia to respond to a desperate
human tragedy.

While tremendous progress has been made in

eliminating starvation and malnutrition, the humanitarian task is
not yet complete.

In addition, while advances have been made in

the other aspects of the mandate of UNOSOM II, namely the promotion
of political reconciliation and the establishment of a secure
environment, much more remains to be achieved in those areas as
well.

The United Nations must therefore stay the course and keep

faith with the Somali people.
We are particularly pleased that the Security Council has
decided, unanimously, to roll over the authority of UNOSOM II for a

S/PV.3317
28

(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
full six-month period, until the end of May 1994.

This is

important because it demonstrates that it is the United Nations
collectively that has this commitment, and that, notwithstanding
changes in the composition of UNOSOM II, the Security Council has
the will for the operation to continue.
On Tuesday last, the Security Council took an important
decision on the investigation of responsibility for attacks against
United Nations personnel.

We provided for the establishment of an

independent commission for that purpose.

Today we are renewing our

commitment to the mandate of UNOSOM II.

Taken together, these

actions show the priority the Council puts on national
reconciliation, and its willingness to look to Somalia’s needs in
the long term.
The second point I want to stress - and one which the Security
Council makes very clear in today’s resolution - is that we are
very conscious that over the long term the United Nations cannot
impose peace and reconstruction on the Somali people.

The extent

to which our humanitarian objectives can be met and the revival of
Somalia’s economic and political structures can be achieved will,
in the end, depend on the Somali people themselves.

Their

participation in this process is essential if the necessary
conditions of a secure environment and national reconciliation are
to be achieved.
There has to be demonstrable progress towards the goals set
out in the Addis Ababa Agreements.

There has to be demonstrable

progress towards the establishment of political and legal
structures.

There have to be improvements in communication and

negotiation in good faith between the factions.

And finally, there

S/PV.3317
29

(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
have to be demonstrable achievements in the process of disarmament
and the cantonment of heavy weapons.
Because all these steps must be verifiable, it is critically
important that this resolution contains quite specific review
provisions.
Finally, I wish to note that the Security Council, in
approving this resolution today, is not only extending the term of
the mandate of UNOSOM II; it is also maintaining in full force all
aspects of that mandate.

The mandate gives highest priority to

political reconciliation and humanitarian support.

But as everyone

knows, the mandate also relates to the overall security environment
in which those priority goals are to be achieved.

It may be that,

over time and in the light of political progress, some aspects of
the mandate may be able to be changed as the environment becomes
more secure.

Certainly, that is our very strong hope.

But in the

meantime we have to be conscious also of the rights and interests
of the personnel, both military and civilian, who have gone to
Somalia in a spirit of generosity to assist the people of Somalia.
Too many of those people have been attacked, and too many of them
have been killed.

The United Nations has a right and a duty to

continue to take all necessary measures to ensure their safety and
security.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 886 (1993), by which the Security Council extended the
mandate of the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) for
an additional period of a little more than six months, until
31 May 1994.

S/PV.3317
30

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
This important decision demonstrates the unity of thought and
action of the international community in the face of the changing
situation in Somalia.

The resolution reaffirms, on the one hand,

that the priority objective of UNOSOM II continues to be to support
the efforts of the Somali people to promote the process of national
reconciliation and to restore democratic institutions.

On the

other hand it recognizes that the success of this commitment
depends first and foremost on the determination of the Somali
people themselves.
The important report of the Secretary-General of 12 November,
prepared after his visit to the region, describes United Nations
success in improving living standards and partially overcoming the
great hardship caused by the internal struggle in Somalia.

The

seeds of reconstruction have been planted and are beginning to bear
fruit.
But United Nations support for the process of national
reconstruction in Somalia will yield only short-lived results
without the sincere and active cooperation of all Somali parties,
including movements and factions.

All the parties must demonstrate

maturity by showing real determination to overcome differences and
commence a dialogue in a climate of tolerance, leading to a
political settlement restoring governmental institutions and
enabling life in Somalia to return to normal.

Otherwise, past

confrontation will return, with its negative consequences for the
Somali people.
Spain is convinced that the national reconciliation in
Somalia, which we all want to see, can be achieved only with
significant progress towards the humanitarian, security and

S/PV.3317
31

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
political objectives set out in today’s and earlier resolutions of
the Security Council, specifically resolution 865 (1993), and in
the commitments the parties assumed in the Addis Ababa Agreements
of January and March of this year.
United Nations participation in Somalia shows that situations
such as the present one, which threaten international peace and
security, evolve and continually change along with the
circumstances on the ground.

The United Nations - both the

Security Council and the Secretary-General - must therefore show an
ability to take quick action and show flexibility in the
decision-making process in order to deal successfully with changing
situations without straying from the basic goals it has set.
In that connection, we are pleased that the Secretary-General
has set out in his report the Organization’s basic options in its
endeavour to reach its goals, in the light of the events that will
be taking place in Somalia in the coming months.

The Council must

continue to give thought to these options with a view to adopting
the necessary decisions in the light of the situation early in
1994.
It is our firm hope that the Somali parties will soon reach
agreement on their positions so that the process of national
reconciliation can take place, with the support of the
international community, including in this effort the United
Nations and the regional organizations that will be making their
contribution to the peace effort.

The fourth Coordination Meeting

on Humanitarian Assistance for Somalia, which will soon be held in
Addis Ababa, is a good opportunity to join efforts in a common
cause.

S/PV.3317
32

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
In this new stage of the United Nations presence in Somalia,
which is beginning with the adoption of this resolution, the
delegation of Spain feels it is only right to pay a tribute to the
commendable and tireless efforts of the Secretary-General, of his
Special Representative and of the entire UNOSOM II personnel,
coming from numerous Member States, as well as of the joint force
of the United States, towards improving the living standards of the
Somali people and facilitating the process of national
reconciliation and reconstruction in the country.

These efforts,

which we publicly commend today, have involved great sacrifices,
and we would pay a special tribute to all those who have laid down
their lives in the service of this noble cause.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

The

international community is faced with serious and unique challenges
in Somalia.

We are all aware of this unfortunate country’s

turbulent history in recent times, which has had an impact on the
international presence since its deployment there.

In the current

situation, the renewal of the mandate of UNOSOM II for a period of
six months, decided on by resolution 886 (1993), just adopted by
the Council, offers a fresh opportunity for continuing political
efforts to extricate Somalia and its people from the crisis it has
been enduring with such dire effects and for so long.

In this

endeavour, the highest priority in the United Nations should be
assistance to the process of national reconciliation and the
establishment of democratic institutions.
We welcome the important progress made throughout most of
Somalia in the areas of humanitarian assistance, the restoration of
normal conditions and the rebuilding of the country.

We are aware

S/PV.3317
33

(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
of the difficulties involved in attaining the desired degree of
political will on the part of all Somali movements and factions to
resolve the enormous problems facing the country.

To that end, a

concerted strategy for the future of UNOSOM II will clearly make an
invaluable contribution to Somalia.
It should be added that the leaders of all Somali parties bear
a special responsibility for the future development of the
situation in their country.

In this process, once we have seen the

situation in Somalia after 31 March 1994, a thorough review of the
mandate of UNOSOM II will certainly be essential.
Hungary voted in favour of this resolution as an indication of
our support for the efforts of our world Organization to overcome
these difficulties and to provide assistance in the revival of
Somalia and in the restoration of security and stability in the
Horn of Africa.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian Federation consistently supports the efforts

of the international community to provide humanitarian assistance
to the Somali people in the speedy stabilization of the situation
and the resumption of normal life in Somalia.
We note with satisfaction the positive changes that are
occurring in that country as a result of the United Nations
activities and those of States Members of the United Nations, as
well as those of a number of international and non-governmental
organizations.

Clearly, there has been significant success in

fighting starvation there and in reducing the number of the hungry.
Significant progress has been made in public health, education and
agriculture.

Positive changes are occurring in the political area

S/PV.3317
34

(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
too.

A process is under way for creating district and regional

councils.

Efforts are being undertaken to establish dialogue

between the Somali parties in order to ensure compliance with the
cease-fire and disarmament agreements reached in Addis Ababa at the
beginning of this year.
At the same time, we agree with the conclusion in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/26738) that much remains to be done
to enable Somali society to stand firmly on its feet.

In

particular, the report quite rightly emphasizes that unless all
Somali groups are disarmed, a lasting peace and lasting stability
will be impossible for that country.
We decisively condemn the ongoing acts of violence and armed
attack against those participating in the humanitarian assistance
and peace-keeping efforts, and we express condolences to the
families of the military and humanitarian personnel of a number of
countries that have been killed while nobly serving the cause in
Somalia.
There is no doubt that the speedy settlement of the conflict
on a lasting and reliable basis would be promoted by activating the
political aspects of the United Nations operation.

As is stated in

the resolution adopted by the Security Council, the highest
priority of UNOSOM II continues to be to support the efforts of the
Somali people themselves in promoting the process of national
reconciliation and the establishment of democratic institutions.
In this connection, we commend the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and his Special Representative and the entire personnel of
UNOSOM II for their achievements in improving the living conditions

S/PV.3317
35

(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
of the Somali people and promoting the process of finding a
political settlement and national reconciliation.
In our view, a significant contribution to the process of
finding a political settlement must be made by the African
countries and other interested countries.

As expressed in this

resolution, we attach great importance to the Security Council’s
support for the ongoing diplomatic efforts being made by States
Members of the United Nations and the regional organizations to
develop dialogue between all Somali parties.
The Russian Federation is prepared, together with the entire
international community, to foster efforts to bring about a speedy
restoration of peace and stability in that long-suffering country.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now make a statement in my

capacity as the representative of Cape Verde.
My delegation has always followed the situation in Somalia
with deep concern.

The situation of internal chaos, which has led

to the destruction of the administrative and economic structure of
that country and resulted in hundreds of thousands of victims, is
undoubtedly one of the most tragic situations provoked by internal
warfare in modern times.
The prompt intervention of the United Nations and the
commendable work of the Unified Task Force brought about a positive
change in the situation, which was followed by the deployment of
UNOSOM II to assist the Somali people in achieving political
reconciliation and the rehabilitation of that country.
The United Nations assistance to Somalia through UNOSOM II was
seen as a major event, not only from the point of view of the
important mandate entrusted to it, but also because this operation

S/PV.3317
36

(The President)
was seen as playing a defining role for the United Nations in the
field of peace-keeping operations in the post-cold-war era.
Unfortunately, the latest developments in Somalia, which have
resulted in repeated attacks against UNOSOM personnel, have created
difficulties in the implementation of UNOSOM’s mandate.
We should like to reiterate our strong condemnation of such
attacks, and reaffirm our position that all parties in the conflict
in Somalia should respect the safety of UNOSOM’s personnel.
We are very grateful to all those countries that have provided
troops for UNOSOM activities for having come to the assistance of
the Somali people at a critical juncture in their history.
Although much remains to be done, we recognize that the
overall situation in Somalia has improved substantially, and for
that we are thankful to the international community for its
cooperation and to the Secretary-General for his efforts in
assisting in the national reconciliation and in the rehabilitation
of Somalia.

We urge all parties, factions and movements in Somalia

to cooperate fully with the United Nations in order to attain this
goal.
There can be no peace and stability in the country unless
there is the political will to achieve it on the part of those
involved.

The United Nations can only assist.

A continuation of

the armed conflict will not bring lasting peace to Somalia, and can
only aggravate the situation and add to the suffering of the Somali
people, which has already lasted too long.
We are glad to note that the international community will
continue to assist the peaceful efforts for national reconciliation
in Somalia, as confirmed by the resolution just adopted.

In this

S/PV.3317
37

(The President)
context, we welcome the contributions of countries from the region,
especially from those neighbouring Somalia, towards achieving
political stability and national reconciliation in Somalia, in
coordination with the United Nations.
I now resume my function as President of the Council.
There are no further speakers.

The Security Council has thus

concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.
