General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

258

2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
after due consultation with the chairmen of the regional
groups, to appoint the members of the Committee on
the basis of equitable geographical distribution and representing the principal legal systems of the world;
3. Requests the Committee to elaborate at the
earliest possible date an international convention to prohibit the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries;
4. Authorizes the Committee in the fulfilment of its
mandate to take into account suggestions and proposals from any State, bearing in mind the views and comments communicated to the Secretary-Genera13 and
those expressed during the debate on this item at the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to compile a list
of ali relevant legislation of Member States and any
other conventions and protocols additional thereto of
international and regional organizations on mercenaries and to place such materials at the disposal of the
Committee;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee with any assistance and facilities it may require for the performance of its work;
7. Requests the Committee to present its report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Report of the Ad
Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an lnternational
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries".

8 Jst plenary meeting
4 December 1980
*
*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the
Secretary-General' that he had appointed as members of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Drafting of an lnternational Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries thirty-four of
the thirty-five States to be appointed by him in accordance with
paragraphs l and 2 of the above resolution.
As a result, the Ad Hoc Committee is composed of the following
Member States: ALGERIA, ANGOLA, BAHAMAS. BANGLADESH,
BARBADOS, BENIN, BULGARIA, CANADA, OEMOCRATIC YEMEN,
ETHIOPIA, FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GERMANY,
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF. GUYANA, INDIA, [TALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN,
MONGOLIA, NIGERIA, PORTUGAL, SENEGAL, SEYCHELLES, SPAIN,
SURINAME, TURKEY, UKRAINIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
URUGUAY, YUGOSLAVIA, ZAIRE and ZAMBIA

35/49.

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Recalling the draft Code of Offen ces against the Peace
and Security of Mankind prepared by the lnternational
Law Commission in 1954, 5
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/97 of 16 December
1978, by which it decided to accord priority and the
., A/35/366 and Add.1-3.
'A/35/793 and Add. l.
' Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session. Supplement No. 9 (A/2693). para. 54.

fullest possible consideration to the item entitled "Draft
Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of
Mankind",
Recalling the belief that the elaboration of a Code of
Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind
could contribute to strengthening international peace
and security and thus to promoting and implementing
the purposes and principies set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
33/97,''
Noting that further comments and observations on
the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind are yet to be submitted by Member
States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations,
Taking into account the statements made during the
debate on this item, ·
1. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations to submit or update, not
la ter than 30 June 1981, their comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind and, in particular, to inform
him of their views on the procedure to be followed in the
future consideration of that item. including the suggestion of having the item referred to the I nternational Law
Commission;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of
the replies submitted by Member States and relevant
international intergovernmental organizations and the
statements made during the debate on this item, to
prepare an analytical paper in order to facilitate the
further consideration of the item;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a report to the General Assembly al its thirty-sixth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind" and
to accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.

81st plenary meeting
4 December ! 980

35/50.

Report of the Special Committee on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-Use of
Force in lnternational Relations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 /9 of 8 November 1976, in
which it invited Member States to examine further the
draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in lnternational Relations submitted by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics,' as well as other proposals made
during the consideration of this item,
Recalling a/so its resolution 32/ 150 of 19 December
1977, whereby it established the Special Committee on
'· A/35/210 and Add.l and 2 and Add.2/Corr.l.
' See Ojficial Records o{the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session .
Sixth Committee, 10th- l 5th and 40th meetings: and ibid.. Sixth Commillee, Sessional Fascicle, rnrrigendum.
'/bid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/34/41 and
Corr.1.). annex.
