S/2018/110

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 February 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2343
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 28 February 2018, and
requested that I report every six months on the situation in Guinea -Bissau and on
progress made in the implementation of the resolution and the mandate of
UNIOGBIS. The report provides an update on key political, security, human rights,
socioeconomic and humanitarian developments in Guinea -Bissau since my report of
10 August 2017 (S/2017/695).

II. Major developments in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Political situation
2.
Since my last report, tensions have continued to mount, as the main political
stakeholders in the crisis remain intransigent in their respective positions and
continue to publicly blame each other for the stalemate. The multiple mediation
efforts spearheaded by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
have produced few tangible results thus far, owing mainly to the lack of political will
and good faith among some stakeholders and their divergent interpretations of the
Conakry Agreement.
3.
From 17 to 19 September, the group of 15 parliamentarians expelled from the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC) in 2016 held
a conference in Bissau to consider options for “saving” the party. In its final
communiqué, the conference blamed the PAIGC leadership for the breakdown of
party cohesion and called for immediate action towards reconciliation and compliance
with the Conakry Agreement related to their reintegration.
4.
The President of Guinea-Bissau, José Mário Vaz, did not attend the seventysecond session of the General Assembly in September, as he had initially indicated
he would, but was represented by Prime Minister Umaro Sissoco Embaló. In his
address to the General Assembly on 21 September, the Prime Minister stated that,
despite challenges in the functioning of the National Assembly and the Government,
there was social peace in Guinea-Bissau. He also acknowledged that the Conakry

18-01123 (E)

120218

*1801123*

S/2018/110

Agreement had laid out a solution to the political crisis, and expressed hope that it
would be resolved with the support of international partners. In a 22 September press
statement, the Forum of Democratic Parties for Political Dialogue (composed of
PAIGC, the Democratic Convergence Party, the Union for Change, the National Unity
Party, the Patriotic Movement and the Solidarity and Work Party) denounced the
participation of Mr. Sissoco in the General Assembly, deeming him an
unconstitutional Prime Minister. President Vaz had appoi nted the Prime Minister to
his post on 16 November 2016 and, though Sissoco was one of the three candidates
put forward by the President for political parties to choose from during the October
2016 Conakry talks, he was not the candidate selected by PAIGC. In appointing
Sissoco as Prime Minister, the President was therefore not adhering to the Conakry
Agreement.
5.
In his speech on Independence Day, on 24 September, President Vaz stressed
that it was up to the National Assembly to find a solution to the cri sis and that the
nation’s problems should be resolved by the people of Guinea-Bissau themselves. The
President stated that the Conakry Agreement did not mention the name of a consensus
Prime Minister and that the Constitution provided for the Government to be an
emanation of the parliamentary majority. On that basis, he had appointed the
Government led by Prime Minister Sissoco, the only name (among the three he
proposed for the Conakry talks) that he believed would have obtained consensus
among more than half of parliamentarians. The President added that he had acted in
accordance with the Constitution and did not violate the Conakry Agreement, and
further stated that PAIGC, as the majority party in the National Assembly, had been
invited to join the Government of Prime Minister Sissoco but rejected the offer, thus
violating the commitment it made in Conakry.
6.
On the morning of 18 October, about 120 individuals broke into PAIGC
headquarters in Bissau and demanded to meet with the party leadership to deliv er a
petition in favour of the group of 15 expelled parliamentarians. A violent
confrontation ensued between the group and several PAIGC supporters inside the
premises, resulting in injuries to four people. Police arrived after the assailants had
been chased out. Speaking to the press, the coordinator of the group of 15 expelled
parliamentarians, Braima Camará, denied any prior knowledge of or involvement in
the incident.
7.
On 21 October, PAIGC decided to convene its congress from 30 January to
4 February 2018 in Bissau to elect a new party leader. Two-thirds of the candidates
for the legislative elections would be selected subsequently by party militants in the
sectors/regions, while the party leadership directly nominates the remaining third.
8.
On 22 October, PAIGC leadership met with leaders of the group of 15 expelled
parliamentarians in the Gabú region at the latter’s request. The PAIGC leader,
Domingos Simões Pereira, reportedly indicated his support for the reintegration of
the group into the party, but advised them to approach the party’s competent organs
on the matter. The meeting was inconclusive.
9.
On 25 October, the leaders of 17 political parties, including PAIGC and the
United People’s Assembly Democratic Party of Guinea-Bissau, held a press
conference to announce the formation of the Collective of Democratic Political
Parties United Against the Dictatorship and denounce the Government. From 27 to
29 October, the Collective organized a series of political rallies in various
constituencies in Bissau, where it reiterated calls for the President to implement the
Conakry Agreement and declared that it would not allow the Government to organize
the next legislative elections. From 3 to 5 November, the Collective, expanded to 18
political parties, organized three similar events in Bissau attended by approximately
2,000 people in total.
2/17

18-01123

S/2018/110

10. On 13 November, a few days before a planned demonstration by the Collective,
President Vaz issued a decree dismissing the Secretary of State in c harge of public
order, Francisco Malam N’dur Djata. On the following day, he issued another decree
dismissing the Prosecutor General, António Sedja Man, and appointing Bacar Biai to
replace him. Mr. Biai became the third Prosecutor General under the Vaz
administration.
11. The African Union Peace and Security Council discussed the situation in
Guinea-Bissau during its 734th meeting, on 14 November. The Council expressed
concern over the persisting crisis and rising tensions in the country. It commende d
the military for its continued respect for its constitutional mandate and called on the
politicians to fully abide by their commitments. The Council underscored the need
for credible elections to be held according to constitutional timelines and called f or
the international community to mobilize support for ECOMIB.
12. On 16 November, as a preventive measure ahead of the 16 and 17 November
demonstrations organized by the Collective, the group of five international partners
based in Guinea-Bissau, consisting of representatives of the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), ECOWAS, the European
Union and the United Nations, issued a joint press release calling on all political
actors to demonstrate restraint and moderation and inviting them to express their
views and disagreements peacefully.
13. On the same day, the Collective held a demonstration in Bissau to demand that
the President implement the Conakry Agreement and dismiss the Prime Minister. The
event was marred by clashes between demonstrators and security forces. Several
demonstrators reportedly sustained injuries and 14 were detained by the Public Order
Police but released the same day. The Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League issued a
statement on the same day condemning the security forces’ “disproportionate and
illegal action”. The Collective announced that it would proceed with its second march
on 17 November and accused ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations
of not being impartial or firm in their engagements to resolve the crisis.
14. Later that same day, the Collective sought the support of UNIOGBIS to prevent
a recurrence of the earlier events. The 17 November demonstration eventually took
place in a peaceful and orderly manner, following intensive consul tations between
representatives of the Collective and the Interior Ministry, facilitated by the group of
five international partners based in Guinea-Bissau, under the leadership of my Special
Representative. At the Ministry’s request, ECOMIB deployed troops to assist with
security during the march.
15. On 28 November, the President of the National Assembly issued a public
statement denouncing alleged assassination plots targeting him and the PAIGC leader.
The Prosecutor General issued a communiqué the following day asking the National
Assembly to produce evidence of the alleged plot. On the same day, his office issued
a press release stating that there was no constitutional limit to the freedom to conduct
demonstrations, but that they must be peaceful and comply with applicable norms,
failing which they risked losing constitutional protection.
16. On 29 November, the group of five issued another statement encouraging the
Interior Ministry to provide the necessary support to the Collective to exercise its
constitutional right of peaceful assembly and urging the Collective to respect a
previously agreed itinerary and ensure that demonstrators refrain from violence. In
response, the Government issued a statement on 30 November criticizing the
statement as untimely, unwise and unbalanced. Thereafter, disagreements between the
Collective and the Interior Ministry on the administrative and legal process for
demonstrations continued. During a press conference on 29 November, the Collective

18-01123

3/17

S/2018/110

announced that its marches planned for 30 November and 1 December would be
postponed to 7, 8, 14 and 15 December.
17. On 30 November, the National Assembly issued a press release about its
Permanent Commission’s decision to reject the elaboration of an agenda for the last
parliamentary session of 2017, while also urging the Government to provide funding
to ensure the proper functioning of the body.
18. On 1 and 2 December, a high-level ECOWAS delegation led by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo, Robert Dussey, and comprising the Minister of State and
Secretary-General of the Presidency of Guinea, Naby K. Bangoura, the Deputy
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Ibrahim Seck, and
the President of the ECOWAS Commission, Marcel Alain de Souza, visited Bissau to
assess the implementation of the Conakry Agreement. The delegation met with all the
key stakeholders. During a meeting between the ECOWAS delegation and
representatives of the Party for Social Renewal, the latter claimed that the first point
of the Conakry Agreement, on the appointment of a consensual Prime Minister, had
already been implemented.
19. On 3 December, the ECOWAS delegation issued a communiqué in which it
urged the parties to respect public liberties, including the right to peaceful protest;
underscored the importance of the organization of elections within the constitutional
time frame; and deferred the decision on the application of collective and individual
sanctions and the maintenance or withdrawal of ECOMIB to the fifty-second ordinary
session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, to be held
in Abuja on 16 December.
20. On the evening of 6 December, the Interior Ministry, through the Commissioner
of the Public Order Police, issued a statement denying rumours that it had refused to
receive notice of a demonstration being organized by the Collective and stressing that
marches and parades were only allowed on Sundays and holidays after 12 p.m. or
after working hours during the week.
21. On 7 December, the police prevented the Collective from holding its planned
demonstration. Although only a relatively small number of demons trators had
gathered, police action against the marchers was criticized by political commentators
and human rights groups, notably for attempting to prevent journalists from covering
the event.
22. On 11 December, President Vaz invited PAIGC, the President of the National
Assembly, the Women’s Facilitation Group and the group of five international
partners based in Guinea-Bissau and other stakeholders to a meeting on 13 December
for a joint analysis of the implementation of the Conakry Agreement. PAIGC, the
President of the National Assembly and their respective political allies, as well as the
Women’s Facilitation Group, declined to attend.
23. On 13 December, the Collective announced the suspension of the
demonstrations that had been initially scheduled for 14 and 15 December, to assess
the outcomes of the fifty-second ordinary session of the Authority of Heads of State
and Government of ECOWAS with respect to the situation in Guinea -Bissau, but
reiterated its intention to continue to hold marches until Pr esident Vaz complied with
the Conakry Agreement.
24. On 15 December, the Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority, President Faure
Gnassingbé of Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha
Condé of Guinea, held separate consultations with President Vaz, the President of the
National Assembly, leaders of parties represented in the National Assembly and the
coordinator of the group of 15 expelled parliamentarians on the margins of the
ECOWAS summit. On the same day, during a meeting with the aforementioned
4/17

18-01123

S/2018/110

political representatives from Guinea-Bissau, President Gnassingbé announced that
President Vaz had agreed to the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement,
particularly the appointment of Augusto Olivais as Prime Minister, provided that the
group of 15 expelled parliamentarians were fully reintegrated into the party and that
the National Assembly would hold its plenary on the same day. President Condé
subsequently held separate discussions with the PAIGC leader and the coordinator of
the group of 15 expelled parliamentarians on their reintegration into the party. No
conclusive agreement was reached.
25. On 16 December, in the final communiqué of the fifty-second ordinary session
of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government, the Authority
expressed its disappointment at the lack of progress in the peace process and took
note of a new road map presented by President Vaz for the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement. It requested both its Chair and the Mediator for Guinea -Bissau
to continue consultations with stakeholders to reach a consensual implementation of
this road map within 30 days. The Authority warned that in the absence of progress,
individual and collective sanctions would be imposed on those impeding the
implementation of the Agreement. The Authority further requested the international
community to support the implementation of the sanctions it may impose. The
communiqué made no reference to legislative elections in 2018 or to ECOMIB.
26. On 21 December, President Vaz convened a meeting in Bissau on his road map
to end the political and institutional crisis. The Vice -President of the National
Assembly, the Prime Minister, leaders of parliamentary parties, the coordinator of the
group of 15 expelled parliamentarians and representatives of civil society
organizations and the Women’s Facilitation Group were in attendance. In the road
map, President Vaz calls for: (a) acceptance by the ECOWAS Authority of the
immediate and unconditional reintegration of PAIGC militants, offi cials and other
leaders from the grassroots structures to the national organs; (b) the cancellation of
the regional PAIGC conferences and the lifting of sanctions and expulsions in effect
for the Party; (c) immediate reopening of the plenary sessions of th e National
Assembly; (d) dismissal of the Prime Minister; (e) launching of consultations with
parliamentary political parties and the group of 15 expelled parliamentarians, with a
view to appointing a consensual Prime Minister; and (f) appointment of a new Prime
Minister within the framework of the Conakry Agreement. Participants expressed
divergent views on his proposals.
27. In his New Year message on 31 December, President Vaz, inter alia, thanked the
international partners of Guinea-Bissau, with special reference to ECOWAS for its
efforts to resolve the crisis in the country. The President acknowledged that the
political actors had a shared responsibility for the continuation of the political and
institutional crisis. He added that the crisis could also be an opportunity to learn from
the mistakes of the past and for the people of Guinea-Bissau to find new ways of
fostering national reconciliation. The President also alluded to his road map as an
important instrument for the way forward in implementing t he Conakry Agreement.
He made no reference to the holding of legislative elections, which are expected to
take place this year, in accordance with constitutional requirements, and for which
technical preparations are ongoing.
28. On 12 January, Prime Minister Sissoco submitted his resignation letter to
President Vaz. The President issued a decree accepting the resignation on 16 January.
On the same day, a new ECOWAS high-level delegation, led by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo and the Minister of State and Secretary-General of the
Presidency of Guinea, arrived in Bissau to follow up on the 30 -day deadline imposed
at the ECOWAS summit in Abuja for the parties to overcome the political impasse.
In a statement issued on 19 January, the high-level delegation noted that no significant
progress had been achieved in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement. It
18-01123

5/17

S/2018/110

further indicated that adequate processes would be launched for the establishment of
sanctions against any person impeding the implementation of the Agreement.
29. On 27 January, the ECOWAS Authority discussed Guinea-Bissau at an
extraordinary session held in the margins of the thirtieth ordinary session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union in Addis Ababa,
and issued a communiqué calling for the appointment of a Prime Minister of
consensus by 31 January, failing which individual and collective sanctions would be
applied to individuals and organizations obstructing the process. The Authority also
extended the mandate of ECOMIB to 31 March. On 30 January, President Vaz issued
a decree nominating Artur Da Silva as Prime Minister. Mr. Da Silva, a member of the
Central Committee of PAIGC, was sworn into office as Prime Minister on 31 January.
In a statement issued that day, PAIGC rejected his appointment. On the same day, the
police prevented PAIGC from opening its party congress at its headquarters. Instead,
PAIGC opened its congress at a local hotel late in the evening. On 1 February, the
police allowed PAIGC access to the building again, which enabled the party to resume
its congress at that location.
30. As decided during the extraordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority on
27 January, an ECOWAS delegation, comprising the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Togo, the Minister of State and Secretary-General of the Presidency of Guinea, and
the President of the ECOWAS Commission, arrived in Bissau on 31 January. On
1 February the delegation issued a communiqué declaring, inter alia, that the
appointment of a Prime Minister of consensus, as prescribed in the Conakry
Agreement, had not been respected and stating that collective and individual sanctions
would be applied from that day.
31. On 4 February, the ECOWAS Authority, pursuant to its decisions of 27 January,
imposed targeted sanctions on 19 individuals deemed to be obstructing the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, with a provision to revise the list
depending on the evolution of the political situation. The sanctions include the
suspension of the 19 individuals from ECOWAS activities as well as a travel ban and
assets freeze for the individuals and their families. The Authority further requested
the African Union, CPLP, the European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the United Nations to support ECOWAS in the enforcement of the
sanctions. 1

B.

Security situation
32. Overall, the security situation is fluid. The political crisis is generating
mounting frustration among the population, who are translating their frustration into
frequent street protests. There is concern that the uncertain political environment
could create a favourable climate for instability and opportunistic criminality.
33. On 16 December, four military personnel were arrested for alleged involvement
in a plot to carry out an attack on the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces,
General Biaguê Na N’Tam. On 23 and 26 December, two additional military
personnel were arrested in connection with the plot. All are currently in pretrial
detention.

__________________
1

6/17

ECOWAS decision A/DEC.2.01/2018.
18-01123

S/2018/110

C.

Human rights situation
34. The human rights situation remained largely unchanged, but deteriorated
significantly when the Government began restricting political participation and
peaceful assembly in January. On 30 January, the group of five international partners
based in Guinea-Bissau issued a statement underscoring the need for national
authorities to ensure full respect for the rule of law and human rights, including the
rights to freedom of assembly and political participation, and to refrain from any
actions or public rhetoric that could further aggravate tensions in the country.
35. The ability of the State to ensure respect, protection and fulfilment of human
rights remains limited. Consequently, no progress was made in investigating or
addressing past gross human rights violations. Moreover, the country has not taken
steps to establish an independent national human rights institution, in accordance with
the Paris Principles, as the National Human Rights Commission continues to work
under State supervision and guidance.
36. National stakeholders continued to express concern over challenges to freedom
of the press, including censorship and bias in the application of the law on the freedom
of assembly and demonstrations. In an open letter dated 15 November, the Collective
of Democratic Political Parties United Against the Dictatorship pointed out that legal
limitations that prevented it from demonstrating were not invoked to limit
pro-Government demonstrations earlier in the year, on 9 March and on 6 and
7 November.
37. On 10 August, the National Human Rights Commission held its first quarterly
ordinary meeting, after the appointment of a new chair in April. Participants discussed
the domestic human rights situation, emphasizing the importance of the protection of
vulnerable children and the challenges to freedom of expression.
38. On 30 August, workers of State-owned media signed a petition “to end
censorship”, and on 14 September the national television station workers’ union
declared a three-day strike supported by the national journalists’ association. On
28 November, a group of journalists gathered at the office of the Prosecutor General
in solidarity with a colleague from a private radio station who had been arrested for
defamation after publishing allegations of nepotism within the Ministry of Health on
his Facebook page. No charges were filed.
39. As part of its collaboration with the National Human Rights Commission,
UNIOGBIS provided technical, logistical and financial support for field assessments
by national authorities in the Bafatá, Biombo and Quinara regions in September,
October and November. The authorities reported marginal progress in health care
services, and a perceived decline in forced and early marriage, as well as in female
genital mutilation, in Bafatá. It was noted that limited access to justice remained a
major challenge in all the regions visited, in part because of the lack of transportation
and financial means. It was also observed that in Biombo, teenage pregnancy, forced
marriage and rape were reportedly recurrent, and that gaps in child registration and
the issuance of identification cards for women/mothers posed challenges of
recognition before the law and limited the right of c hildren to education. Recurrent
domestic violence and sexual and gender-based violence were also reported in
Quinara, and specialized shelters for female victims of violence were unavailable in
the region, which is one of the least developed in Guinea -Bissau.
40. On 1 November, the Government adopted a draft law to regulate family shelters
to enhance child protection from trafficking and forced marriage. There are only nine
operational shelters for children and youth in the country (5 in Bissau, 2 in Gabú, 1 in
Bafatá and 1 in Canchungo), which are managed by civil society organizations.

18-01123

7/17

S/2018/110

UNIOGBIS also provided technical support to civil society organizations to
contribute to efforts on a law against forced marriage and forced begging.
41. Following a strike action in the education sector from 6 to 26 November,
stakeholders expressed persistent concerns over the quality of, and overall access to,
the educational system.

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
42. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) released its fourth national consultative
report for Guinea-Bissau on 2 October. In the report, IMF indicated that the prospects
for continued macroeconomic stability were generally positive, with annual growth
between 5 and 6 per cent. It also pointed to positive fiscal discipline, increased
revenue collection and greater transparency in public expenditure management.
43. The cashew harvest, the backbone of the economy, saw record prices in 2017,
which compensated for a slightly lower annual productio n than the previous year.
Nonetheless, Guinea-Bissau remains one of the 10 poorest countries in the world,
with an annual per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of $641.6, one of the lowest
in the region.
44. Labour unrest was recurrent during the reporting period and affected service
delivery, particularly in the education and health sectors. On 11 August, the
Government reached an agreement with the National Union of Workers, following
their 8 to 11 August general strike to demand higher wages and a com mitment to
implement an incremental salary adjustment.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
A.

Fostering inclusive political dialogue and supporting national
reconciliation processes
45. UNIOGBIS continued to support initiatives aimed at overcoming the current
stalemate, preventing tensions from escalating and creating opportunities for dialogue
among national political actors. My Special Representative consulted with a range of
political and social stakeholders, including political parties, civil society
representatives and traditional, religious and community leaders, reiterating the
importance of constructive dialogue as a solution to the crisis. He continued to
coordinate the group of five and other international partners based in Guinea-Bissau.
Recent consultations of the group of five have focused on modalities for assisting
stakeholders in addressing existing and emerging challenges posed by rising political
and social tensions in the country. International partners continued to appeal to
political stakeholders to exercise restraint and moderation and to express views and
differences peacefully.
46. On 12 September, my Special Representative met with the Women’s Facilitation
Group, which has been active in recent months in complementary advocacy and
mediation among political actors. The Group urged the group of five to exert pressure
on stakeholders, particularly the President, to engage in dialogue on implementation
of the Conakry Agreement. The Group stated its intention to continue its national
dialogue facilitation, and my Special Representative undertook to sustain support for
their efforts through his good offices and the group of five forum.

8/17

18-01123

S/2018/110

47. On 21 September, with the support of UNIOGBIS, the organizing commission
for the national conference towards the consolidation of peace and development in
Guinea-Bissau held a march in Bissau to celebrate the International Day of Peace.
The march, which brought together more than 150 participants from civil society and
the defence and security forces, served to sensitize and mobilize the population to the
need to advance national reconciliation. The march was followed by an interactive
debate broadcast on two national radio stations.
48. Between 14 September and 19 October, the National Institute for Studies and
Research, with the support of UNIOGBIS, held five conferences on institutional
reform, thus concluding a cycle of seven conferences conducted since June. The
conferences focused on: transparency challenges in the management of the public
treasury and revenues; teaching history as a tool for peacebuilding; the role of civil
society organizations in the cyclical political crises; political interference in the
judicial system; and the country’s readiness for the legislative elections.
49. On 27 October, UNIOGBIS and Lusophone University in Bissau jointly
organized a youth conference on citizens’ contributions to democratic processes. The
event drew 109 participants (including 41 women) from Bissau and the regions.
Participants welcomed the partnership between civil society organizations and
UNIOGBIS and underscored the significance of citizens’ collective engagement in
democratic governance.
50. UNIOGBIS, with the assistance of an expert deployed by the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs, held a working session on 14 and
15 November aimed at sustaining the work of the Women’s Facilitation Group. The
expert assisted the 28 participants, including two men from th e Women’s Forum for
Peace, in designing the next phase of its facilitation efforts and identifying potential
additional areas of UNIOGBIS support to the Group, including in capacity -building
and training.

B.

Review of the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau
51. As noted in my report of 10 August (S/2017/695), national stakeholders have
made no progress in implementing the Conakry Agreement as it relates to the review
of the Constitution, owing mainly to the failure to agree on a consensual Prime
Minister and the stalemate in the National Assembly. The lack of consensus and
progress towards resolving the crisis continues to affect the functioning of State
institutions. Consequently, the ad hoc commission on constitutional reform of the
National Assembly did not convene during the reporting period.

C.

National security sector reform and rule of law strategies
52. UNIOGBIS continued to provide strategic and technical assistance to State
institutions for more effective and efficient law enforcement, criminal justice and
penitentiary systems. Notwithstanding some improvement in coordination within the
criminal justice system, including harmonization between regular and military justice
practice, challenges persisted in a number of areas. These included the limited
capacities of judicial personnel, weak institutional structures and limited access to
justice, particularly in the regions.
53. The political impasse in the country continues to hinder progress in key ar eas
of the security sector, notably the rejuvenation of the armed forces and effective
civilian oversight. Overall, the lack of engagement between the executive and the
legislative branches is affecting the national security apparatus and the development

18-01123

9/17

S/2018/110

of policy guidelines for civilian oversight and accountability mechanisms for the
military and law enforcement agencies. With the continuing paralysis of the National
Assembly, no new laws or amendments to existing ones could be adopted, and the
Government’s programme and budget could not be approved. In addition, the limited
availability of human and material resources to implement approved legal frameworks
and policies, which underpin the existence and mandates of the military and law
enforcement agencies, remained a key challenge.
54. The establishment of a police academy to professionalize law enforcement and
further strengthen its capacity remains a priority for UNIOGBIS. The academy would
train and provide a curriculum and certification process for law enforcement
personnel, in line with the organic law of the country. The training would be
predicated on a transparent, nationally owned recruitment and selection system.
55. In order to maintain its field presence beyond Bissau, UNIOGBIS, on
1 December, reopened its Bubaque regional office, which had been closed during the
rainy season. Ongoing engagement through other United Nations regional offices
(Bafatá, São Domingos and Buba) with local authorities and communities has been
useful in strengthening local capacity to prevent conflict and promote stability.
UNIOGBIS and its national partners have, through community engagement, reassured
local stakeholders about addressing security challenges and concerns.
56. In furtherance of the rule of law and security sector reform efforts, on 30 August,
UNIOGBIS, with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (U NODC) and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), signed a three-year joint programme on police, justice and corrections
to provide strategic and technical support to national law enforcement, justice and
corrections counterparts. The ambitious programme, with estimated funding of
$25 million, will be executed over the coming three years. In tandem, the African
Development Bank, UNDP and the Ministry of Finance, signed a $1.8 million
agreement on 16 November to strengthen the capacities of justice institutions over
the next two years.
57. UNIOGBIS also supported the Ministry of Defence, through the National
Defence Institute, in completing and submitting to the Minister the draft national
defence policy and national defence strategy for review and approval on 9 October.

D.

Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of
international assistance
58. During the reporting period, my Special Representative remained fully engaged
with international partners based in Bissau to assess developments on the ground. He
held regular meetings with the group of five international partners based in Guinea Bissau and other representatives of the diplomatic community in Guinea -Bissau.
59. On 14 September, my Special Representative met with members of the group of
five to evaluate the political challenges and seek their views on the way forward prior
to the general debate of the General Assembly. The group reaffirmed the central
importance of the Conakry Agreement and of reminding all stakeholders in Guinea Bissau about their obligations to meet their commitments. On 16 August, he met with
the President of Guinea in Conakry to take stock of the political situation in Guinea Bissau.
60. From 18 to 22 September, my Special Representative held consultations on
Guinea-Bissau in the margins of the seventy-second session of the General Assembly

10/17

18-01123

S/2018/110

with the Prime Minister of Cabo Verde, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Portugal
and the Congo, the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, the President
of the ECOWAS Commission, the Executive Secretary of CPLP and representatives
of Angola, Portugal and the European Union. The interlocutors expressed their shared
concerns over the deteriorating situation in Guinea-Bissau and reiterated the central
importance of the Conakry Agreement. Moreover, they restated their willingness to
continue to work with the United Nations and political actors of Guinea-Bissau
towards a resolution of the crisis.
61. On 16 November, at the request of the Collective of Democratic Political Parties
United Against the Dictatorship, my Special Representative, together with members
of the group of five, met with the Interior Minister to urge him to meet with the
Collective’s leaders and jointly agree on the necessary measures to facilitate a
peaceful demonstration planned for 17 November.
62. On 29 November, my Special Representative convened a me eting of
international partners accredited to Guinea-Bissau ahead of the visit of the ECOWAS
ministerial mission of 1 to 3 December. A joint UNDP/European Union electoral
support mission briefed the meeting on the technical preparations, including voter
registration, for the legislative elections in 2018.

E.

Strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the capacity
of State organs
63. From 24 to 26 October, UNIOGBIS conducted missions to Buba (Quinara
region) and Bolama (Bolama region) to meet the newly appointed governors of both
regions and to consult with local authorities, including security and defence forces,
and with civil society organizations, on their needs and the challenges related to
decentralization, human rights and development. From 28 October to 1 November,
UNIOGBIS undertook a similar mission to Bafatá and Gabú, the capitals of the Bafatá
and Gabú regions, respectively.
64. UNIOGBIS also supported the National Judicial Training Centre in the delivery
of a five-week capacity-development programme for the Supreme Court of Justice
and the office of the Prosecutor General, focused on managing staff grievances that
had resulted in a court clerks strike earlier in 2017. The training included
presentations on criminal law provisions, judicial fees and other related fields. Thirty
court clerks from Bissau and the regions benefited from the training, which took place
from 7 August to 1 September and from 30 October to 3 November, in Bissau.
65. On 16 November, UNIOGBIS provided technical support to, and participated
in, a workshop organized to strengthen coordination between the office of the
Prosecutor General and law enforcement agencies. The workshop sought to address
mechanisms to strengthen collaboration and coordination among the Stat e criminal
justice actors. Twenty-two participants from the office of the Prosecutor General, the
Judiciary Police and the Security and Information Services benefited from the
technical support.
66. Government budgetary constraints continued to hinder the speedy
implementation of programmes to strengthen democratic institutions. Owing to a lack
of sufficient resources for the Justice Ministry, the high-level National Justice Forum
scheduled for 21 to 23 November was not held. The Forum seeks to enhance the
capacity of the justice system to address money-laundering and terrorism,
cybercrimes, economic and financial crimes, military crimes and enforcement. In
September, UNIOGBIS provided both financial and technical support to facilitate six
consultative preparatory forums for three of the Justice Ministry’s working groups,
on criminal justice, military justice and the penitentiary system.

18-01123

11/17

S/2018/110

F.

Law enforcement, criminal justice and penitentiary systems
67. UNIOGBIS continued to provide secretariat support to the Superior Council for
Police and Internal Security Coordination to enhance inter-agency law enforcement
coordination on methods to curb drug trafficking, sexual exploitation and human
trafficking. As part of this ongoing effort, UNIOGBIS facilitated meetings of the
Council, led by the head of the Public Order Police, on 23 August, 25 October and
29 November. The Director of Prison Services and the President of the Superior
Military Tribunal participated for the first time to establish a coordination me chanism
between their institutions for the promotion and protection of, and respect for, human
rights, with a focus on arbitrary and protracted pre-trial detentions in prisons and
police custody.
68. On 31 October and 1 November, UNIOGBIS facilitated a two -day validation
workshop for the strategic development plans of the police and internal security
institutions. A representative from the office of the Prime Minister chaired the
workshop, which was attended by 40 senior government officials, including the heads
of the Public Order Police, the National Guard, the Judiciary Police, the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the Security and Information
Services.
69. On 23 November, UNIOGBIS met with the head of the Public Order Police
Cooperation Office to plan implementation of the strategic development plan relating
to human resources management and training.

G.

Promotion and protection of human rights
70. UNIOGBIS continued to assist national authorities in the promotion and
protection of human rights, including through strategic advice and technical and
financial support. From 16 to 18 August, UNIOGBIS supported the National Human
Rights Commission in assessing prisons and detention centres in Bissau and in the
Oio, Tombali, Quinara, Bafatá and Gabú regions. Arbitrary arrests and prolonged
detention were common in these regions, except in the model police station in Bissau,
owing to the fact that case files were poorly kept or non-existent.
71. UNIOGBIS also provided technical and financial support to the National
Human Rights Commission for the finalization of a nationwide assessment of the
human rights situation. The assessment, launched in 2016 in the regions of Gabú, Oio,
Tombali and Bolama/Bijagós, included visits in 2017 to the Bafatá, Biombo and
Quinara regions.
72. On 16 and 17 November, with UNIOGBIS support, the National Human Rights
Commission organized a strategic retreat on monitoring implementation of the
recommendations of the universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council and
other human rights mechanisms. The Commission adopted its proposed activities for
2018, which include elaborating a national human rights action plan and submitting
several overdue reports to human rights mechanisms.
73. From 23 October to 8 November, UNIOGBIS held workshops in Bafatá,
Quinara and Cacheu for approximately 180 participants, including 87 women and 24
persons with disabilities, aimed at strengthening the human rights capacity of
administrators of justice and civil society organizations, with emphasis on human
rights perspectives on land and electoral laws and the normative framework on
domestic violence and forced marriage. In addition, UNIOGBIS, from 23 November
to 10 December, supported the organization by national authorities and other

12/17

18-01123

S/2018/110

stakeholders of 16 days of activism on violence against women and the celebration of
Human Rights Day.
74. From 28 November to 14 December, UNIOGBIS sponsored the training of 105
human rights defenders, including 66 women, in the southern, eastern and northern
regions of Guinea-Bissau. On 9 December, on the occasion of International Human
Rights Defenders Day, UNIOGBIS supported the formal establishment of the
Network of National Human Rights Defenders.
75. Other human rights capacity-building initiatives undertaken by UNIOGBIS
included targeted training on the right of women to political participation, in
collaboration with the Network of Women Parliamentarians, in October and
November in Bafatá, Buba and Canchungo. This included human right s awarenessraising workshops for 100 members of political parties on 4 October; 20 police
officers of the Bissau model police station on 27 November; and 50 crowd control
police officers in Bissau on 12 December. General human rights sensitization
workshops were also undertaken in Buba from 31 October to 2 November, Bafatá
from 23 to 25 October, and São Domingos from 7 to 9 November, with the
participation of a total of 140 members of civil society.

H.

Combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
76. During the period under review, the capacity of the Transnational Crime Unit
appeared undermined, owing, among other things, to frequent personnel changes in
the senior ranks of the Justice Ministry, which has oversight responsibility for the
Unit and provides most its personnel. This challenge was further compounded by
budgetary constraints that have left the office of UNODC in Guinea -Bissau
understaffed.
77. UNIOGBIS, nonetheless, continued to provide technical advice to personnel of
the Transnational Crime Unit in the implementation of the West Africa Coast
Initiative. A joint assessment was conducted by partners of the Initiative in April and
May, and the findings were presented to the High-level Policy Committee of the
Initiative during its meeting of 5 December in Grand Bassam, Côte d’Ivoire, for
endorsement.
78. UNIOGBIS also provided technical guidance to other law enforcement agencies
responsible for the conduct of intelligence-based drug trafficking investigations,
including through enhanced regional and international cooperation activities. In
furtherance of efforts in support of national counterparts in the fight against
transnational organized crime, UNIOGBIS, in collaboration with the national
INTERPOL bureau, conducted a joint equipment-based training for 27 law
enforcement officers at three major border control entry points in São Domingos,
from 4 to 9 December; Pirada, from 11 to 15 December; and Bubaque from 18 to
22 December.
79. On 14 September, UNIOGBIS conducted technical assessment visits to six
border control posts, with a special focus on the Djegue border with Senegal in the
São Domingos sector. However, there was no significant observation of the incidence
of drug and human trafficking along the routes connecting Guinea -Bissau to Senegal
and Guinea.

18-01123

13/17

S/2018/110

I.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding
80. The integration of gender-sensitive perspectives into the work of UNIOGBIS
and the United Nations country team continued to be accorded the highest priority.
Key gender-related activities focused on support for women’s participation as active
peacemakers in resolving the political crisis. Technical and operational support
activities were provided to encourage women’s mediation efforts and to enhance their
effectiveness as leaders. During the reporting period, my Special Representative
maintained strategic engagement with the Women’s Facilitation Group as part of
greater efforts to reach out to national stakeholders and the international community.
As part of a new package of projects, the Group will continue its work with support
from the Peacebuilding Fund.
81. On 21 August, the Women’s Facilitation Group briefed the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, with the facilitation of my Special
Representative, who also continued to ensure that the Group ’s mediation efforts were
consistent with the advocacy of international partners. The Group also had a similar
opportunity to brief the ECOWAS ministerial mission, which visited Bissau from 1
to 3 December.
82. On 1 November, the Council of Ministers adopted a decree to accelerate
implementation of the Government’s national policy on gender equality and equity.
The decree focuses on an improved legal framework to promote gender equality and
women’s rights and the role of women in decision-making and to combat violence
against, and trafficking of, women and girls. The United Nations intends to use the
framework as a basis for initiating new projects aimed at reducing poverty through
the empowerment of women.
83. On 24 November, the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Solidarity
organized a reflection workshop on gender-based violence in Bissau. The UNDPsponsored workshop gathered 70 participants, including 7 men, from civil society and
national institutions to deliberate on strategies to combat gender-based violence and
to strengthen women's participation in decision-making.

J.

Preparation for legislative and presidential elections in 2018
and 2019
84. Despite the prevailing political stalemate, the Government began technical
preparations for the legislative and presidential elections, to be held in 2018 and 2019,
respectively. On 20 and 25 October, the Technical Support Office for the Electoral
Process launched its programme to update the electoral cartography of polling station
sites in the Gabú and Bafatá regions, a necessary precursor to the updating of the
jurisdiction of electoral districts countrywide. Similar exercises were subsequently
undertaken in the other regions of the country until the end of November, when they
were concluded.
85. On 7 November, my Special Representative chaired a meeting of international
partners to discuss the political situation and preparations for the elections.
UNIOGBIS presented the recommendations of the United Nations electoral needs
assessment mission conducted in May, while UNDP briefed on the ongoing technical
support provided to the Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process and the
National Electoral Commission. Several international partners stressed the need to
organize elections within the stipulated constitutional time frame. However, despite
the Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process and the National Electoral
Commission having commenced technical preparations, concerns remain a bout the
feasibility of holding elections ahead of a satisfactory resolution of the political crisis.

14/17

18-01123

S/2018/110

The blockage of the National Assembly poses a specific problem, as the mandate of
four executive members National Electoral Commission expired in June and the
presidency of the Commission remains vacant, and only the National Assembly
(which has not met since January 2016) can appoint new Commission members.
While the interim president of the Commission has submitted a proposed timeline to
President Vaz for the legislative elections, which are scheduled to take place on
20 May 2018, the President has not yet confirmed the date.
86. From 22 to 24 November, with financial support from UNIOGBIS, Commission
organized a training workshop for 100 representatives, including 20 women, from the
media, civil society and political parties. The workshop, which focused on the theme
of “Leadership, the electoral system and management of disputes in the electoral
process”, aimed at strengthening understanding and a culture of dialogue among
stakeholders ahead of the anticipated polls.
87. A joint UNDP/European Union delegation was deployed to Bissau from
25 November to 1 December to assist the electoral authorities in developing an
electoral assistance project document. This was followed by a joint voter registration
expert mission of UNDP and the Electoral Affairs Division of the Department of
Political Affairs, from 9 to 16 December, to provide technical support in preparation
for the voter registration exercise. Several technical challenges remain, especially
regarding the updating of the voters register, which has not been undertaken since
2014. It is estimated that the exercise will cost between $2.5 and $2.8 million. A
support package for the Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process, which
lacks the necessary expertise in some areas, is currently being prepared by
international partners in Bissau. The UNDP/European Union mission emphasized the
importance of holding elections before the four-month rainy season, which usually
begins in June, because of the logistical challenges the heavy rains would present.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
88. On 15 December, the Peacebuilding Support Office approved six projects under
the Intermediate Response Facility of the Peacebuilding Fund for approximately
$7.3 million. The projects will contribute to the sociopolitical empowerment of
women and youth, political dialogue and national reconciliation, and strengthening
of conflict-sensitivity in the media and the justice sectors, and are characterized by a
high-level of integration of programmatic activities among United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes and UNIOGBIS. The projects build on two participatory
workshops held in Bissau from 19 to 21 and 26 to 28 September, which were
co-facilitated by the Peacebuilding Support Office and the Geneva -based
non-governmental organization, Interpeace. Through the workshops, a wide range of
national stakeholders were consulted in an effort to analyse current peacebuilding
challenges and to redefine peacebuilding priorities in Guinea -Bissau.

B.

Public information
89. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS activities were consistently covered in
local and international media. In total, 117 multimedia posts were published on
Facebook and 25 on Twitter, 24 press releases were issued and 18 articles on the
website and four internal newsletters — all in both English and Portuguese — were
published. In addition, two issues of I Kuma, the external newsletter featuring the
work of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau, were published, and more than 3,000

18-01123

15/17

S/2018/110

copies were circulated throughout the country. UNIOGBIS also produced and
broadcast nine hour-long radio programmes with live question-and-answer segments,
in Creole and Portuguese, focusing on the mission’s mandate, the Conakry
Agreement, peace consolidation, human rights, and women’s participation in politics,
among other topics. The programmes were broadcast nationwide through a network
of 27 community radio stations.
90. On 4 and 5 October, UNIOGBIS organized a workshop for political parties on
political communication. The two-day meeting brought together 115 participants,
including key communications officers from 11 different political part ies, for a
training session designed to enhance professionalism in reporting. The workshop also
created a forum in which participants could articulate their party ’s vision for the
country and reach consensus on key political priorities.
91. To mark United Nations Day on 24 October, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
country team organized a photo exhibition on the 17 Sustainable Development Goals
in Bissau and Bafatá. More than 250 students attended the exhibitions, which were
designed to increase awareness of the Sustainable Development Goals and their
relevance for development benchmarking for Guinea-Bissau.

C.

Staff safety and security
92. The overall security situation for United Nations staff in Guinea -Bissau
remained stable. Security incidents that occurred were consistent with normal trends,
and did not affect United Nations operations. Crime, especially street robbery and
burglaries, remained a phenomenon confronting the general population, but rarely
affected United Nations staff.

V. Observations
93. The continuing efforts of ECOWAS to resolve the Guinea-Bissau crisis,
particularly the mediation efforts by Presidents Gnassingbé and Condé are
commendable. The subregion has a responsibility to come together and push for the
full implementation of the Conakry Agreement as a crucial step for the holding of
inclusive elections. In particular, the international community should continue its
advocacy to ensure that legislative elections are held within the constitutionally
mandated time frame and that support is provided to the electoral process.
94. I take note of the decisions on Guinea-Bissau taken during the fifty-second
ordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government in
Abuja and the extraordinary session of the Authority in Addis Ababa on 27 January.
I also take note of the communiqué issued by the ECOWAS ministerial mission
following its visit to Guinea-Bissau on 31 January and 1 February. The mission noted
that the appointment of a consensual Prime Minister, as presc ribed in the Conakry
Agreement, was not respected. In its decisions, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of
State and Government declared its resolve to impose targeted sanctions on those
obstructing the implementation of the Conakry Agreement, which was reaffir med by
the follow-up ECOWAS ministerial mission in its communiqué of 1 February.
I reiterate my call on the Security Council to consider ways to ensure the speedy
resolution of the crisis.
95. The presence of ECOMIB has contributed towards ensuring stabil ity in GuineaBissau, and I salute the sacrifices made by ECOWAS member States who have
committed both troops and funding to ECOMIB. The international community needs
to continue to support and assist ECOMIB.
16/17

18-01123

S/2018/110

96. I encourage the defence and security institutions of Guinea-Bissau, particularly
the armed forces, to maintain their non-interference posture in the political process
while playing their constitutionally mandated role. At the same time, the reform of
defence and security institutions must remain a key priority, as the crisis has hampered
efforts to modernize security institutions. I reiterate my call on international partners
to support Guinea-Bissau in implementing the necessary changes.
97. The promotion of and respect for human rights is fundamental to sustaining
peace and ensuring long-term stability and development in Guinea-Bissau. I deeply
regret that the positive steps taken by national authorities have been undermined by
the actions they have taken to prevent peaceful assembly and political participation,
particularly during the period from 29 to 31 January. I call on national authorities to
respect human rights and fundamental freedoms and refrain from any further acts that
undermine the rule of law. I also I strongly encourage them to redouble their efforts
to build, through education, at all levels and in all institutions, a culture of respect for
human rights and accountability.
98. I welcome the efforts by the Government to promote gender equality and equity
and encourage national authorities to step up efforts to increase and support women ’s
participation in the country’s decision-making processes.
99. The mandate of UNIOGBIS expires on 28 February. The resolution of the long standing political impasse is a precondition for the successful consolidation of peace
in Guinea-Bissau and for holding inclusive elections. Consequently, the United
Nations should remain engaged in peacebuilding efforts in the country and support
ECOWAS efforts to resolve the political crisis. I therefore recommend that the current
mandate of UNIOGBIS be extended for another year, until 28 February 2019. Should
the parties fail to find a consensual solution to resolve the political impasse, I intend
to authorize an assessment of the current mission, and I will present options to the
Security Council on a possible reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
country.
100. I thank the staff of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team, under the
leadership of my Special Representative, Modibo Ibrahim Touré, for their
commitment and hard work, and bilateral, regional and international partners for their
unrelenting support to the building of lasting peace in Guinea -Bissau.

18-01123

17/17
