II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

mal/official inter-sessional intergovernmental work and
the commencement of preparation of the concluding document or documents of the Conference, as well as the mandate and composition of the group of internationally eminent experts;
6. Decides that the United Nations Conference for the
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy shall be held at Geneva from l Oto
28 November 1986;
7. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
specialized agencies and other relevant organizations of
the United Nations system to ensure that their contributions to the input documents for the Conference, including
reports of the regional expert group meetings, should be
concise and comprehensive and specifically related to the
purpose, aims and objectives of the Conference, including
in particular suggestions regarding practical and effective
ways and means for the promotion of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, so as to
achieve meaningful results from the Conference in accordance with the objectives of General Assembly resolution
32/50;
8. Invites all States to co-operate actively in the preparation of the Conference and to make available, as soon as
possible, the information requested in paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 36/78 and in the broad questionnaire circulated by the Secretary-General of the Conference in March 1984;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984

39/91. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples' 10
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, 111
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 38/54 of 7 December 1983, as well as the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Bangkok Declaration and Programme of Action on Namibia, 112 adopted
by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 25 May
1984 at its extraordinary plenary meetings held at Bangkok,

Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repression of millions of Africans, particularly in Namibia, by
the Government of South Africa through its persistent,
l lOSee also sect. I, footnote 5.
111 Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple-

ment No. 23 (A/39/23).
112 Jbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/39124), part. two, chap. III, sect. B.

47

illegal occupation of the international Territory and its
intransigent attitude towards all efforts being made to
bring about an internationally acceptable solution to the
situation obtaining in the Territory,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take all necessary
measures to eliminate forthwith the remaining vestiges of
colonialism, particularly in respect of Namibia where desperate attempts by South Africa to perpetuate its illegal
occupation have brought untold suffering and bloodshed
to the people,
Strongly condemning the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, have continued to collaborate with the Government of South Africa in its domination of the people of
Namibia,
Conscious that the success of the national liberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have provided the international community with a unique opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards the total
elimination of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations in Africa,
Welcoming the accession to independence by Brunei
Darussalam on l January 1984 and its admission to membership in the United Nations on 21 September 1984, 113
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by the
Special Committee with a view to securing the effective
and complete implementation of the Declaration and the
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting also with satisfaction the co-operation and active
participation of the administering Powers concerned in the
relevant work of the Special Committee, as well as the
continued readiness of the Governments concerned to
receive United Nations visiting missions in the Territories
under their administration,
Reiterating its conviction that the total eradication of
racial discrimination, apartheid and violations of the basic
human rights of the peoples of colonial Territories will be
achieved most expeditiously by the faithful and complete
implementation of the Declaration, particularly in
Namibia, and by the speediest possible complete elimination of the presence of the illegal occupying regime therefrom,
Keenly aware of the pressing needs of the newly independent and emerging States for assistance from the
United Nations and its system of organizations in the economic, social and other fields,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV), 2621 (XXV)
and 38/54 and all other resolutions on decolonization and
calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with
those resolutions, to take all necessary steps to enable the
dependent peoples of the Territories concerned to exercise
fully and without further delay their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence;
2. Affirms once again that the continuation of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations - including
racism, apartheid, the exploitation by foreign and other
interests of economic and human resources and the waging
of colonial wars to suppress national liberation movements - is incompatible with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 114
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and poses a serious threat
to international peace and security;
I 13 See resolution 39/1.
114 Resolution 217 A (III).

48

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

3. Reaffirms its determination to take all necessary
steps with a view to the complete and speedy eradication
of colonialism and to the faithful and strict observance by
all States of the relevant provisions of the Charter, the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the guiding principles of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
4. Affirms once again its recognition of the legitimacy
of the struggle of the peoples under colonial and alien
domination to exercise their right to self-determination
and independence by all the necessary means at their disposal;
5. Approves the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 1984, including
the programme of work envisaged for 1985; 115
6. Calls upon all States, in particular the administering
Powers, and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to give effect to the recommendations contained in the report of the Special
Committee for the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the other relevant resolutions of the United
Nations;
7. Condemns the continuing activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the colonial
Territories, particularly Namibia;
8. Strongly condemns all collaboration, particularly in
the nuclear and military fields, with the Government of
South Africa and calls upon the States concerned to cease
forthwith all such collaboration;
9. Requests all States, directly and through their action
in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, to withhold assistance of any kind
from the Government of South Africa until the inalienable
right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and
independence within a united and integrated Namibia,
including Walvis Bay, has been restored, and to refrain
from taking any action which might imply recognition of
the legitimacy of the illegal occupation of Namibia by that
regime;
I 0. Calls upon the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and installations from colonial Territories, to refrain from establishing new ones and not to involve those Territories in any
offensive acts or interference against other States;
11. Urges all States, directly and through their action
in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, to provide all moral and material
assistance to the oppressed people of Namibia and, in
respect of the other Territories, requests the administering
Powers, in consultation with the Governments of the Territories under their administration, to take steps to enlist
and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a
bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the strengthening of
the economies of those Territories;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) in all
Territories that have not yet attained independence and, in
particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals for the elimination
of the remaining manifestations of colonialism and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
115 Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtv-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. I, sect. S

(b) To make concrete suggestions which could assist
the Security Council in considering appropriate measures
under the Charter with regard to developments in colonial
Territories that are likely to threaten international peace
and security;
(c) To continue to examine the compliance of Member
States with the Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
Namibia;
(d) To continue to pay particular attention to the small
Territories, including the sending of visiting missions to
them, as appropriate, and to recommend to the General
Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise their right to
self-determination, freedom and independence;
(e) To take all necessary steps to enlist world-wide support among Governments, as well as national and international organizations having a special interest in
decolonization, for the achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration and the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, particularly as concerns
the oppressed people of Namibia;
13. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the discharge of
its mandate and, in particular, to permit the access of visiting missions to the Territories to secure first-hand information and ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their
inhabitants;
14. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide or continue to provide to the newly
independent and emerging States all possible assistance in
the economic, social and other fields;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for
the implementation of the present resolution, as well as of
the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization
adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee.
100th plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/92. Dissemination of information on decolonization
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, 116
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in
particular General Assembly resolution 38/55 of7 December 1983,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration
and mindful of the continuing pressing need to take all
possible steps to acquaint world public opinion with all
aspects of the problems of decolonization with a view to
1 l6 find .. chap. Ill.
