UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3321
30 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 30 November 1993, at 5.15 p.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. DORANI
Mr. MÉRIMÉE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. KHAN
Mr. LOZINSKIY
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-87297 (E)

S/PV.3321
2
The meeting was called to order at 5.25 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
CENTRAL AMERICA:

EFFORTS TOWARDS PEACE

FURTHER REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE UNITED NATIONS
OBSERVER MISSION IN EL SALVADOR (S/26790)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received a letter from the representative of El Salvador in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Castañeda Cornejo
(El Salvador) took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador.

This report is contained in document S/26790.

Members of the Council also have before them document S/26820,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.

S/PV.3321
3
(The President)
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

If I hear no

objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call
on those members of the Council who wish to make statements before
the voting.

S/PV.3321
4
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like at the outset to express my delegation’s appreciation
for the report of the Secretary-General on developments affecting
the activities of the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL).

The report highlights the fact that the

process of implementing the Accords signed by the Government of
El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberacíon
Nacional (FMLN) has continued to make general progress.

It should

be stressed that this fact is due largely to the will of all the
Salvadorian parties and to the effective cooperation of ONUSAL.
However, the report does not conceal the delays and
difficulties that have been experienced in the implementation of
certain aspects of these Accords, the importance of which is
impossible to ignore.

Particularly disturbing are the problems

that have been encountered in the full deployment of the National
Civil Police and the gradual phasing out of the old National
Police.

In this respect, we should recall that public security

policy is one of the critical elements and mainstays of the Peace
Accords.

All Salvadorian institutions should therefore make an

additional effort in this area so as to ensure the provision of
financial and technical resources for the National Civil Police and
the National Public Security Academy.

This matter is certainly

sure of receiving the cooperation of the international community.
Also of importance is the reintegration of former combatants
from both sides into civilian society.

Unfortunately, examples

already exist of former combatants’ failure to adapt to a new
situation.

This is not only a personal tragedy; the accumulation

of such personal tragedies may impede the effectiveness of the
progress that has been made and undermine the stability of the
country itself.

It is therefore necessary for the transfer of land

S/PV.3321
5
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
programmes and other reintegration programmes to be carried out
fully and completely and for their implementation to be
accelerated.

The international community will, of course, respond

to the extent that a firm will exists on the part of the
Salvadorian political authorities.
In recent weeks, we have become aware of episodes of violence
that recall scenes of a past which we had hoped were far behind us.
The Secretary-General and the ONUSAL Human Rights Division have
shared with us in various reports their concerns at the increase in
political violence and its possible imputation to the resurgence of
illegal armed groups.

There is a need for exhaustive investigation

of these groups, not with the aim of digging up old familiar demons
but with a view to preventing the violence from continuing to
poison the Salvadorian people’s potential for coexistence now and
in the future.
A few months ago, the Commission on the Truth recommended an
investigation of the illegal armed groups.

It also made other

recommendations, the purpose of which was to strengthen the basis
of a fully democratic state of law.

A number of these

recommendations - in particular those relating to the reform of the
administration of justice - have yet to be fully implemented.

In

this and other cases, the Council reiterates its appeal to the
appropriate Salvadorian authorities to do their utmost to comply
with these provisions and recommendations.
For the past 10 days, El Salvador has been in the midst of an
electoral process that will culminate on 20 March in presidential,
legislative and municipal elections, which will mark a significant
milestone in the peace process.

If these elections are to be truly

representative, it is important to provide for the registration of

S/PV.3321
6
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
all Salvadorians possessing the right to vote who have requested
the appropriate electoral documentation.

The report of the

Secretary-General describes the progress made in this area, but it
also warns of administrative obstacles which have impeded the
provision of the appropriate documentation to some electors.

All

the Salvadorian institutions involved in this process should bear
in mind that, although the problems may be administrative in
nature, the consequences of their lack of resolution will be
political.

In this connection, we welcome the assistance which the

Electoral Division of ONUSAL is providing to the Supreme Electoral
Tribunal to help it resolve these problems.
The draft resolution before us extends the mandate of ONUSAL
to 31 May 1994.

The following day, 1 June, the elected President

of El Salvador will take office.

This should mark the end of the

transition process in El Salvador and should coincide with the full
implementation of the Peace Accords signed by FMLN and the
Government.

However, the Secretary-General warns us, quite

realistically, of the probability that important aspects of those
Accords may not yet be implemented by that time.

Thus, the

Salvadorian exercise will not be able to be considered complete.
Here, we take note of the view expressed by the Secretary-General
that a reduced ONUSAL presence would probably prove to be necessary
beyond 31 May so as to allow it to fulfil the implementation of its
mandate.

The Council will be considering the views and

recommendations that the Secretary-General will provide on this
matter in a report requested for 1 May 1994.
Spain wishes to express its firm hope that, despite all the
problems that we have described, the political process in
El Salvador may come to fruition.

Seen as a whole, the Salvadorian

S/PV.3321
7
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
transition process is exemplary.

Much remains to be done.

However, the commitment of the presidential candidates to the Peace
Accords gives us secure grounds for hope that the Accords will be
resolutely championed by whomever is elected President, with the
full cooperation of all the political forces in the country.

The

Spanish Government reaffirms its readiness, individually and
together with other members of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General, to continue to support the efforts underway to
ensure the full implementation of the Accords and the consolidation
of peace in El Salvador.
Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
The draft resolution before the Security Council renews the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL)
until 31 May 1994, thus reaffirming the importance of the Peace
Accords and of international assistance in verifying them and
ensuring their full implementation.
Venezuela welcomes the progress made in this process, the
complexity and sensitive nature of which is familiar to us all.

As

a member country of the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General,
Venezuela has worked objectively and constructively to contribute
to the peace process.

I wish to place on record the appreciation

of the Government of Venezuela for the Secretary-General’s
dedication, personally and through the work of senior Secretariat
officials, and that of his Special Representative,
Mr. Augusto Ramirez-Ocampo, and all the personnel of ONUSAL in
striving to find solutions to the various problems associated with
the implementation of the Accords.
The Salvadorian nation is today in the midst of an electoral
process that will culminate in March 1994.

If these elections are

S/PV.3321
8
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
to have their full significance for peace and national
reconciliation, the full implementation of the Peace Accords is of
critical importance.

The international community should do

everything possible to assist in achieving these goals.

It should

also publicly confirm its commitment to continuing to support
El Salvador as it has done to date, if necessary beyond the end of
the electoral process, so as to give full meaning to the aim of
firm and lasting peace which has been its target from the outset.

S/PV.3321
9
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
The draft resolution before the Council identifies, on the
basis of the Secretary-General’s report, the most delicate pending
problems.

It would be ingenuous to believe that, in the daily

renewal of the country’s institutional and political life resulting
from the implementation of the Accords, there would be no
resistance, uncertainty, practical difficulties or shortcomings.
The important point, in our view, is that throughout the process
both sides have maintained the will to make peace prevail and to
deal in a constructive spirit with the problems and delays that
have arisen, striving to identify their specific causes and find
agreed solutions.

We also understand that the concerns of both

parties are magnified and take on unforeseen connotations in an
electoral context.
For all those reasons, we appeal to the parties to continue to
serve as an example for the United Nations in their efforts to
solve the complex problems of peace and national reconciliation.
We also express our admiration for the pride and dignity with which
they have faced all their difficulties.

This inspires us to say

that El Salvador has before it a historic opportunity for renewal
and that it should not allow the actions of any extremist element
to thwart this opportunity.

The political violence and resistance

to change that have re-emerged still have their partisans in
certain sectors.

The elections and the full implementation of the

Peace Accords, to which the presidential candidates have made a
commitment, will marginalize those sectors even more until they
understand that only institutional renewal and the reforms
advocated in the Peace Accords will make it possible to channel the
aspirations of all Salvadorians.

This will be a primary

responsibility of the winners of the elections held in March of
next year.

S/PV.3321
10
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
It would be extremely disquieting if the United Nations were
to detach itself from this process.

Venezuela considers that the

United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) can and
should continue to cooperate in the process of peace and national
reconciliation in El Salvador, even beyond the mandate we shall
renew today.

The review of the timetable for implementing the most

important aspects of the Accords will enable us to gauge the
requirements of this additional undertaking, and we shall look
forward to hearing the recommendations to be formulated by the
Secretary-General on this matter.
The PRESIDENT:

I now put the draft resolution in document

S/26820 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution
888 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

This resolution

reflects the reality that enormous progress has been made in
implementing the Salvadorian Peace Accords.

However, it also makes

clear to the parties the critical importance of moving ahead now on
those provisions not yet fully implemented.
We share the concerns that many here have expressed about the
growing violence in El Salvador.

Unchecked, the recent killings

S/PV.3321
11
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
could undermine a process on which the Salvadorian people have
based their future.

Several weeks ago Assistant Secretary Watson

travelled to El Salvador to deliver a strong message against this
violence.

We have also vigorously supported the need for a

thorough investigation of suspected political killings.
The upcoming elections in El Salvador will in many respects be
the culmination of the peace process.

With so much at stake, it is

imperative that every effort be made to ensure a climate for free
and fair elections untainted by violence.

We are pleased that

substantial progress has been made in registering voters.

But, as

this resolution stresses, the process must keep moving forward in
order to guarantee maximum transparency and participation on one of
the most important days in modern Salvadorian history.
In that context, I would mention that President Clinton met
today at the White House with President Cristiani and other Central
American leaders.

I think it is important to acknowledge here the

key role that President Cristiani’s statesmanship has played in
consolidating the peace in El Salvador.
We are confident that, with the continued support of the
United Nations, the Four Friends and the international donor
community, the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo
Martí para la Liberación Nacional (FMLN) will meet their
commitments.

We are confident that they will act with the

responsibility, leadership and foresight required to secure their
country’s future.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

France

voted in favour of this resolution extending the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) until
31 May 1994.

It welcomes the progress made so far in implementing

S/PV.3321
12
(Mr. Merimee, France)
the Chapultepec Accords.

However, my country regrets that, at the

very time when the electoral campaign is beginning, violence is
resurging in the country and obstacles are being placed in the way
of the implementation of the main provisions of the agreement.
France calls on both parties to implement without delay the
commitments they entered into and to agree on a timetable for
implementing those provisions that have not yet been totally
implemented, whether they relate to the establishment of the
National Civil Police, the transfer of lands, the reintegration of
ex-combatants or the recommendations of the Commission on the
Truth.
My country welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts to
establish an impartial commission to investigate illegal armed
groups.

Only the complete elimination of such groups and the full

reinsertion of the Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación
Nacional (FMLN) into El Salvador’s political life will make it
possible to create conditions of true democracy in the country.
As to the future, though it is too early to say what the role
of the United Nations should be in El Salvador after the elections
and the installation of the new Government, we feel that the end of
the ONUSAL operation should not mean the end of the United Nations
presence in the country.

We believe that it would be especially

useful to continue to provide assistance in the area of human
rights so as to ensure the necessary transition, along the lines of
what was done in Cambodia.
entrusted with that mission.

The Centre for Human Rights should be
The establishment of an integrated

United Nations Office is also a solution that we think bears
consideration.

S/PV.3321
13
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil) (interpretation from Spanish):
The peace process in El Salvador is now at a critical, politically
defining moment.

With the start of the electoral campaign a few

days ago, the Salvadorian people is preparing for what is to be the
historical culmination of this entire process:

the successful

holding of elections in March 1994, in fulfilment of the Peace
Accords.

The consolidation of peace through the free and

democratic choice of the people of El Salvador will lay the
foundation of a country at peace with itself and dedicated to
building, through the efforts and talents of its hard-working
people, a future of development and prosperity.
At such an important moment in the consolidation of peace in
El Salvador, the Government of Brazil considers it essential for
the United Nations to reaffirm its support for the peace process in
that Latin American country and its pledge to contribute to the
success of the process.

We express our gratitude to the Secretary-

General, to his Special Representative, Mr. Augusto Ramírez-Ocampo,
and to the personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL) for their tireless efforts for peace and
national reconciliation in El Salvador.

S/PV.3321
14
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
Renewal of the verification activities and good offices of
ONUSAL for a period of six months is indispensable if the peace
process is to continue and come to a successful conclusion.

We

therefore welcome the fact that the resolution we have today
considered and adopted in the Council extends the mandate of the
Mission until 31 May 1994.

At the same time, we take note of the

comments made by the Secretary-General in his report regarding the
prospects for the future of the Mission beyond that date.
The latest reports on the situation in El Salvador present
information that cannot fail to cause grave concern.

We find

particularly disquieting the observation that important aspects of
the Peace Accords have not yet been fully implemented.

We are

especially concerned at the recent episodes of violence - possibly
politically motivated - which are reminiscent of ideas and
practices of the past and completely incompatible with the new
El Salvador which is to result from the Peace Accords and the
choice of its people in favour of democracy and the rule of law.
As noted by the Security Council in the presidential statement
issued on 5 November last, such acts of violence are unacceptable
and should cease immediately.

The efforts already undertaken to

ensure that those responsible for the recent murders are brought to
trial are positive.

We hope that those efforts will be pursued

further and will soon yield tangible results.
We likewise hope that all parties will continue their efforts
to ensure the full and timely implementation of all of the
provisions of the Peace Accords, including those relating to the
National Police, the recovery of weapons held by private
individuals, the implementation of the recommendations of the
Commission on the Truth, the transfer of land, and other social
reintegration programmes.

S/PV.3321
15
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
In El Salvador it is vital at this stage that the future
should carry more weight than the past.
unequivocal historic opportunity.

We are faced with an

The holding of free and

democratic elections with full participation by all sectors of
Salvadorian society will be the key that will make it possible to
close the door once and for all on a period of anguish and
disturbance and at the same time to open a new door onto a future
of hope and fraternal reconciliation.
The Government of Brazil believes that the peace process in El
Salvador is an example of the meaningful contribution the United
Nations can make to a people’s efforts to solve problems that could
affect the security of a region or subregion.

Brazil is resolved

to contribute to the success of this process and will continue to
work to this end in the Security Council and in other bodies of our
Organization.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

The signing of the Chapultepec

Agreement by the Government of El Salvador and the FMLN in January
of last year formally ended the armed conflict and marked a
turning-point for both the country and the region.
Japan warmly applauded the good-faith efforts made by both
sides in the negotiating process and considered that this progress
had demonstrated that peace-keeping and peacemaking may be
effectively combined.
As the Secretary-General’s report stated, despite a number of
obstacles, remarkable progress has been made in implementing the
Accords.

We are seriously concerned, however, that recent

developments could threaten previous achievements, especially as
the electoral campaign gets under way.

I hope that an independent

and thorough investigation of illegal armed groups will be
undertaken as soon as possible.

S/PV.3321
16
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
Japan considers that, as stated in the earlier Security
Council resolution 832 (1993) on ONUSAL, the forthcoming general
election should constitute the logical culmination of the entire
peace process in El Salvador.

Japan hopes that ONUSAL, which is

playing a key role in that process, will ensure the credibility of
the elections.

Japan thus supported the adoption of this

resolution, which demonstrates the international community’s
steadfast support for the El Salvadorian people.

Indeed, their

efforts to restore peace to their homeland deserve our admiration
and strengthened support.
Mr. LOZINSKIY (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian Federation welcomes the fact that the peace

process in El Salvador has moved ahead and that significant
progress has been made in achieving many of the goals of the Peace
Accords.
Credit here goes primarily to the parties themselves, the
Government of El Salvador and the FMLN, both of which made serious
efforts to achieve national reconciliation.

Undoubtedly, an

important role was also played by the United Nations.

We note with

appreciation and fully support the great contribution made by those
in charge of the United Nations Secretariat in promoting full and
timely implementation of the Peace Accords in El Salvador.
The settlement in El Salvador has now entered the delicate
stage of preparations for the elections which are to be the
culmination of the peace process.

In this connection, we share the

profound concern of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
over the human rights situation in El Salvador, particularly with
respect to politically motivated murders, but also as regards
delays in establishing the National Civil Police, as well as delays

S/PV.3321
17
(Mr. Lozinskiy, Russian Federation)
in carrying out the registration of voters and certain
socio-economic aspects of the Peace Accords.
All of this has had a negative impact on the political
atmosphere and on confidence in the peace process.

It is

particularly important now to concentrate efforts on ensuring
proper compliance with the provisions of the Peace Accords,
particularly those concerning the phasing out of the National
Police and the full deployment of the National Civil Police, the
transfer of land and the carrying out of other reintegration
programmes that are of essential importance to the establishment of
a new atmosphere and the laying of a solid foundation of respect
for human rights in El Salvador.
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Commission on the
Truth, an impartial, independent and credible investigation of the
activities of illegal armed groups should be carried out as soon as
possible.

We trust that the parties involved will reach agreement

on such an investigation in the very near future.
We welcome the agreement reached between the Government and
the FMLN on speeding up the implementation of the Peace Accords.
We share the positive assessment by the United Nations SecretaryGeneral of the commitment to peace and stability made by six out of
the seven candidates for the presidency of El Salvador.

In that

commitment, they undertook to support the constructive development
of the peace process and to carry out all the obligations contained
in the Peace Accords.
We truly believe that the time has come in the settlement in
El Salvador for all parties to make the maximum effort to ensure
the successful consolidation of the peace process and to make
irreversible the democratic changes, full respect for human rights,

S/PV.3321
18
(Mr. Lozinskiy, Russian Federation)
and the socio-economic reconstruction of the country, with the
active support of the international community.
Accordingly, the Russian delegation voted in favour of the
Security Council resolution on extending the mandate of ONUSAL for
a regular six-month period until 31 May 1994.
The PRESIDENT:

There are no further names inscribed on

the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.00 p.m.
