S/PV.9176

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9176th meeting

Monday, 31 October 2022, 11.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Chumakov
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66258 (E)
*2266258*

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany,
Romania, Türkiye and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Ms. Rebeca Grynspan, Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity.
A total of 38 countries have purchased some
9 million tons of grain from Ukraine under the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. As has been noted, not all of it
has gone to the neediest countries but all of it has a
humanitarian impact — the reduction of prices and the
calming of market volatility. Ukraine’s grain exports
are not a food aid operation, but they operate as a huge
lever on price, with positive ripple effects throughout
the world. New security allegations are cause for grave
concern to the Secretary-General, and many Member
States are now worried that the deal is in trouble. It
is therefore a privilege for me to brief the Security
Council on this particular matter today.
Over the weekend, the Secretary-General heard
from our Russian colleagues of their intention to
suspend their participation in the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, the reasons for which I am sure they will
share with us today. It would indeed be a grave abuse
2/20

31/10/2022

of the Black Sea Grain Initiative if it were used in any
way for military operational advantage. The United
Nations has the solemn privilege of assisting the parties
in implementing this unique arrangement. Acting as the
secretariat, the United Nations is ready to investigate,
along with the Member States party to the Initiative,
any and all evidence presented, if requested.
The Joint Coordination Centre, which comprises
representatives of all four signatories to the Initiative,
has established and agreed processes for such incidents
and accidents. When a ship’s captain recently reported
seeing a possible floating mine, the Joint Coordination
Centre agreed by consensus to pause shipping. It
allowed a Ukrainian tugboat, accompanied by a searchand-rescue vessel at a distance, to search the area.
Nothing was found, and the Joint Coordination Centre
decided to resume shipping the next day. I cite that as an
example of the Joint Coordination Centre’s functioning.
That is why Russia’s intended suspension is
concerning. There is a painstaking process in the Joint
Coordination Centre to arrive at consensus on matters
large and small, even when a hot war is raging. The Joint
Coordination Centre has to be — and is — meticulously
impartial. The corridor has been tranquil. The ships
sailed, the food flowed, prices dropped and hope
rose again.
I wish to stress three points related to the alleged
connection between the Black Sea Grain Initiative and
the Sevastopol attacks and damage to Russian military
vessels and infrastructure.
First, to be clear: no military vessels, aircraft or
assets belonging to any party are, or have been, involved
in support of the Initiative. They are not required. In
fact, they are prohibited from approaching closer than
10 nautical miles to the cargo ships, according to the
procedures agreed by all parties.
Secondly, the corridor itself is just lines on a chart.
When Black Sea Grain Initiative vessels are not in the
area, the corridor has no special status. It provides
neither cover nor protection for offensive or defensive
military action. It is not a shield or a hideout. It is not a
no-go zone. Those elements come into play when a ship
passes through those lines on the sea.
Thirdly, turning to the alleged misuse of cargo
vessels in the Initiative for military purposes, none
were in the corridor on the night of 29 October, when
the reported attacks took place. No vessel reported an
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9176

incident over the weekend. We are therefore ready to
consider an inquiry into any evidence that is reported
to us in the Joint Coordination Centre.

were delaying food delivery. We need to get back to
the status quo ante, when we were able to export those
millions of tons.

All sides decided, within the Joint Coordination
Centre, that the Initiative would be entirely civilian
in nature. Rather than escorts, as had been previously
envisaged by some, or patrols, the safety of shipping
is protected by the commitments of Ukraine and the
Russian Federation. Both commit not to attack ships
and related port facilities, under paragraph C of the
agreement signed in Istanbul on 22 July. We stand
ready to discuss any concerns about the Initiative and
its implementation. We continue to rely on the key
contribution of Türkiye as mediator, facilitator and host.

I want to point out that some have questioned the
value of this quite extraordinary effort. They have said
that it is not enough, that the food is going to the wrong
places and that it is the wrong type of food. Mark my
words — when things go awry, as they are doing now,
we can all see how much good it can do and has been
doing. We insist, as we have all along, that the exports
from both of these global breadbaskets — Ukraine
and Russia — are vital. We need unimpeded exports
from both. Of course, Ms. Grynspan will brief the
Council in more detail, but let me also say very clearly
that we hope and expect all Member States to work
to support the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations and
the Russian Federation, also signed on 22 July, to
ensure that their own food and fertilizer exports can
expeditiously reach global markets. If we cannot get
more fertilizer out, we face even worse shortages next
year. For me, as the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the
thought of even more global hunger next year is the
nightmare that we face.

The Joint Coordination Centre’s operations are an
open book — or perhaps I should say an open database.
The journeys of cargo vessels in the Initiative can be
tracked in real time on public websites. All parties share
the same information about ships, cargo, inspection
and destinations. The data for the 9.5 million tons of
shipments to date has been accessed more than 70,000
times on the United Nations website.
The rigorous joint inspections, including by Russian
inspectors and all parties to the Initiative, have combed
through the storage holds, engine rooms and tanks of
ships more than 800 times. The searches have come
up with plenty of minor inconsistencies — missing
paperwork, some sacks of rice swept from a previous
cargo shipment, a crew member’s passport wrongly
recorded. More seriously, the Joint Coordination
Centre’s teams have battled to maintain a balance
between safety and rigour when inspecting cargo that
has been fumigated with toxic insecticide. The Joint
Coordination Centre has recorded some 60 navigational
deviations from the agreed corridors in more than 820
voyages facilitated by the Initiative. On more than 100
occasions, when problems have been raised, the Joint
Coordination Centre process has been comprehensive
and exhaustive. Corrective measures have been agreed
by consensus. It is not the easiest format for countries
at war to work with, but until now it has worked, to
their great credit. However, in the days leading up to
Russia’s suspension of its participation, it is true that
the process had been getting bogged down, owing to
insufficient inspection capacity. Food for millions was
stuck in a maritime traffic jam in the Bosporus, visible
from above. Ships’ captains were calling in, desperate
to get moved up through the queue. That meant that
we lost time, the shipping industry lost money and we

I particularly welcome the pledges from both Russia
and Ukraine to donate food to support humanitarian
relief operations in the world’s hardest-hit and most
hungry nations. It is a heartening sign that both sides
recognize the special responsibilities they share. As I
am sure Ms. Grynspan will explore and explain much
better than I, when the Chicago Board of Trade opened
today wheat prices jumped as a result of recent events.
Each fraction of a percentage point pushes someone,
somewhere over the line into extreme poverty. Insurers
tell us that their premiums may leap by a quarter or a
half for shipping crossing the Black Sea.
We
are
very
encouraged
by
Russia’s
assurance — which is not merely a distinction, but
an important fact — that it is not pulling out of the
Initiative, as some have said, but is only temporarily
suspending activities in the implementation of the
Initiative. The Russian Federation has deployed a highly
professional team at the Joint Coordination Centre for
its implementation, and it is still there. We look forward
to welcoming it back as a full and active participant
as soon as possible in the fulfilment of reaching the
goals that we have all agreed and signed up to. We have
had many discussions, and the United Nations is ready
to address concerns and listen to suggestions from all

22-662583/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

sides as we approach the 120-day extension point on
19 November, when the Initiative can be renewed, with
no one objecting.
Today emergency measures were taken to release
some of the cargo from Ukrainian ports and inspect
some of the 100 vessels that are queued up and ready
to go. We need to continue fulfilling our commitments
and acting in concert, as before. Our understanding is
that the Initiative and commitments remain in force
even during the suspension of Russia’s participation.
Today 12 ships sailed out of Ukrainian ports, and two
headed in to load food. All those ships were previously
inspected by the full membership of the Joint
Coordination Centre. As an example, one ship headed
south through the corridor is the IKARIA ANGEL, with
30,000 tons of World Food Programme (WFP) wheat
for Ethiopia. Another, the PANGEO, passed inspection
on its onward journey full of wheat destined for Yemen
and Afghanistan, and the next WFP vessel is on its way.
I therefore have a simple message. Let us keep the
supply line open. Let us keep the Initiative in action. Let
us resolve our differences with all speed. The Initiative
is too important to fail.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Grynspan.
Ms. Grynspan: We are meeting today in a context
of acute and prolonged crisis. Aware of the gravity of
the situation, the Secretary-General created the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance
in March to deal with the impact of the war in Ukraine
on developing countries. Our initial analyses were
alarming and have not been proved wrong. Given the
fact that Russia and Ukraine are two globally vital
breadbaskets, as the war began, commodity prices that
were already rising skyrocketed.
In March, the Food Price Index of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
recorded its highest level in history. The world was in
no position to absorb the shock. Climate change and
the coronavirus disease pandemic had depleted the
capacity of most of the developing world to cope with
such external shocks. It was the perfect storm — a
cascading crisis that led to cascading inequalities. As
a result, according to our estimates, more than
1.6 billion people, in more than 90 countries, were
in a state of severe vulnerability to rising poverty,
4/20

31/10/2022

hunger and debt. That was the beginning of a cost-ofliving crisis of global proportions. Immediately, the
Secretary-General focused on breaking the vicious
cycle of rising prices and inflation by addressing food
insecurity, the most urgent dimension of the crisis. As
Mr. Griffiths explained very clearly, the SecretaryGeneral’s plan involved the parallel implementation
of two initiatives — the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and a memorandum of understanding on promoting
the unimpeded export of Russian food products and
fertilizers to world markets. As we all know, together
with Türkiye, a key player in the effort, we signed the
two agreements in Istanbul on 22 July.
The impact of the two agreements has been made
clear in a short period of time, with massive global
welfare effects. Grain exports from Ukraine and the
Russian Federation increased substantially. Wheat
exports from the Russian Federation tripled between
July and September, while wheat exports from Ukraine
more than quadrupled over the same period of time,
resulting in lower food prices in international markets
and improved access to food for humanitarian actors.
More than three-quarters of all the maize and wheat
for human consumption went to the developing world,
including 20 per cent of wheat for least developed
countries. The FAO Food Price Index has declined for
six months in a row by about 16 per cent. According to
World Bank models, that decline may have prevented
more than 100 million people from falling into poverty.
However, we are still below the volumes traded by
Ukraine and Russia for the same period in 2021, and
uncertainty with regard to the continuation of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative is now causing prices to rise again.
As Mr. Griffiths said, wheat futures rose by more than
6 per cent just today.
Furthermore, fertilizer prices are still two and half
times their 2019 level, producing a fertilizer crunch in
which farmers, especially smallholder farmers from the
developing world, have been priced out of production.
In North America, fertilizers represent less than 10 per
cent of total production costs, whereas in West Africa
they represent 50 per cent.
The International Fertilizer Association forecasts
a decline of between 18 and 23 per cent in fertilizer
use in sub-Saharan Africa this year. For that reason, we
know that today’s crisis of affordability may become
tomorrow’s crisis of availability of huge proportions,
drawing other staples such as rice into the crisis.
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Therefore, we have been focusing in recent days
on solving the fertilizer crisis. Ensuring access for
fertilizers from the Russian Federation to key markets
is an important part of that. We have dedicated a lot
of effort to finding solutions to the constraints we
still face.
What we have called the chilling effect of the
sanctions on the private sector — overcompliance,
reputational risks and market avoidance — are still real
obstacles. Transaction costs on insurance premiums,
financial payments, shipping costs and transport
costs for Russian food and fertilizer exports are
very high, leading to continued high global food and
fertilizer prices.
Specific actions are yielding some results for
our efforts. Fertilizer currently stored in ports and
warehouses in European ports are being donated for
humanitarian needs in Africa, South-East Asia and
Latin America, with the direct engagement of the World
Food Programme. We anticipate that the first shipment
of fertilizers will depart for Africa in the first week
of November.
In relation to the United Nations efforts to facilitate
unimpeded access to food and fertilizers from the
Russian Federation, there has been very intense
engagement with the United States, the European
Union, the United Kingdom and other countries
and private sector actors, who have issued critical
clarifications and high-level political statements. We
welcome those efforts.
But even with clear exemptions to the sanctions,
there is still a lot of work that remains to be done,
including on further clarifying exemptions for food
and fertilizer within the different sanctions regimes,
addressing indirect constraints to food and fertilizer
trade and improving the private sector’s willingness
to engage.
We urge all parties to make every effort to resume
and extend the Black Sea Grain Initiative and implement
both agreements to their fullest extent.
The United Nations is fully committed and will
spare no effort to continue to work with all parties
to ensure that we reach that goal. As the SecretaryGeneral said in his statement on Saturday, “We do not
underestimate the challenges, but we know they can
be overcome”.

S/PV.9176

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Grynspan for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia requested this meeting today in
connection with the actions by the Ukrainian side on
the Black Sea that pose a direct threat to international
peace and security.
On Saturday, 29 October, at approximately 4 a.m.,
under the cover of the humanitarian corridor created for
the implementation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
Ukrainian armed forces launched massive air and sea
strikes against the vessels and infrastructure of the
Russian Black Sea Fleet and Sevastopol. The attacks
involved nine unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
seven unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs), all of
which were destroyed by our navy. The Russian vessels
that were attacked were ensuring the safety of the grain
corridor used for exporting food from Ukrainian ports.
Russian specialists found and retrieved the UUV
debris and conducted an analysis of their Canadianmade navigation modules. The information restored
from their memory shows that those UUVs were
launched from the coast near Odessa, whence they
moved along the security zone of the grain corridor and
subsequently turned in the direction of Sevastopol in the
Russian Crimea. The coordinates of one of the UUVs
showed that its starting point was in the grain corridor
security zone in the Black Sea, which may indicate that
the UUV was launched from one of the civilian vessels
chartered by Kyiv and its Western patrons to export
agricultural products from Ukrainian seaports.
According to the Russian Ministry of Defence,
Kyiv initiated that terrorist attack, under the leadership
of British specialists, in Ochakiv port in the Mykolayiv
oblast of Ukraine. Another noteworthy fact is that an
American intelligence-gathering RQ-4В Global Hawk
UAV was seen in the Black Sea airspace off the Crimean
coast on Saturday.
That act by Kyiv is a gross violation of the Istanbul
agreement of 22 July and basically puts an end to the
agreement’s humanitarian dimension. It is obvious now
that the Ukrainian side is using the Black Sea grain
corridor for military and sabotage purposes.
Given that situation, the Russian side cannot
guarantee the safety of civilian vessels participating in

22-662585/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We do not know what
other terrorist attacks Kyiv is plotting with the help of
its Western sponsors. That is why we had to suspend the
implementation of the Grain Initiative on 29 October
for an unspecified period of time and instructed our
representatives in the Joint Coordination Centre in
Istanbul to that effect.
However, according to the information we received,
the work of the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul
continued without the participation of Russian experts.
In particular, on 30 and 31 October the representatives
of Türkiye, the United Nations and Ukraine agreed
on the passage of 12 vessels from Ukrainian ports to
Türkiye, four vessels from Türkiye to Ukraine and 40
vessels from Türkiye to the Mediterranean.
It is our understanding that the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, which Russia, Türkiye and Ukraine agreed
on 22 July under the aegis of the United Nations, may
not be implemented without Russia’s participation.
Therefore, we do not consider the decisions made
without us to be binding.
At the same time, given the misuse of the
humanitarian corridors and the fact that the Black Sea
remains an area of hostilities, we cannot allow the
unimpeded passage of vessels without our inspection.
We will have to take our own measures to control what
the Joint Coordination Centre authorized without our
consent. We will provide details on our conclusions and
approaches to that end in the near future.
The statements by our Western colleagues that we
heard today alleging that our measures pose a threat
to food security are nothing more than an attempt to
shift the blame in order to spare the Kyiv regime, which
is allowed to do anything, even the most dangerous
things, by its Western sponsors. That includes nuclear
blackmail via strikes on the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, preparing dirty bomb provocations,
targeted attacks on civilian infrastructure, including
the Crimean bridge, and the repression of peaceful
people in the territories under its control.
How can they whitewash their protégés when they
feel complete impunity and they use a humanitarian
corridor under United Nations protection for their
subversive terrorist purposes? What Russian
propaganda can they invoke? The fact is that it is
the Kyiv authorities and not Russia that jeopardizes
the functioning of the humanitarian corridor, while
6/20

31/10/2022

showing their complete disdain for any agreements,
even those made under United Nations auspices.
In the course of the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
more than 70 vessels were detained, some of which were
removed owing to systematic violations of the rules of
navigation in the grain corridor and attempted smuggling
in secret, specially equipped containers. Ukrainian
social media openly discusses the opportunities that
the initiative opened for the smuggling of arms and
fuel through vessels returning to Ukrainian ports via
the grain corridor. We also saw attempts to artificially
accelerate the inspection process for dry cargo ships
within the framework of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Washington and Brussels hypocritically accuse
Russia of provoking world hunger, but they fail to
mention that their sanctions block not only Russian
agricultural exports of 30 million tons of food and
25 million tons of fertilizer, but also our provision,
free of charge, of 500,000 tons of grain and 286 tons of
fertilizer to countries in need. For our part, we have been
working with integrity and honesty in order to ensure
the export of Ukrainian food, which was dispatched on
a commercial basis and is not being sent to the needy,
as the Secretary-General had promised, but to the
European Union and other developed States. Thanks
to the critical efforts of Russian experts, the Black
Sea traffic was increased to the impressive level of
approximately 1 million tons weekly, while progress on
the Russia-United Nations memorandum to normalize
the export of our foodstuffs is nearing zero. We should
have expected such an approach from our Western
partners in the Security Council, as we recall that those
are the same delegations that did not allow the adoption
at the end of July of a joint Security Council product
that would have welcomed both Istanbul arrangements
and actively tried to delete from the text every mention
of the Russian part of the package.
We are surprised that the leadership of the United
Nations failed not only to condemn, but even to express
concern about the terrorist attacks carried out under
the cover of the humanitarian corridor. First, the
Secretariat promptly reclassified the grain deal from
a humanitarian to a commercial project, and now it
is turning a blind eye to its being used for military
purposes — to say nothing of the lack of concrete
results with regard to Russian agricultural exports,
which account for a significant share of global markets
and are crucial for food security.
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

The Saturday terrorist attack in Sevastopol that
directly involved the grain corridor was a step to
undermine the grain deal. First the Ukrainian side
refused to allow merchant ships to leave the ports,
which had been mined by Ukraine itself, through the
corridor we opened in an attempt to exert political
pressure on Russia and take advantage of this
situation. Now Ukraine is using the grain corridor for
military purposes.
This situation compels us to provide some clarity.
What do the beneficiaries of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative actually want? If one wants to ensure food
security and assistance for the poorest counties,
everything is in place. By the end of this year, our
agricultural sector could provide approximately
30 million tons of grain for export, primarily wheat,
with a view to bringing this up to 50 million tons,
given the current harvest. Even under the conditions of
a grain deal that has gone wrong for us, we have sent
approximately 10.5 million tons of grain, three quarters
of which is wheat, to countries in Asia and Africa. In
the next four months, Russia is also ready to provide
its grain at affordable prices, in addition to 500,000
tons of food to the poorest countries free of charge,
as well as 300,000 tons of fertilizer still detained in
European ports.
However, if the goal is to prevent Russian food
from accessing global markets and to let Ukraine use
the cover of the Black Sea Grain Initiative to engage
in smuggling, sabotage and acts of terror, that is
entirely different. Please choose the desired path for
our dialogue.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): Here
we are again, gathered at Russia’s request, to endure
another episode of its disinformation campaign. We
regret that Russia is again using the Security Council
as a platform for propaganda.
Russia’s accusations against the United Kingdom
and Ukraine on Saturday, 29 October, are not supported
by any concrete evidence and are completely unfounded.
They are another clear illustration of Russia’s strategy
of distorting reality and continuing to make outrageous
allegations. This is a strategy carefully designed to
divert the attention of the international community
from a simple fact — Russia’s sole and exclusive
responsibility for the war of aggression it is waging
against Ukraine.

S/PV.9176

In the face of these new allegations, no one should
be fooled by Russia’s objective. For several weeks now,
Russia has been looking for a pretext to withdraw from
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Since Saturday, we now
know the pretext it chose to invent.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is a success. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s investment
and Türkiye’s contribution. As the Secretary-General
recalled in his statement on Friday, 9 million tons of
grain and other food products have been exported by sea
since 22 July. The Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations confirmed that wheat prices
have fallen as a result of the resumption of exports.
Every effort must therefore be made to ensure that the
initiative continues.
Let us be clear —the Istanbul agreements are
producing the expected effects. By deciding to
suspend its participation in the implementation of
those agreements, Russia is choosing to impose food
insecurity and malnutrition on the entire world and, in
particular, on developing countries that rely heavily on
Ukrainian exports. It has made the deliberate choice
to use hunger as a means of pressure and a weapon of
war. It is cynically gambling with the fate of millions of
people who will be affected by the effects of the drop in
harvests in 2023 and 2024.
This blackmail must stop. It is urgent that exports
through the Black Sea continue. We call on Russia
to return to respecting the agreements reached on
22 July. France will continue to support the efforts
of the Secretary-General in that regard. France will
also continue to work with its European partners to
implement the solidarity corridors that have enabled the
export of nearly 13 million tons of grain and other food
products. Together with our partners, we will continue
to make the necessary efforts to ensure that Russia’s
lies do not prosper.
I would like to conclude by reminding the Council
that Russia will not be able to absolve itself of its
responsibility for the crimes committed in Ukraine over
the past eight months. Those crimes that are widely and
solidly documented.
Mr. Ravindran (India): Let me also join other
in thanking Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Rebeca
Grynspan, Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, for their
briefings on the Black Sea Grain Initiative.

22-662587/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

The Black Sea Grain Initiative and cooperation by
the parties have provided a glimmer of hope for peace
in Ukraine. The agreements, a result of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts, were aimed at averting a global food
crisis and ensuring food security. The initiative resulted
in the export of more than 9 million tons of grains and
other food products out of Ukraine. We believe the
exports contributed to lowering the prices of wheat and
other commodities, as evident from the drop in the Food
Price Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
We believe that the suspension of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative is expected to further exacerbate the
food security, fuel and fertilizer supply challenges
faced by the world, particularly the global South. India
therefore supports the Secretary-General’s engagement
with the parties on the renewal and full implementation
of the Initiative, including facilitating exports of food
and fertilizer from Ukraine and Russia.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative and its successful
implementation over the past four months are consistent
with our long-standing position that diplomacy and
dialogue are the only solution to ending this ongoing
conflict, which has resulted in serious consequences
for the region and beyond. We continue to support all
efforts, including those of the Secretary-General, to
end the conflict.
Let me end by reiterating that the global order
is anchored in the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Secretary-General Grynspan for
their briefings.
Ireland deeply regrets the decision by the Russian
Federation to suspend its involvement in the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. That deal is vital to ensuring the
export of much-needed grain and fertilizers to address
the global food crisis, exacerbated by Russia’s war
against Ukraine. In the words of the Secretary-General,
the agreement is a ray of hope in a world darkened by
global crises. Its continued implementation could not
be more urgent.
In turning its back on the deal, Russia could
exacerbate the situation for millions of people across
the world already at risk of starvation. The fact that
Russia suspended its participation as winter sets in is
8/20

31/10/2022

particularly cynical, with many millions facing the
all-too-real possibility of being plunged into acute
food insecurity as a result. As always, it is the most
vulnerable who will pay the highest price. We urge
Russia to reconsider that decision and immediately
resume its participation in the life-saving initiative so
as to enable food to reach those who need it most.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative should continue
to play an important role in alleviating global food
insecurity in the months ahead. Concerted action is
needed to ensure that the grain sitting in Ukrainian
silos can continue to be exported through its Black Sea
ports and onward to markets, to reach populations in
desperate need in places already devastated by hunger,
such as Somalia, Ethiopia, Yemen and Lebanon.
Ireland therefore strongly supports the renewal of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative next month. We urge all
sides to engage in good faith to bring about the renewal
of the deal, thereby continuing to improve access to
food for millions of people across the globe.
To that end, Ireland fully supports the work of
the Secretary-General to find a solution to this most
pressing crisis. We are confident that, just as they did
when they agreed the deal in July, the sides can once
again come together in a spirit of dialogue to overcome
any remaining obstacles and save this life-sustaining
initiative from the brink.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths and Secretary-General
Rebeca Grynspan for their briefings.
We regret the news that the Russian Federation has
withdrawn from the Black Sea Grain Initiative. The
world is hungry. That development makes life harsher
for millions who are not party to the war in Ukraine.
It undermines global food security, particularly in the
most fragile countries and regions.
The operationalization of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative was a credit to the humanitarian diplomacy
between Ukraine and the Russian Federation, using
the good offices of the Secretary-General and the
Government of Türkiye. We cannot overstate its
importance to the world. It enabled approximately
9 million tons of Ukrainian grain to be exported. Partly
as a result of its impact on markets, the Food Price
Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations declined to 136.3 points last month,
which is considerably lower than the record high of
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

159.7 points in March. The lowest level since February,
when the conflict in Ukraine started, has been reached.
The same Food Price Index shows that the cost of
global food staples declined by about 8.6 per cent in
July, almost 2 per cent in August and a little more than
1 per cent in September. Cumulatively, that has helped
to improve global access to food, particularly for the
most vulnerable.
With that welcome trend in mind, we do not believe
that the reported drone attack on the Black Sea Fleet in
Sevastopol on 29 October is likely to endanger global
food security. We therefore call for immediate action to
deploy a United Nations fact-finding and verification
mission to report on any armed or blockading actions
related to the war in Ukraine that endanger global
food security.
Last week, on 26 October, during a Security
Council briefing on Article 100 of the Charter of the
United Nations, our delegation highlighted the need
for heightened respect for the good offices and factfinding capabilities of the Secretary-General (see
S/PV. 9167). Today’s discussion starkly illustrates why
our recommendations must be adopted. If the past 10
months are any guide, the members of the Council will
now be subjected to claims and counter-claims about
the Sevastopol drone attack. The claims will not be
verifiable, and the chances of Security Council action
will therefore be limited, if not impossible. It will
also sustain an unfortunate trend of the Council being
used primarily as a platform for propaganda, and not
for deliberation that furthers its mandate to protect
international peace and security.
General Assembly resolution 46/59, of 1991,
recognizes the need for the Security Council to have
knowledge of all relevant facts in performing functions
relevant to its mandate. It further recognizes the
Secretary-General’s fact-finding capabilities and
requires him to monitor the state of international peace
and security, making use of the information-gathering
capabilities of the Secretariat. We would welcome the
Secretary-General establishing a fact-finding mission
on the drone attack to better inform the Council.
One of the reasons for the ongoing food insecurity
is the volatility in insurance costs for the shipping of
foodstuffs owing to the extensive misinformation and
disinformation that characterize the war. A fact-finding
mission would, at a minimum, provide more accurate

S/PV.9176

signals to the food and financial markets with regard
to threats to the shipping of foodstuffs from Ukraine.
Finally, we once again propose that the parties
to the conflict, their allies and their partners make
use of the Secretary-General’s good offices for the
mediation and resolution of the conflict in Ukraine
and in stabilizing the wider European security order.
In addition, we reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and, as such, our respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Secretary-General Grynspan for their briefings today.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is vital to global
food security. The United Nations estimates that it has
indirectly prevented 100 million people from falling
into extreme poverty. More than 60 per cent of wheat
exported under the deal went to low- and middle-income
countries, including Ethiopia, Yemen and Afghanistan,
via the World Food Programme.
Russia’s suspension of the initiative over the
weekend has meant that more than 100 ships were
blocked from seeking permission to enter Ukrainian
ports to load grain. Every day, an average of 100,000
tons of grain is exported under the initiative. That is
enough to feed 5 million people for a month. Should
Russia’s suspension of the agreement continue, the
severe impact is clear.
Recognizing the global food crisis, the United
Kingdom has not placed sanctions on food or fertilizer
exports from Russia to third countries. We have worked
hard and continue to do so in order to ensure that there
are mitigations in place to prevent indirect effects
resulting from the sanctions. And we note that there
has been no decrease in Russian grain exports since the
start of its war on Ukraine.
Russia claims that it suspended its participation in
the Grain Initiative owing to an attack on its Black Sea
fleet, falsely asserting that those vessels were involved
in the implementation of the deal. As we heard from
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, no military vessels
or assets are involved in supporting the Initiative. What
Russia neglects to mention is that its Black Sea fleet
is illegally occupying Ukrainian waters and bombing
Ukrainian towns. The global impact of Russia’s war on
Ukraine has already been profound. Ending the Grain

22-662589/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

Initiative would unleash the unprecedented wave of
hunger and destitution that the Secretary-General’s
Global Crisis Response Group warned us about in June.
We therefore urge Russia to renew its cooperation under
the agreement so that shipments of grain can continue
as before, and to work with all the parties to renew the
Black Sea Grain Initiative this month.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths and Ms. Rebeca Grynspan, SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD), for the information they
have shared with us.
Mexico regrets Russia’s announcement to
temporarily suspend the implementation of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, a diplomatic initiative that has
been instrumental in many ways, three of which I will
highlight today. First, the signing of the agreement in
July enabled a resumption of exports of corn, wheat and
other foodstuffs, and as has been shown by the Food
Price Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and confirmed by the SecretaryGeneral of UNCTAD, it has also helped to stabilize
prices. Secondly, the export of more than 9 million
tons of grain and other products has helped to mitigate,
at least to some degree, the food insecurity plaguing
mainly developing countries, especially those that
are already facing critical levels of food insecurity.
Thirdly, as we have pointed out on numerous occasions,
the agreement represents an achievement for diplomacy
and mediation. It shows that constructive dialogue is
possible, even in times of war, and that the United
Nations is shouldering its responsibility in that regard.
We therefore echo the Secretary-General’s call to
the parties to resume and extend the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. We also urge the full implementation of the
memorandum of understanding signed with the Russian
Federation and call on all the relevant actors to remove
the obstacles to the implementation and full execution
of both agreements.
As we have seen, improving the availability of
fertilizers and access to them is essential for the
agricultural sector and consequently the economy as
a whole. The sowing seasons for the next two years
or so largely depend on it. If the necessary products
are not made available in time, the subsequent effects
on production levels and the increase in global prices
would be catastrophic. And there is no doubt that if
10/20

31/10/2022

the Black Sea Grain Initiative stops, the least-favoured
countries will once again pay the highest price and the
poorest segments of the world’s populations will feel
the effects the hardest.
Mexico reiterates its unwavering support for the
Secretary-General’s efforts to engage with the parties
in order to renew and strengthen the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and acknowledges Türkiye’s role in facilitating
the signing of the agreement in Istanbul. Diplomacy
and mediation are the instruments needed to achieve a
negotiated solution — an urgent truce — in order to put
an end to the war, as well as the human suffering and
grave economic consequences it has caused.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Grynspan for their
briefings and for so clearly outlining the benefits of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, which Russia is apparently
ready to deny to vulnerable people in low-income
countries around the world. Russia’s announcement
that it is suspending its participation in the United
Nations-brokered Black Sea Grain Initiative is deeply
concerning and fundamentally irresponsible. We
urge Russia to keep that essential and life-saving
arrangement functioning and allow food exports to
move to the world market to reach the countries that
need them most.
At the beginning of this year, as has already been
pointed out, conflict, the coronavirus disease pandemic
and the effects of the climate crisis had already
driven more than 190 million people into acute food
insecurity. Then President Putin launched his brutal
assault on Ukraine. Now, according to the World Food
Programme, a further 70 million people may fall into
food insecurity. Yet while partners across Africa,
Asia, the Americas and Europe are working together
to increase the resilience of global food systems,
Russia is once again demonstrating its willingness to
weaponize food. Its actions directly affect low- and
middle-income countries by raising global food prices
and exacerbating already dire humanitarian crises and
global food security.
The United States, along with other Council
members, welcomed the United Nations efforts led by
the Secretary-General and Türkiye to bring the deal to
fruition. At a dark time of war, the deal showed the
value of diplomacy and the commitment to addressing
a problem with global implications for food security.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative has helped to stabilize
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

and lower global food prices to pre-war levels. It has
facilitated the transfer of more than 9 million tons of
grain and other food products from Ukraine — enough
food to feed tens of millions of people. It has also
enabled the World Food Programme to get desperately
needed food aid to vulnerable populations. That includes
exports of corn and wheat to parts of the world where
people need it most. Two thirds of the wheat exported
under the Initiative has gone to developing countries in
Latin America, Asia and Africa.
Any action by Russia to disrupt those critical
food exports is essentially a statement that people and
families around the world should pay more for food or
go hungry and face higher rates of malnutrition and
death. We urge the Government of Russia to resume its
participation in the Initiative and extend it in order to
ensure that people around the world continue to benefit
from it. And we stand ready to support the United
Nations in its efforts to extend and expand the deal.
Since February, the United States has provided
more than $6.1 billion in humanitarian assistance and
$2.3 billion in development aid to combat global hunger
and strengthen food security. We understand that the
Russian Government has announced its intention to
donate 500,000 metric tons of grain to countries in need.
That would be a welcome step, albeit grossly overdue,
but it cannot come at the cost of blocking vastly larger
quantities of food exports from Ukraine.
Our Russian colleagues would have others believe
that the United States has not been doing enough to
facilitate food exports from Russia, whereas in fact the
United States has already excluded food and fertilizer
from our sanctions on Russia. We will continue to
provide guidance as needed to ensure that food gets
to its proper destination, because we are committed to
addressing food insecurity globally.
Our Russian colleagues also neglected to mention
today that there have been three Russian attacks on the
Ukrainian ports of Pivdennyi and Odesa since the grain
deal was signed. One of those attacks occurred just one
day after the agreement went into effect.
Let me be perfectly clear: as we have said many
times before, there is only one way to solve the many
food supply chain disruptions that the conflict has
caused — Russia must end its war and withdraw its
troops from Ukraine.

S/PV.9176

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development SecretaryGeneral Grynspan for their informative briefings.
The war in Ukraine is yet another stark reminder
of how humanitarian suffering in one part of our
globalized world translates into more suffering in other
parts. In Ukraine, the approach of winter, the attacks
on infrastructure and the shifting front lines pose new
risks to civilians, when the human toll has already
been enormous.
Given the central role of both Ukraine and Russia
in the global food supply chain, local events there often
have an immediate short-term effect on commodity
prices worldwide. Those short-term price movements
then affect the long-term food security of people around
the world. As we have highlighted before, those effects
are particularly devastating on the most vulnerable
communities in Africa and the Middle East.
In July, the two agreements reached sought to
address the short- and medium-term food security
impacts of the crisis. The United Arab Emirates
welcomed the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the
memorandum of understanding agreed between Russia
and the United Nations to facilitate the export of
fertilizers, which have undoubtedly helped to alleviate
pressure on global food supplies and prices.
The attacks over the past weekend on Russian
vessels in the Bay of Sevastopol and the suspension of
Russia from participation in the Initiative have already
led to price hikes in the market and can jeopardize
grain supply for the most fragile countries.
It is important to remember that the Black Sea Grain
Initiative does not operate in a vacuum — it is a delicate
undertaking that relies on the smooth coordination of a
number of direct and indirect stakeholders, including
ship owners and operators and insurers. Underlying
all of that are the assurances by the parties of a safe
and secure environment for all vessels engaged in the
Initiative. It is vital that all parties maintain trust in
the mechanism.
Changes to any part of that delicate construct,
however, will result in ripple effects throughout the
entire chain. They affect both food and fertilizer
exports and lead to real-life consequences in the places
that are most in need of those commodities. With more
than 100 vessels registered to be inspected by the Joint

22-6625811/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

Coordination Centre at a moment of persistent global
food insecurity, we urge all stakeholders to address
their differences, eliminate uncertainties and re-engage
with the process.
We also underline the importance of agreeing to a
solution for the export of ammonia — a key component
of fertilizers — in order to prevent an even more
catastrophic global food crisis next year. I commend
the Secretary-General and others for their efforts in
that regard.
Over the past few months, the United Arab
Emirates has underlined the importance of ensuring
that commodities freed for export by the agreements
reach those most in need. To date, as Mr. Griffiths
informed us, 9.3 million tons have been shipped via
the Joint Coordination Centre established by the Grain
Initiative, approximately three quarters of which
consisted of corn or wheat.
Beyond easing the strain on food markets, the
agreements notably signalled that positive outcomes
were possible with constructive engagement, even while
the conflict escalated in rhetoric and on the ground.
We commend the significant efforts of all parties that
resulted in those agreements and reiterate that their full
implementation, expansion and extension will have a
beneficial impact on global food security.
In addition to Ukrainian civilians, the victims
of the war have been the women, men and children
of the global South. They are the ones impacted by
limited access to food, high commodity prices and
the refocusing of international attention and resources
elsewhere. The latest developments only widen that
gap, and we therefore need to redouble our efforts to
protect those whose lives have been upended by the
war, both in Ukraine and the rest of the world.
As the conflict extends into its eighth month, we
once again stress the importance of de-escalation and
finding the right diplomatic offramp as soon as possible.
It is vital to identify and build on areas of convergence,
including to address the global impacts of the conflict,
and to work towards bringing it to a peaceful end. For a
sustainable peace to be achieved, there is no alternative
to a cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine and
engagement in dialogue in good faith in order to
bring about a diplomatic resolution. The United Arab
Emirates is committed to doing whatever it can to
facilitate dialogue with key stakeholders to address that
urgent matter.
12/20

31/10/2022

Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Rebecca Grynspan,
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, for their briefings on the
status of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Today’s meeting provides us with an opportunity
to assess the benefits and challenges of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, brokered by Türkiye and the United
Nations, to resume stalled food and fertilizer exports
from the Russian Federation and Ukraine to the rest of
the world. The Black Sea Grain Initiative is important
for addressing global food security challenges and
symbolizes a major diplomatic breakthrough in the
ongoing war in Ukraine. It demonstrated the ability
of the warring sides to reach agreement through
dialogue and cooperation — at least on humanitarian
matters — and gave hope for the future.
The international response to the signing of the
deal in July reflected a clear demand for the timely
and unobstructed supply of grains from Ukraine to
other parts of the world in order to help address the
exceptionally high food prices. As we heard from our
briefers, a little more than 9.5 million tons of grain,
including corn, wheat, barley, rapeseed and sunflower
seeds, have been exported under the Initiative, to both
higher- and lower-income countries.
We also note that shipments under United Nations
food aid programmes to Afghanistan, the Horn of
Africa, Syria and Yemen have been made possible
under the Initiative, repelling the spectre of hunger for
millions of people. It is also clear that global markets
had begun to respond positively to the exports, with
steady monthly decreases in global food prices.
In that context, and in the wider interest of
all humankind, we urge the Russian Federation to
reconsider its decision to suspend its involvement in
the Initiative. The full commitment of all parties to
the implementation of the grain deal is crucial to avoid
a reversal of the notable gains and a rebound of food
price hikes. We fear worsening times if nothing is done
to restore the full operationalization of the Initiative,
especially as we enter the winter season.
We call on all Security Council members and the
international community to support the intensified
engagements of the Secretary-General and Türkiye
in that regard and urge the parties to work closely
and collaboratively to find a way out of the current
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

stalemate. We also call for close cooperation through
the Joint Coordination Centre on immediate next steps,
including the inspection and granting of safe passage
to vessels already in the demarcated humanitarian
corridors of the Black Sea.
We call on the parties to refrain from taking
unilateral actions that are likely to upend the full
resumption of the Grain Initiative and its possible
renewal in November, when it is expected to expire. In
keeping with the humanitarian objective, equal efforts
must also be made to facilitate the export of Russian
fertilizer and other agricultural products that are
critical to agrarian economies.
Finally, we call for concerted international efforts
and diplomacy to end the war. It is in our common
interest to support a peaceful settlement of the
conflict and avoid divisive approaches that tend only
to aggravate the hostilities and prolong the war. We
urge for a resumption of dialogue in order to reach a
comprehensive and mutually acceptable settlement of
the conflict.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Secretary-General Grynspan for their briefings.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is an important
food-export arrangement that was reached through
repeated consultations between the United Nations,
Russia and Ukraine. Since the signing of the agreement
nearly four months ago, more than 9.5 million tons of
Ukrainian food products have been shipped to other
parts of the world by more than 400 ships, which has
played a positive role in curbing the rise of global
food prices. As Secretary-General Guterres said, the
agreement is a beacon on the Black Sea — a ray of hope
for millions of people hit by the food crisis. It is not
easy to open a food export route in a war zone, which
requires the parties concerned to maintain political
input, strengthen communication and coordination,
strictly implement the provisions of the agreement and
jointly cope with the difficulties and challenges that
may arise in its implementation.
China notes Russia’s recent announcement of its
decision to suspend its participation in the Black Sea
Grain Initiative due to attacks on its Black Sea Fleet
and civilian vessels in Sevastopol. China also notes
the response of Ukraine, the United Nations and other
relevant parties. We hope that the parties concerned
will remain in communication, rebuild mutual trust

S/PV.9176

and find a solution that addresses the concerns of all
parties. We also hope that the Secretary-General will
continue to play an active role in that regard. Russia’s
grain and fertilizer exports are equally important
to the international market and the memorandum of
understanding signed by Russia and the United Nations
should be effectively implemented. As the SecretaryGeneral has repeatedly pointed out, this year’s food
crisis is primarily one of distribution caused by high
food prices. However, if fertilizer exports do not recover,
next year we will be facing a supply crisis caused by
food shortages, which will be even more severe. The
relevant countries must confront and eliminate the
negative impact of all-out and indiscriminate sanctions
on normal international trade, take concrete measures
to remove the real obstacles to Russia’s export of its
grain and fertilizer and completely abandon wrongful
practices that politicize and weaponize economic and
trade issues.
Compounded by conflict and sanctions, the
negative spillover effects of the Ukrainian crisis have
spread across the globe. Countries around the world
have all felt their enormous impact, and vulnerable
developing countries are in a particularly difficult
situation. A prolonged, expanded and complicated
conflict is in no one’s interest. We must work hard
to overcome differences, fully pursue cooperation
and make tangible efforts to manage the escalation of
the crisis and prevent its spillover effects. Dialogue
and negotiations are the only realistic way out of the
Ukrainian crisis. A Cold War mindset, bloc politics,
division and confrontation, isolation and suppression
will not bring about peace.
China has noted that Russia’s Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov publicly stated to the media on
30 October that his country was ready to engage in
dialogue with Western countries to ease the current
tensions. We hope that the relevant parties will respond
positively and that all the parties will meet each other
halfway to open the door to dialogue and negotiations
as soon as possible. China has been actively promoting
peace talks and will continue to play a constructive
role in resolving the Ukrainian crisis and safeguarding
world peace and stability.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Gabon.

22-6625813/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

I thank Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Grynspan for
their briefings.
The signing, on 22 July, of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations and Türkiye was a source of hope for the
world amid a crisis, economic uncertainty and food
shortages, with a genuine risk of food insecurity for
many vulnerable countries and regions — even if not
all of the grain has gone to the neediest countries, as
Mr. Griffiths mentioned in his briefing. The agreement
was a positive sign that discussion remained possible
amid a deadly war and that such diplomatic success
could have a domino effect and lead to other such
successes. Those hopes and positive signs have been
undermined today by the suspension of the Initiative,
casting a shadow on several fronts, particularly that
of food security for the many populations that depend
on those supplies. The implementation of such an
agreement requires the full commitment of all the
parties and full respect for the agreed guarantees. My
country urges them to use the same channels that were
used to negotiate and finalize the agreement in order
to address issues related to its implementation and
ensure the unhindered continuation of exports and a
resumption of the agreement.
According to the most recent statistics of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the agreement has clearly had a positive effect by
stabilizing and reducing food prices. The benefits are
also economic, thanks to the renewed port activities
resulting from the resumption of maritime transport at
Ukrainian ports involved in the Initiative. The goal is
to export the nearly 25 million tons of grain stored in
Ukraine, as well as fertilizer and other food products
covered by the agreement. The world is facing an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis, which has deepened
this year and leaves millions at risk of being left by the
wayside. In that regard, it is the responsibility of both
the parties not to thwart the process of implementing
the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its call for
restraint and de-escalation and calls on the parties to
refrain from any unilateral action that would jeopardize
the quest for a diplomatic solution to the current crisis
in Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
14/20

31/10/2022

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Ms. Grynspan for their
detailed information.
Over the past nine months, since Russia decided to
go against reason and against everything in common we
have built together, there has been only a single piece
of good news — the Black Sea Grain Initiative. It was
welcomed worldwide, and the active role played by the
United Nations and Türkiye was duly appreciated. It
was widely seen as a moment of diplomacy — a beacon
of hope in an ocean of despair. Since then, exports have
brought much-needed relief everywhere. The world
understood what stood between it and food on the table,
and that was the war in Ukraine. Arrangements were
needed and arrangements were made, and they have
prevented some 100 million people from falling into
food insecurity, hunger and poverty.
As we know, the mechanism has worked seamlessly.
It should therefore be reactivated and maintained. There
was, and is, no reason to suspend it. Russia’s decision
to suspend it, excluding itself from yet another of its
international commitments, throws us back in time,
and we do not need to be reminded of its consequences.
They are already being felt. As a result, markets will
become nervous and distressed. Prices will spike again.
The needy will suffer, and the hungry will have to wait.
Suspending the deal is a statement telling the world
that, while there is plenty of food and all the means
exist to make it available, someone has decided to oblige
families around the world to pay more for food or risk
going hungry. Inflation is already unusually high, and
the situation can only get worse, in particular with the
imminent arrival of winter in many parts of the world.
Our question is: On what basis can a few people
in the Kremlin decide who should eat and who should
not and dictate to developing countries — and perhaps
not only developing countries — in Africa and Asia
whether they can have something on their table and
whether they can feed their children? The reasons given
for the suspension, which were linked to allegations of
drone attacks, have nothing to do with the shipments,
as we heard. Let us not forget that Russia is illegally
occupying Ukrainian waters in the Black Sea.
No one has the right to weaponize food, no one has
the right to play with hunger and no one has the right to
play starvation games. We call on Russia to reconsider
its decision, go back to do its part with regard to
inspections, renew the deal later this month, honour its
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

commitment and enable food to reach those who need it.
It must also do better, end its war of choice and respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
In conclusion, we encourage and fully support the
United Nations in its efforts to resolve the situation
through talks and dialogue and help avoid a recurrence
of an artificial global food crisis.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths and United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development SecretaryGeneral Rebeca Grynspan for their briefings.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative was a sign of
encouragement in the middle of a tragedy that affects
millions in Europe and elsewhere, as well as a
demonstration of the potential of dialogue to contain the
spillover effects of the conflict. Brazil deeply regrets its
suspension. The consequences, as we all know, will be
dramatic, even more so for developing countries, which
will have to face the renewed threat of food insecurity.
We recall the Secretary-General’s warning that
the world may be on the threshold of an unprecedented
food supply crisis. The interruption of grain shipments
across the Black Sea pushes us closer to that scenario.
We believe that, at present, simply pointing the finger
at others will not bring us closer to a solution. We urge
the parties to return to the negotiating table and renew
their commitments made in July without delay. It is no
exaggeration to say that the lives of millions depend on
the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Brazil understands that the Black Sea Grain
Initiative should have been the initial step on the
journey towards peace. Unfortunately, it has turned
out to be an almost isolated effort and not part of a
set of actions that would result in building trust and
cooperation between the parties. We are aware that the
conflict in Ukraine entails complex causes that involve
the collective security architecture in Europe.
For that reason, it may not be realistic to expect
a short-term solution to the crisis. In that context,
creative and pragmatic measures, such as the Istanbul
agreements and the exchange of prisoners of war, should
be encouraged by the international community. We
reiterate our willingness to contribute to exploring new
paths for dialogue. The price of delaying a diplomatic
solution, in good faith and without preconditions, is
simply too high.

S/PV.9176

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the briefers for their
candid statements.
We are here once again to discuss the consequences
of Russia’s own illegal war against its neighbour and
fellow United Nations Member State, Ukraine. That
war is a blatant violation of international law and the
very principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which we have all committed to uphold. In addition to
the enormous and steadily increasing loss of human
lives and the grave humanitarian consequences for
Ukrainians, the war increases the risk of an imminent
global food shortage.
The detrimental effects of Russia’s illegal war
are being felt far beyond Ukraine, with devastating
consequences for the millions of people already facing
hunger. The negative impact of the war on global
food security is clear. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
is the reason that the supply of Ukrainian grain to
global food markets stopped, with undeniable and
direct consequences for the global food supply. By
exacerbating shortages and causing higher prices,
Russia’s war of aggression affects us all.
Grain from Ukraine is also critical for the World
Food Programme and other humanitarian actors
responding to increasing humanitarian needs across
the globe. It is vital that the Black Sea Grain Initiative
be fully implemented and continued. We trust that the
parties’ commitment to the agreement will continue,
and we call on Russia to lift its suspension in order to
minimize the impact on the populations that depend on
those shipments. It is essential to keep a transportation
line open to secure food for the world’s most vulnerable
people and countries.
In July, we were encouraged to see that the
parties were able to negotiate the critical agreement
to allow for the resumption of exports from the global
breadbasket — Ukraine — and food and fertilizer from
Russia. The Secretary-General called the agreement “a
beacon of hope” and “multilateral diplomacy in action”.
We are pleased to learn about the current efforts of the
United Nations to keep vessels moving.
Norway continues to support the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts for dialogue and mediation between the
parties to advance the grain agreement. When the time
comes, we will stand firmly with the United Nations
in the efforts to build and sustain peace, including the
full restoration of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, within its internationally recognized borders.

22-6625815/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

Let me conclude by reiterating that Norway does
not and will not recognize any illegal annexation
of Ukraine’s territory, including the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol. We
remain steadfast in our commitment to international
law and Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): There are different interpretations of the
statistics. I would like to draw members’ attention to the
content of the website managed by our United Nations
colleagues and the data of the Joint Coordination
Centre. As of 29 October, the grain corridor in the
Black Sea had granted passage to 409 ships, more than
40 per cent of them bound for European countries.
Altogether, approximately 9.5 million tons of food were
exported, of which 43 per cent was corn and only 29 per
cent was wheat. Today wheat was often the only staple
grain mentioned, which only represents one third of the
grain exported.
We also recall that not all Ukrainian wheat
is of food grade. Furthermore, more than half of
the recipients are high-income countries, mostly
European Union countries. Low-income and lowermiddle-income countries received less than one quarter
of the exports — slightly more than 2 million tons in
three months. The amount delivered through the World
Food Programme was only 255,000 tons, or 2.3 per cent
of the total. Nor have we had any confirmation from
the countries of the European Union of their claim that
they are rerouting or reselling part of the foodstuffs
that they are buying from Ukraine in order to send it to
poor countries. We still find it difficult to understand
why the World Food Programme is playing such an
insignificant role in this area.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank Mr. Griffiths
and Ms. Grynspan. I also recognize at this meeting
the representative of terrorist Russia in the Soviet
permanent seat.
Inflicting terror on civilians has become a hallmark
of Russia in its war of aggression against Ukraine.
This morning Russia again attacked Ukraine’s energy
facilities and other critical civilian infrastructure with
16/20

31/10/2022

missiles and drones. Specifically, more than 50 cruise
missiles were launched from north of the Caspian Sea
and the Rostov region of Russia. Most of them were
shot down by the Ukrainian defence forces, but the
rest targeted 18 critical civilian infrastructure sites,
mostly energy facilities, in 10 Ukrainian regions. At
least 13 people were wounded as a result of the attack.
In particular, a Russian strike on the capital city of
Kyiv has resulted in water outages for 80 per cent of
the households in the city. About 350,000 households
in Kyiv were also cut off from electricity this morning.
Russia continues its deliberate attempts to
undermine the progress achieved by humankind since
the Second World War in striving to apply international
law effectively. Russia is attempting to break its core
principles. We are contributing to strengthening the
principle of the sovereign equality of nations. Russia is
claiming the exclusive right to dictate its will to other
nations. We are doing our best to resolve the global
food crisis. Russia is deliberately dooming millions
throughout the world to hunger.
We were outraged, but not surprised, by the
announcement by Russia that it was suspending its
participation in the Black Sea Grain Initiative. The
announcement did not come completely suddenly, as
Russia has never stopped aggravating the food crisis
as a tool to pressure and blackmail the world. We had
already heard Russia threaten to quit the Initiative before.
Since September it has been resorting to impeding the
passage of ships through the grain corridor, leading to
its effective blockade. According to the Ministry of
Infrastructure of Ukraine, as of 30 October, 218 cargo
ships were at a standstill in the corridor, some of them
waiting there for more than three weeks. Of those, 95
ships with grain have already left the Ukrainian ports
and are now awaiting inspection to depart to their final
destinations; 101 are awaiting inspection to arrive at the
Ukrainian ports; and the remaining 22 ships are waiting
to leave the Ukrainian ports. This absolutely deliberate
blockade by Russia started more than a month ago. Its
intention is crystal clear — to blackmail Ukraine into
succumbing to the Kremlin’s demands, bringing back
the threat of large-scale famine across the globe.
Putin’s representative’s crocodile tears cannot
conceal the cynicism of his masters and their total
disregard for the critical nutrition needs of millions
of people in various parts of the world. More than
2 million tons of foodstuffs are right now actually on
board the ships that have been blocked by Russia in
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9176

the grain corridor. Blocking that amount means that
access to food has been worsened for at least 7 million
consumers all over the world. It is disgusting that while
depriving people in need of 2 million tons that could be
supplied immediately, Russia has generously promised
to send 500,000 tons of grain over the course of the
next four months, while at the same time it is stealing
extensive amounts of grain from the occupied part of
Ukraine. Russia has forgotten to explain the reasons for
such generosity.

Russia to promote its false narratives. The past week
in the Council was exemplary in that regard, and today
we have again faced Russian attempts to discredit the
Council by turning it into a venue for circulating new
aspects of a lie — the lie that serves the same goal of
covering up its aggression against Ukraine, its war
crimes and crimes against humanity, as well as its
actions aimed at aggravating the food crisis worldwide.
That practice is discrediting the Council and must
be stopped.

The hunger threat resulting from Russia’s actions
becomes even more obvious if one takes into account
the overall totals of food supplies that have shipped
since the first vessel left the Ukrainian port of Odesa on
1 August. Over the past three months we have managed
to export more than 9 million tons of foodstuffs under
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Out of that amount,
5 million tons were sent to countries in Africa and Asia.
We are particularly concerned about the detrimental
impact of Russian actions on the grain supplies under
the World Food Programme for countries teetering on
the edge of famine. During the period of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, the United Nations contracted with
Ukraine for almost 200,000 tons of grain for Ethiopia,
Yemen and Afghanistan. On top of that, we have
allocated 50,000 tons of grain as humanitarian aid for
Ethiopia and Somalia, and those supplies are also under
threat at the moment.

We welcome the continued engagement of the
Secretary-General in intense contacts aimed at ending
Russia’s suspension of its participation in the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. We commend his role in brokering and
implementing the Initiative and support his efforts to
secure the agreement. A strong response by the United
Nations and Türkiye, as signatories to the agreement
with Russia, is needed to bring to an end to Moscow’s
attempts to once again terrorize the world with the threat
of hunger and genocide and to make it fully implement
its commitments under the Black Sea Grain Initiative.

For its part, as a reliable contributor to global food
security, Ukraine remains committed to implementing
its obligations under the Black Sea Grain Initiative
in good faith. Our commitment has not been shaken
by Russia’s deliberate and regular armed attacks and
provocations. Let me remind the Council that on 23 July,
the day after the Initiative was signed, Russia shelled
the port of Odesa with missiles. On 23 September, the
port of Odesa sustained another Russian attack with
unmanned aerial vehicles of Iranian origin. Odesa
is one of the ports that Russia had committed not to
attack, in accordance with the Grain Initiative. Ukraine
has done its utmost to ensure the functioning of the
grain corridor against the backdrop of Russia’s recent
terrorist attacks on our critical energy infrastructure,
which in particular cut off Ukrainian ports. We remain
ready to continue gathering and shipping agricultural
products to ensure global food security.
The only thing that Russia has been able to feed us
is fakes and disinformation. It is especially concerning
that the Security Council has also been misused by

Representatives of the United Nations and Türkiye
are negotiating with the Russian delegation and
continue to seek solutions for the full implementation
of the Initiative. According to the proposal of the Joint
Coordination Centre, representatives of the United
Nations and Türkiye envisaged having 10 inspection
groups working to check 40 ships. That proposal
was accepted by the representatives of Ukraine
and representatives of the Russian Federation were
informed. As a result, 12 ships carrying 354,500 tons
of agricultural products left Odesa, Chernomorsk and
Pivdennyi seaports today to respond to the needs of
Africa, Asia and Europe. Among them is the bulk carrier
IKARIA ANGEL, with Ukrainian wheat intended for the
residents of Ethiopia, who are on the verge of famine.
That is the seventh vessel chartered under the World
Food Programme.
At the same time, passage into Ukrainian ports
for loading is allowed for four vessels that have passed
the Joint Coordination Centre inspection one day
prior, with the participation of all parties, including
representatives of Ukraine.
The declaration of the leaders’ summit on global
food security, on 20 September, explicitly named
Russia’s latest invasion of Ukraine among the factors
that have disrupted production and supply chains

22-6625817/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

and dramatically increased global food insecurity,
especially for the most vulnerable.
I therefore wish to reiterate that as soon as Russia
is compelled to stop the war, the looming threat
of hunger will be over, in particular for the most
vulnerable nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): I also thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Secretary-General
Grynspan for their briefings.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative marked a turning
point in how we put the needs of those furthest behind
first, even in times of war. It is a message to the world
that the United Nations, Türkiye and the parties to the
conflict pledged to do our utmost to limit the suffering
of those dependent on fertilizer and grain exports for
their food security.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative has already moved
more than 9.5 million metric tons of grain and foodstuffs.
It brought global food prices down. As a result of the
Initiative, the World Food Programme was able to
intervene before famine took hold. Children around the
world — from Afghanistan to Ethiopia, Somalia and
Yemen — have been benefiting from the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. Those products are still desperately
needed today as we head into winter. Furthermore, a
global increase in food prices will threaten those in
already precarious situations, as inflation leads to costof-living crises worldwide.
As of this morning, there were 97 loaded vessels
and 15 inbound vessels registered for inspection around
Istanbul. The ships anchored outside of the Bosporus
Strait pose navigation risks. We have therefore been
implementing a movement plan with the United Nations
for those vessels.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative must continue.
The trust between nations with different development
levels has been hard-earned and can be easily lost
unless we take proactive steps today. Two deals have
been brokered to bring irreplaceable Ukrainian and
Russian products to world food markets. We must find
ways to overcome any difficulties that prevent the full
implementation of those deals.
Today we call for common sense in recognizing the
need for restraint and in upholding our responsibility
18/20

31/10/2022

to protect the most vulnerable populations, who have
turned to the United Nations as their last hope. Those
two deals should be tackled on their own merits and be
decoupled from the developments on the ground. Both
deals were made in good faith and should continue in
good faith.
As we speak, we have been in contact with the
parties in order to ensure the continuation of the
Initiative. Türkiye hopes that reason will prevail and
that the Black Sea Grain Initiative will remain intact
and in place. We will also continue to support all efforts
to end the war in Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak in the
Security Council today on this important topic. I will
limit my statement to three points, but before doing so,
I would like to thank the two briefers, Ms. Grynspan
and Mr. Griffiths, for their important insights.
Above all, I would like to recall one fundamental
fact — the only reason that the traditional grain
export routes from Ukraine to world markets were
jeopardized and interrupted is simply because of the
war of aggression of Russia against Ukraine. The Black
Sea Grain Initiative re-activated those crucial routes,
which once again became a lifeline for millions of
people across the globe. The Initiative is a remarkable
diplomatic achievement, made possible by the United
Nations and Türkiye.
Contrary to some false accusations that we have
heard, the implementation of the Initiative has been
successful. More than 9 million tons of grain have
already been supplied to the world through that channel
alone, largely to developing countries. The Initiative
has also succeeded in bringing prices down to their
pre-war level of January, as measured by the Food Price
Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.
However, prices are still too high. The international
community is working on many fronts to mitigate this
food crisis. That is why the Group of Seven Foreign
Ministers will discuss the Russian suspension of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative and its potential global
implications, in particular food security in the most
vulnerable countries, at their meeting in Germany at
the end of the week. They will look into how to best
22-66258

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

support the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and Türkiye in
that respect. We are pleased that the African Union
Commission and the Foreign Ministers of Kenya and
Ghana will join those discussions.
It is encouraging that dozens of ships are currently
on their way to bring more wheat from Ukraine to the
world. We commend the United Nations, Türkiye and
Ukraine for having taken a swift decision, making
continued grain shipments via the Black Sea possible.
We would like to underline our full support for
those efforts, and call upon all parties involved to do
their utmost to contribute to a safe passage for grain
shipments to countries in need.
What the world needs now is a public commitment
from all parties to an extension of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative beyond its initial 120 days. I once again thank
Secretary-General Guterres as well as OCHA, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and the World Food Programme for their efforts in
that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Grynspan and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings. They both confirm
what we assessed in Romania, a Black Sea country and a
neighbour to Ukraine — the Black Sea Grain Initiative
has proven instrumental in unblocking the grain exports
in the Black Sea region and, consequently, in avoiding
a food-shortage catastrophe for millions worldwide. It
needs to be implemented and extended for their benefit.
Making food available and not weaponizing
it is both a shared and individual responsibility of
all Member States. Romania condemns Russia’s
suspension and adds its voice in calling on Russia to
revert its decision and to resume the implementation of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
As mentioned by previous speakers, the positive
effects of the agreement brokered by the United Nations
and Türkiye are visible beyond any doubt — global
food prices decreased and grain became available to the
least developed countries and to developing countries.
Such strong encouragement to stay the course on
the Black Sea Grain Initiative comes from a country
that is already doing a great deal to support the export
of Ukrainian grain to various parts of the world.

S/PV.9176

Romania has facilitated the export of over 5.8 million
tons of grain from Ukraine via Romanian roads,
railways and ports. The port of Constanța, our largest
port in the Black Sea, with a capacity to ship over
25 million tons per year, has become a major gateway
for Ukrainian grain shipments to the outside world, in
complementarity with the efforts under the Black Sea
Grain Initiative.
Just to provide the full picture of the magnitude
of that effort and to provide a reality check, I would
like to supply the following data. A maritime vessel
using the Black Sea Grain Initiative corridor can carry
at least 30,000 tons of grain and can be loaded directly
from the relevant Ukrainian ports directly from silos.
In order for the same maritime vessel to be loaded in
the Romanian port of Constanța, it needs to wait for
the transit of trucks, trains or barges on the Danube
River towards the port. According to our information,
a truck can transport between 22 and 25 tons, a train
car 50 tons and a barge around 2,000 tons. I made the
calculation, and I think that, in order to load a 30,000ton maritime vessel, we would probably need to use
1,200 trucks. That has been the reality on the ground
for the past more than eight months since the war broke
out — truck by truck, train by train and ship by ship
towards countries and regions that badly need them.
To accelerate that process, we liberalized the
bilateral road transport and freight in transit with
Ukraine, providing support to Ukrainian-flagged ships
in Romanian ports, adapting the wide-gauge railway
line to ensure connection to rail freight transport and
facilitating access to the port of Galati on the Danube
River. That is how Romania became an important transit
country for Ukrainian grain, and we will continue to
extend our support.
My country’s efforts and the European Union
solidarity lanes are complementary to the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. But the initiative brokered in July
by the Secretary-General needs to continue and to be
extended beyond November so that even more people
can afford bread. We strongly support it.
I would also add that, in addition to our efforts to
support the delivery of Ukrainian grain, as a major grain
exporter, we continue to make significant amounts of
Romanian grain available to many States Members of
the United Nations. We play a key role in food security,
and we will continue to act responsibly.

22-6625819/20

S/PV.9176

Threats to international peace and security

Food needs to remain available for people in the
future. We need to avoid a more serious food crisis,
which would affect vulnerable people throughout the
world. Romania stands ready to support the efforts
of the Secretary-General in making a difference to
people’s lives.
I conclude by saying that there is no alternative
to the Black Sea Grain Initiative, and nothing can
meaningfully compensate for its absence.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: I thank you, Mr. President, for
granting us this opportunity to speak during this
important debate. The European Union (EU) greatly
appreciates, and supports, the work done by UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Secretary-General
Grynspan with regard to the implementation of the
United Nations-brokered Black Sea Grain Initiative.
We also commend the role of Türkiye as the host of the
Joint Coordination Centre.
Russia’s intention to suspend its participation in
the Black Sea Grain Initiative is extremely worrisome
because it will obstruct the export of much-needed
grain to address the global food crisis. Russia is
solely responsible for the global food security crisis,
which it caused by its unprovoked and unjustified
war of aggression against Ukraine and its blockade of
Ukrainian seaports.
The United Nations-brokered agreement, together
with the EU-Ukraine solidarity lanes, has made a
significant difference by allowing the export of grain
and agricultural products from Ukraine to the global
markets and to the countries most in need, including in
the Horn of Africa, Yemen and Afghanistan. The Black
Sea Grain Initiative has brought more than 9.5 million
tons of grain and foodstuffs to the global market, as
already underlined by many speakers before me. In
that context, the EU exported 14 million tons of grain
to third countries, which is a higher level than in the
past. All those efforts contributed to lowering food

20/20

31/10/2022

prices — which is what matters — to the benefit of
developing countries.
In reply to my Russian colleague, let me
also reiterate that most of the wheat goes to least
developed countries — 19 per cent — and developing
countries — 47 per cent. According to United Nations
estimates based on the World Bank model, the reduction
in the prices of staple foods has indirectly prevented
some 100 million people from falling into extreme
poverty. Also, in terms of showing how responsible we
are as global actors and major humanitarian donors, we
are ensuring that the countries that are most affected by
the food crisis have access to the necessary foodstuffs
and grain.
Regarding fertilizers, we would like to recall
that they are not subject to EU sanctions and that,
as underlined by Secretary-General Grynspan, any
possible indirect effects were dealt with both through
measures to address overcompliance and on a case-bycase basis. We are ready to act regarding any case that
is reported to us.
Since the beginning of Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine, Russia has been weaponizing food
and hunger. Russia’s deliberate actions, including
destroying stocks, disrupting production and imposing
quota restrictions on its own export of foodstuffs and
fertilizers, have exacerbated the global food security
crisis. We therefore urge Russia to reverse its decision
and to immediately resume the implementation of the
United Nations-brokered Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which is key to the livelihoods of millions of people.
We strongly support the Secretary-General’s call for
the extension of the initiative beyond its current period,
ending in November.
Finally, the EU and its member States remain fully
mobilized to address the crisis, and we will continue
to respond to it and to support the timely and stable
delivery of Ukrainian agricultural products to the
global markets.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

22-66258
