United Nations

A/RES/55/26

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 42

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/L.34/Rev.1)]

55/26. Preparations for the special session on children
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/217 of 21 December 1990, in which it welcomed
the adoption by the World Summit for Children of the World Declaration on the
Survival, Protection and Development of Children and Plan of Action for
Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development
of Children in the 1990s, 1 51/186 of 16 December 1996, 53/193 of 15 December
1998 and 54/93 of 7 December 1999,
Bearing in mind the nearly universal ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, 2
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 3 and, in particular, the
paragraphs relevant to the situation of children,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of the
preparations for the special session of the General Assembly in 2001 for follow-up
to the World Summit for Children, 4
Taking note also of the reports of the Preparatory Committee for the Special
Session on its organizational and first substantive sessions 5 and of the decisions
contained therein,
1.
Reaffirms the commitments adopted by the heads of State and
Government at the World Summit for Children on 30 September 1990, as contained
in the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children
and Plan of Action for Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival,
Protection and Development of Children in the 1990s,1 and their appeal to give
every child a better future;

1

A/45/625, annex.
Resolution 44/25, annex.
3
Resolution 55/2.
4
A/55/429.
5
A/55/43 (Parts I and II). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth
Session, Supplement No 43 (A/55/43).
2

00 56095

A/RES/55/26

2.
Also reaffirms that the special session of the General Assembly in 2001,
while reviewing the achievements in the implementation and results of the World
Declaration and Plan of Action, will make a renewed commitment and consider
future action for children in the forthcoming decade;
3.
Stresses that the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child 2 contributes to the achievement of the goals of the World Summit for
Children, and recommends that a thorough assessment of the ten years of
implementation of the Convention be an essential element in the preparations for the
special session;
4.
Welcomes the initiatives and actions taken by Governments and relevant
organizations, in particular the United Nations Children’s Fund, as well as regional
and subregional organizations, to review the progress achieved since the World
Summit for Children, and in this regard encourages appropriate national, regional
and international preparatory activities with a view to contributing to the
preparations for the special session and building partnerships for and with children;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the national reports
to be submitted by Member States, to submit to the General Assembly at its special
session, through the Preparatory Committee for the Special Session, a review of the
implementation and results of the World Declaration and Plan of Action, including
appropriate recommendations for further actions, which also elaborates on the best
practices noted and obstacles encountered in the implementation process, as well as
on measures to overcome those obstacles;
6.
Reaffirms the need for the full and effective participation of Member
States, and in this regard reiterates its invitation to heads of State and Government
to participate in the special session;
7.
Welcomes the assignment by heads of State and Government of personal
representatives to the Preparatory Committee, and reiterates the invitation to heads
of State and Government who have not assigned personal representatives to consider
doing so;
8.
Reiterates its invitation to States members of the specialized agencies
that are not Members of the United Nations to participate in the work of the special
session, in the capacity of observers;
9.
Reaffirms the important role of all relevant actors, including nongovernmental organizations, in implementing the Plan of Action, and stresses the
need for their active involvement in the preparatory process, including in the work
of the Preparatory Committee, and at the special session, the modalities for which
are being addressed by the Preparatory Committee;
10. Reiterates the importance of a participatory process at the national,
regional and international levels with a view, inter alia, to establishing partnerships
among a broad range of actors, including children and young people, in order to
raise momentum for the rights and needs of children;
11. Highlights the important role of children and young people in this
process, and in this regard encourages States to facilitate and promote their active
contribution to the preparatory process, including in the work of the Preparatory
Committee, and the special session;

2

A/RES/55/26

12. Urges all relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system,
including the funds and programmes, specialized agencies and the international
financial institutions, actively to participate in the preparations for the special
session;
13. Reiterates its invitation to the Committee on the Rights of the Child to
provide its input to the preparatory process and at the special session;
14. Reiterates its invitation also to all relevant experts, including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography, to participate in the preparatory process
and the special session, in accordance with the established practice;
15. Decides to convene the special session of the General Assembly for
follow-up to the World Summit for Children from 19 to 21 September 2001, and to
refer to it as the “special session on children”;
16. Decides also to convene two substantive sessions of the Preparatory
Committee in New York during 2001, one from 29 January to 2 February and the
other from 11 to 15 June;
17. Decides further to invite the associate members of the regional
commissions listed in the footnote 6 to participate as observers in the special session
and its preparatory process, subject to the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly;
18. Reaffirms the importance of the full participation of the least developed
countries in the special session and the preparations for the session, and in this
regard expresses its appreciation to the Governments which have made financial
contributions to the trust fund established by the Secretary-General for that purpose,
and invites the Governments which have not yet contributed to do so;
19. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments which have made
financial contributions towards the preparatory activities undertaken by the United
Nations Children’s Fund as the substantive secretariat of the special session, and
encourages Governments which have not yet contributed to do so;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session an
item entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

6

American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, British Virgin Islands, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, Montserrat, Netherlands Antilles, New Caledonia, Niue,
Puerto Rico, United States Virgin Islands.

3
