A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/249
18 April 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 179
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.56)]
48/249.

Emergency assistance to Mozambique

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the loss of human life and extensive damage and
devastation caused by tropical cyclone Nadia, which recently struck vast areas
of central and northern Mozambique,
Noting with grave concern that the stricken areas were yet to recover
fully from the consequences of war and previous natural disasters,
Noting the negative impact of the cyclone on the national economy and on
the ongoing collective efforts to bring about a lasting peace and tranquillity
to Mozambique,
Recognizing the efforts undertaken by the Government of Mozambique in
order to assist the people in need,
Determined to assist the people of Mozambique in their efforts for the
full implementation of the provisions of the General Peace Agreement for
Mozambique of 4 October 1992, 1/ particularly in the period prior to the
holding of the general elections,
1.
Declares its solidarity with the people and Government of
Mozambique in this time of trial;

__________
1/

See S/24635 and Corr.1.

/...

A/RES/48/249
Page 2

2.
Notes with satisfaction the national efforts already under way in
order to provide the necessary assistance to the victims of the cyclone;
3.
Commends the international community, including the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund, and the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, through the United Nations Office for
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination at Maputo, for their prompt response to
assist the victims of this natural disaster;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General and the competent bodies and
organizations of the United Nations system, in close collaboration with the
Government of Mozambique, to mobilize relief assistance to the victims of this
natural disaster;
5.
Requests the international community to provide urgently
additional support to Mozambique in order to mitigate the economic, financial
and social consequences endured by the people and the Government of Mozambique
in their efforts to recover from the cyclone and to enable the country to
continue pursuing its development goals;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to review the consequences of
tropical cyclone Nadia on the national economy of Mozambique and to include
his observations and recommendations in the report called for in
paragraph 10 (c) of General Assembly resolution 47/42 of 9 December 1992,
entitled "Assistance to Mozambique".
92nd plenary meeting
5 April 1994
