S/2021/120

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 February 2021
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2522 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2522
(2020), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report to the Council every
three months on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present report covers key developments
relating to Iraq and provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq
since my previous report of 10 November 2020 (S/2020/1099) and the briefing given
to the Security Council by the Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI
on 24 November.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The Government of Iraq continued to undertake efforts to establish conditions
conducive to holding free, fair and credible early elections. After the electoral
legislative framework was published on 9 November, the Council of Ministers approved
a draft law under which 329 billion Iraqi dinars (approximately $225 million) would
be allocated for election-related activities and referred it to the Council of
Representatives for adoption. On 17 December, the Council of Representatives
adopted the Law on Allocating and Financing the Expenditures of the Council of
Representatives Elections (2020), with an allocated budget of 290 billion dinars
(approximately $198 million).
3.
Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi engaged with the country’s electoral
authorities to emphasize the importance of effective coordination and transparency in
all electoral preparations. During a visit to the headquarters of the Independent High
Electoral Commission on 30 November, the Prime Minister stressed the import ance
of ensuring that electoral procedures were in line with the electoral legal framework
as a necessary precondition to building integrity and public trust in the electoral
process. He instructed relevant governmental agencies to provide full support to the
Commission for the completion of all technical and operational preparations.
4.
The Government paid particular attention to promoting inclusivity in the
elections, including through technical preparations to ensure broad voter

21-01196 (E)

110221

*2101196*

S/2021/120

participation. On 6 December, Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi of the Council of
Representatives met with the Board of the Commission to urge an expansion in the
biometric registration of voters and the development of mechanisms to expedite the
process for completing the distribution of biometric voter registration cards.
Discussions were also focused on ensuring the integrity of the elections, including
the identification of a reputable international company to audit the results
management and information technology systems, and continued cooperation with
the United Nations on the audit.
5.
Discussions took place on the electoral timetable needed for technical
preparations. On 14 January, the three presidencies held a meeting with the President
of the Supreme Judicial Council and the Independent High Electoral Commission.
Following the meeting, a presidential statement was issued in which it was noted that
the Council of Representatives must adopt the law on the Federal Supreme Court and
dissolve itself prior to the election as specified in article 64 of the Constitution
(60 days in advance). On 17 January, the Commission sent a letter to the Prime
Minister in which it proposed 16 October as the date for early parliamentary elections
and to extend the registration period for political alliances and candidates, which
would allow United Nations experts and international observers to play a role in
achieving the greatest degree of monitoring and transparency.
6.
The Government of Iraq took steps to address the budget deficit, which was
compounded by a decline in global oil prices and the economic impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Following lengthy negotiations between
the Government and the legislature on the scale of permissible borrowing to finance
the budget deficit until the end of 2020, the Council of Representatives adopted the
Law on Financing the Fiscal Deficit for 2020 on 12 November. The Law authorized
the Government to use internal and external borrowing to finance the 12 trillion Iraqi
dinar deficit (approximately $10 billion) from October to December 2020. The Law
also allowed the Government to disburse the salaries and pensions of civil servants
and included funding for investment projects, the operational expenses of ministries
and independent bodies, and governorate-level projects. The Law stipulated that
federal budget allocations to the Kurdistan Region of Iraq would be based on the share
stipulated in the 2019 Law on the Federal Budget (12.67 per cent) and made them
conditional on the transfer of oil and non-oil revenues to the federal Government by
Erbil.
7.
On 28 November, the Finance Committee of the Council of Representatives
submitted a reform paper to the Government in which it recommended urgent
measures to address the fiscal situation, in particular the lack of liquidity.
Recommendations covered three main areas: increasing revenues and decreasing
expenditures; reform of financial and monetary policy; and general economic
reforms. The Committee called on the Government to elaborate on its plans to
implement the White Paper for economic and financial reform, which had been
approved by the Council of Ministers on 13 October.
8.
Work on the preparation of a budget for 2021 continued. On 19 December, the
Central Bank of Iraq announced a devaluation of the dinar by approximately 20 per
cent at the request of the Minister of Finance. According to a Central Bank statement,
the devaluation of the country’s currency constituted a one-off measure to address the
liquidity crisis caused by low oil revenue. After extensive debates in the Council of
Ministers and numerous amendments to the initial budget as submitted by the Minister
of Finance, the Prime Minister announced on 21 December that the draft budget had
been finalized. The next day, the spokesperson of the Council of Ministers announced
that the draft had been submitted for parliamentary approval. On 29 December, the
Speaker confirmed in a statement that the Council of Representatives had received
the draft and announced the extension of the current legi slative term by one month,
2/16

21-01196

S/2021/120

until 3 February, to allow the completion of the 2021 federal budget law and other
legislation.
9.
A step was taken to increase the diversity in senior positions within the
Government, including women’s representation, when, on 15 December, the Council
of Representatives confirmed Hiyam al-Haidari as a Minister of State and the third
female cabinet member.
10. On the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women,
25 November, the President issued a statement in which he affirmed the need to take
all measures necessary to end violence and discrimination against women. He called
on the Government and relevant authorities to develop effective programmes, plans
and mechanisms that support women’s economic, social and political empowerment.
The Speaker marked the occasion by issuing a statement on social media in which he
called on the legislature to fight violence against women. Meanwhile, on 7 December,
Deputy Speaker Bashir al-Haddad chaired a consultative forum organized by the
parliamentary committee on women, family and child affairs in cooperation with the
Iraqi Al-Amal Association and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to commemorate the 16 Days of Activism
against Gender-based Violence campaign.
11. The Government continued to address the COVID-19 pandemic. On
17 November, the Prime Minister announced in a statement that the Ministry of
Health had started preparations for vaccine storage. On 24 November, the Min istry of
Health announced that Iraq would purchase a sufficient number of doses of any
vaccine approved by the World Health Organization, with priority given to health care personnel, security forces and the elderly. On 22 December, the Council of
Ministers directed the Ministry of Finance to fund the purchase of the Pfizer BioNTech vaccine. Further public directives were issued by the Ministry of Health
on 30 November to slow the transmission of COVID-19, including calls for maskwearing and social distancing in public places. On 22 December, the Iraqi Civil
Aviation Authority announced international travel restrictions in response to the
emergence of a new COVID-19 strain.
12. Small-scale and predominantly peaceful protests continued in southern and
central governorates. On 27 November, demonstrations were staged in Baghdad and
southern Iraq that led to violent clashes with other protesters in Nasiriyah, Dhi Qar
Governorate. In response, on the same day, the Prime Minister ordered the dismissal
of the Dhi Qar Police Commander and formed an investigative committee. On
28 November, tensions escalated between security forces and protesters in Nasiriyah.
Security forces fired warning shots to disperse the crowd and later withdrew from the
area as protesters burned tyres and blocked major intersections. On 29 November, the
Prime Minister affirmed his support for peaceful, lawful protests and announced the
formation of an emergency crisis team headed by National Security Adviser Qasim
al-Araji. The crisis team was granted powers to protect peaceful demonstrators, State
institutions and private property and met with security officials, tribal leaders and
youth representatives in Dhi Qar Governorate.
13. On 27 November, security forces in Wasit Governorate removed protesters’ tents
from the main demonstration site in Kut to end protests close to government
buildings. Confrontations broke out the next day as protesters returned, burned tyres,
damaged public property and threw stones at security forces. One protester d ied after
setting himself on fire.
14. From 2 to 12 December, demonstrations also took place in Sulaymaniyah
Governorate. Protesters initially gathered in the city of Sulaymaniyah, calling for the
payment of public sector salaries, criticizing the lack of government transparency and
accountability, and demanding basic services and jobs. Security personnel forcibly
21-01196

3/16

S/2021/120

dispersed demonstrators. The protests then spread within the governorate and became
violent, with protesters setting fire to political parties’ offices and government
buildings.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
15. Negotiations to resolve outstanding disagreements between Baghdad and Erbil
continued, with a focus on two contentious issues: the sharing of revenue and the
transfer of federal budget allocations to the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. The absence of
an agreement on the latter further delayed the budget transfer to the Kurdistan Region
of Iraq and thus the payment of civil servants’ salaries in the region, triggering
demonstrations in Sulaymaniyah Governorate that began on 2 December.
16. Disagreements emerged between Baghdad and Erbil over the Law on Financing
the Fiscal Deficit for 2020. The Council of Representatives passed the Law on
12 November in the absence of parliamentarians from the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
who had left the session prior to the vote. In a statement issued on 13 November,
President Salih underlined the need to enact the law in order to ensure the payment
of employees’ salaries but noted its passage “in the absence of a national consensus”.
The Presidency of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq issued a statement on 12 November
in which it noted that the Law had been passed without consideration for the
“principles of partnership and consensus”. However, after a meeting of the three
presidencies of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq on 15 November, the President of the
Region, Nechirvan Barzani, stated that the Kurdistan Regional Government stood
ready to reach agreements with the federal Government on revenue -sharing and other
outstanding issues. Since then, two delegations of the Kurdistan Regional
Government have visited Baghdad. The first delegation was led by the Kurdistan
Regional Government Minister of Finance and Economy on 3 December, and the
second by the Deputy Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq from 9 to
17 December. However, no agreement was reached on the transfer of pending or
future federal budget allocations to the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.
17. The agreement of 9 October between the federal and the Kurdistan Regional
Governments on Sinjar, Ninawa Governorate, entered into forc e on 21 November.
The Joint Operations Command confirmed the start of the implementation of the
agreement’s security provisions on 1 December.

C.

Security situation
18. On 10 December, Iraq marked the third anniversary of the military defeat of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh). The President
recalled “the ultimate sacrifice made by our heroic security forces when they defeated
ISIL”. The Speaker noted that the “victory will be completed with the return of the
displaced to their homes and the reconstruction of the devastated areas”. On the same
day, the Prime Minister visited Fallujah in Anbar Governorate and met with the local
Operations Commander and other security officials. The Prime Minister commended
the sacrifices that had made “victory” possible and the ongoing role of the security
forces in the fight against terrorism. Meanwhile, Iraqi security forces continued to
conduct counter-terrorism operations in areas still experiencing ISIL attacks,
primarily Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates.
19. On 17 November, the acting Secretary of Defence of the United States of
America, Christopher Miller, announced a further drawdown of his country’s troops
in Iraq from 3,000 to 2,500 by 15 January 2021. He affirmed that the decision was
“not irreversible” and was consistent with “established plans and strategic

4/16

21-01196

S/2021/120

objectives.” He emphasized that Iraqi and officials of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization had been consulted. Later that day, seven rockets were launched towards
the former International Zone, four of which landed within its perimeter. Rockets
landing outside the former International Zone killed a child and injured five civilians.
The attack was the first since the announcement on 10 October of a unilateral
“ceasefire” by a spokesperson for a group that proclaimed itself “the Coordination
Body for the Islamic Resistance”. Rockets also landed in the former International
Zone on 20 December, causing damage to residential buildings an d vehicles. The
President and Prime Minister issued statements condemning the attacks as affronts to
the sovereignty of Iraq, reiterating the commitment of the Government of Iraq to the
protection of diplomatic personnel and premises and pledging to appreh end and hold
the perpetrators to account. The attack of 20 December was also condemned by the
international community, including the United States and the regional neighbours of
Iraq, notably Bahrain, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Saudi Arab ia and
the United Arab Emirates.
20. On 9 December, attacks with improvised explosive device were targeted at
trucks contracted to carry supplies for the international counter-ISIL coalition, the
first such incident since the announcement of the unilateral “ceasefire” of 10 October.
Since then, a total of 18 similar incidents reportedly took place in Babil, Basrah, Dhi
Qar, Muthanna, Qadisiyah and Salah al-Din Governorates.
21. The Ministry of Defence of Turkey reported continued military activity against
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) targets in northern Iraq. On 9 December, in an
address to the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, the Minister of National Defence
Hulusi Akar stated that 28 operations had been carried out in northern Iraq against
PKK elements in the preceding month. In the same address, Mr. Akar also stated:
“while maintaining close contact with our Iraqi brothers, steps are being taken for a
closer cooperation, especially in the fight against terrorism”. In response to the
identical letters dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/1065), the Permanent Representative of Turkey sent a letter dated
16 November 2020 to the President of the Security Council ( S/2020/1117) in which
he reiterated that Turkey was obliged to take “appropriate measures against terrorist
threats to its security emanating from Iraq”. In a subsequent letter to the President of
the Security Council, dated 3 December 2020 (S/2020/1165), the Permanent
Representative of Turkey “firmly rejected” any criticism towards his coun try for
exercising its inherent right of self-defence, as outlined in Article 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations and acting within the context of responsibility attributed by
relevant Security Council resolutions to States Members of the United Nation s in the
fight against terrorism. In identical letters dated 13 January 2021 addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council ( S/2021/57), the
Permanent Representative of Iraq transmitted, on behalf of his Government, a list of
“Turkish violations of Iraqi territory and airspace” between 30 September 2020 and
7 January 2021. According to the letters, those violations of the sovereignty of Iraq
by Turkey were contrary to the principles of good-neighbourliness and constituted a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. In the same
letters, Iraq reiterated its willingness to cooperate with Turkey with a view to finding
common ground and arriving at appropriate solutions that would bring an end to the
repeated violations.
22. On 5 November, in response to a reported attack by PKK against Kurdistan’s
Peshmerga forces in Amedy District, Dahuk Governorate, the Prime Minister’s Office
issued a statement condemning the attack. In the statement, the attack was labelled as
an “assault on the country's sovereignty” and measures were announced to end similar
attacks. During the cabinet meeting of 4 November, the Prime Minister of the
21-01196

5/16

S/2021/120

Kurdistan Region of Iraq also condemned the attack. On 16 December, the Prime
Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq reported another attack by PKK against
Peshmerga forces after the Peshmerga had stopped PKK elements from crossing the
border from the Syrian Arab Republic. He condemned the “reckless, unprovoked
attack” by the PKK against a Peshmerga base. PKK reportedly denied being
responsible for either incident.

D.

Regional and international developments
23. Iraq continued efforts to strengthen relations with its regional neighbours and
international partners. In the area of economic development, the fourth meeting of the
Saudi-Iraqi Coordination Council, a mechanism to harmonize positions between the
two countries on issues of mutual interest, took place in Baghdad on 8 November at
the ministerial level. It was followed on 10 November by a virtual meeting between
the Prime Minister and Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman Al-Saud to review the
Council’s work. The two sides affirmed their determination to stren gthen bilateral
relations, to coordinate positions on matters relating to oil, including full commitment
to decisions made by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and with
other major oil-producing countries, to cooperate in confronting th e threat of
terrorism and in supporting regional and international stability. They also agreed to
enhance commercial ties, including by reopening the Arar border crossing between
Saudi Arabia and Iraq, which had been closed since 1990 and which reopened on
18 November.
24. The President of Iraq engaged with international partners to underscore his
country’s desire to be a stabilizing force in the region and its commitment to global
action to combat COVID-19 and climate change. On 2 December, he spoke with the
President of France, Emmanuel Macron, to review regional developments and discuss
ways to strengthen Iraqi sovereignty. The President of Iraq addressed a special session
of the General Assembly in response to the COVID-19 pandemic on 3 December and
the Climate Ambition Summit on 12 December.
25. On 17 November, the Prime Minister spoke with the Secretary of State of the
United States, Michael Pompeo, to discuss bilateral relations and cooperation
between Iraq and the international counter-ISIL coalition in the ongoing global fight
against terrorism.
26. The Prime Minister conducted visits aimed at deepening the bilateral ties of Iraq
with its regional neighbours. He travelled to Ankara at the invitation of the President
of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan with whom he met on 17 December. The Prime
Minister’s Office reported via social media that the two sides discussed bilateral
relations and ways to consolidate them in various fields and reviewed a number of
issues of common interest. During a joint press co nference, President Erdoğan
expressed appreciation for the operations against PKK conducted by the Iraqi
authorities. He noted that Turkey and Iraq had agreed to continue their fight against
common enemies, including PKK and ISIL, and added that the two co untries had
reaffirmed their consensus to enhance cooperation in that regard. The Prime Minister
of Iraq underlined the desire of Iraq to maintain friendly and good relations with its
neighbours. He emphasized that it was impossible for Iraq to tolerate an y terrorist
formation that threatened the national security of Turkey from Iraqi soil. During the
visit, two bilateral agreements were signed relating to taxation and cultural
cooperation. On 19 December, the Prime Minister visited Jordan, where he met wit h
King Abdullah II. Agenda items included bilateral relations and issues of common
interest, notably the region’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic and economic
recovery measures.

6/16

21-01196

S/2021/120

27. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Fuad Hussein, conducted visits aimed at
boosting the bilateral ties of Iraq, including economic ties, with regional and
international partners. On 25 November, he led a high-level delegation on a visit to
Moscow, where he met separately with the Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian
Federation, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Energy. In a statement
issued on 25 November, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq expressed his
country’s keenness to further develop bilateral ties, including through the activation
of 14 memoranda of understanding in the areas of education, public health, oil and
transportation, and underscored his appreciation for the role the Russian Federation
played in the global fight against terrorism. The Minister attended the Manama
Dialogue in Bahrain from 4 to 6 December. He visited Kuwait on 16 December and
Turkey on 17 December.
28. The Minister of Defence of Iraq, Juma Anad Saadoun, and the Minister of
National Defence of Turkey, Hulusi Akar, paid reciprocal visits on 28 December and
18 January respectively. They discussed joint cooperation in the fight against
terrorism.
29. On 22 December, the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq spoke with
the United States Secretary of State. According to a readout by the Department of
State, they discussed regional security and continued security cooperation between
the United States, the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments and the
international counter-ISIL coalition.
30. On 5 January, the United States Department of State extended a waiver for 90
days enabling Iraq to continue to engage in financial transactions related to the import
of energy from the Islamic Republic of Iran.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
31. The Special Representative continued to engage with the three presidencies, the
leaders of political parties, members of parliament, the Independent High Electoral
Commission and religious and community leaders on issues related to, among other
things, electoral preparations, public protests and relations between Baghdad and
Erbil.
32. Following the promulgation of the Law on the Election of the Council of
Representatives of Iraq, the Special Representative discussed with releva nt actors the
need to ensure the swift allocation of an electoral budget to allow the Independent
High Electoral Commission to implement its tasks. She underlined the importance of
full transparency to instil public trust in the electoral process and boost voter
participation. She emphasized that, as an essential requirement for electoral integrity,
the Iraqi people must be able to vote freely, away from political interference and
security threats.
33. As protests continued to be marked by violence, the Sp ecial Representative,
under her good offices mandate, held meetings with Iraqi activists and Government
officials. She listened to the activists’ concerns and confirmed that UNAMI continued
to monitor, document and publicly report on human rights violation s and to provide
specific and concrete recommendations to the federal and Kurdistan Regional
Governments, legal authorities and security forces for remedial and pre -emptive
action. In her engagement with government officials, the Special Representative

21-01196

7/16

S/2021/120

cautioned that the lack of transparency and accountability remained a source of public
discontent.
34. On the issue of domestic anti-corruption activities, the Special Representative
discussed with government officials that efforts in that domain were welcom ed but
must follow due process in a manner that promoted transparency and fairness,
consistent with established legal norms.
35. From 19 to 21 December, the Special Representative visited Erbil and
Sulaymaniyah. She met with the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Nechirvan
Barzani, the Prime Minister of the Region, Masrour Barzani; Co-President of the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Lahur Talabany; the General Coordinator of the Gorran
Movement, Omar Sayid Ali; and the Secretary General of the Kurdist an Islamic
Union, Salahuddin Muhammad Bahaauddin , with whom she discussed the overall
political situation in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, as well as outstanding issues
between the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments. The Special
Representative emphasized that a positive and constructive relationship between the
federal Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government was crucial to
the stability of the whole country. Concerning the public protests in Sulaymaniyah,
the Special Representative condemned the acts of violence that had resulted in deaths,
injuries and the destruction of property. She expressed concern over persistent reports
of human rights violations, with respect to the freedom of expression, including
arbitrary arrests and detention, and other forms of interference.
36. The Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance
continued her activities in preparation for the elections for the Council of
Representatives. On 3 December, she met with the Chair of the Independent High
Electoral Commission. She continued her engagement with the international
community in the context of enhanced electoral technical assistance to the
Commission.
37. On 7 November, the Deputy Special Representative represented UNAMI at the
virtual closing session of a series of workshops that had been held across Iraq.
Organized by the Iraq Foundation and supported by the Mission, the workshop in
Baghdad provided training for women in leadership, communications and advocacy.
The Deputy Special Representative highlighted the need for sustained efforts to
translate women’s informal grassroots leadership into formal political and public
roles.
38. The Deputy Special Representative led the final sessions of online youth
workshops in Maysan, Muthanna and Dhi Qar Governorates organized by UNAMI in
cooperation with the Committee for Coexistence and Societal Peace of the Prime
Minister’s Office and the Amal Association, an Iraqi non-governmental organization.
On 22 November, she virtually addressed a national youth conference, the
culmination of 18 workshops across governorates that brought together hundreds of
young people and political representatives over the past 18 months to discuss key
challenges facing youth and their contribution to shaping the country’s future.

B.

Electoral assistance
39. In a letter dated 20 November, the Government of Iraq made a formal request to
the Security Council to strengthen the role of UNAMI to obtain more advice, support,
technical assistance and electoral observation for early parliamentary elections in
June 2021. In clarifying the request for electoral observation to ambassadors in
Baghdad, the Minister for Foreign Affairs underscored that the need to rebuild public
trust and promote participation were the main reasons behind the request. The request
remains under consideration by the Security Council.

8/16

21-01196

S/2021/120

40. The Law on the Election of the Council of Representatives of Iraq (Law No. 9
of 2020) was signed by the President on 5 November. Under the new Law,
parliament’s 329 seats were maintained, 83 seats (25 per cent) were reserved for
women and 9 seats for the country’s minority communities (5 for Christians, 1 for
Yezidis, 1 for Shabaks, 1 for Sabean Mandeans and 1 for Fayli Kurds). Each
governorate was divided into multiple constituencies, with a total of 83 countrywide.
Each constituency would return three to five members of parliament, depending on
its population density. The Independent High Electoral Commission worked to adjust
the voter registry structure and candidate nomination processes to reflect the new
constituencies. The Mission continued to provide technical and legal assistance to the
Independent High Electoral Commission for the development of several electoral
regulations, including the registration and certification of candidates, electoral
campaigning, media regulations, electoral complaints and appeals, voter registration
updates, and the accreditation of political parties, electoral alliances and candidates’
agents.
41. With 11.3 million voters (out of 26.6 million) still without biometric records,
UNAMI urged the Independent High Electoral Commission to consider options for
expanding biometric registration coverage and speeding up the distribution of voter
cards ahead of the elections, including by drawing on support from other government
institutions and seeking solutions with service providers. The Mission provided
technical assistance to the Independent High Electoral Commission and the Ministry
of Interior as they considered ways to combine the voter database of the former and
the national identification card project of the latter to improve the integrity and speed
of voter registration. The Mission continued to assist the Independent High Electoral
Commission with regard to technical requirements to undertake an independent audit
of the election results management and information technology systems for the
elections.
42. Concerns continued to be raised by parliamentarians over the recruitment of
personnel for the Independent High Electoral Commission’s national and
governorate-level electoral offices. The Board of Commissioners reiterated that the
appointments were being made according to established legal procedures and that all
appointees were subject to a three-month probationary period. The Mission made
suggestions to the Board on the application of a transparent and consistent evaluation
process for the personnel. With the aim of building technical capacity, UNAMI held
two orientation and training sessions in November 2020 for heads of departments and
sections of the Commission. Those induction activities set the stage for the larger scale capacity-building initiatives under the United Nations-led electoral support
project.
43. Significant progress was made in mobilizing funding to implement the project
entitled “Support to Iraq’s electoral processes”. To date, the project has received
generous contributions and confirmed commitments from the Governments of France,
Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom of Great B ritain and
Northern Ireland, and the United States, as well as from the European Union. Those
funds will enable the deployment of electoral experts from January 2021, to be
assigned to provide capacity-building and technical assistance as the Independent
High Electoral Commission prepares for early parliamentary elections.

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
44. Criminal accountability for violations and abuses perpetrated against protesters
since October 2019 remains largely absent, including with respect to the targeted
killings, abduction and torture of protesters and activists. The fact -finding body

21-01196

9/16

S/2021/120

mandated to examine such violations, established by the Government in May, is not
yet functional and the names of its members have not yet been announced.
45. During demonstrations in Sulaymaniyah Governorate, security forces used live
ammunition in response to violence by protesters, resulting in 9 dead and 85 injured
from 2 to 12 December, according to information verified by UNAMI. On
7 December, the Kurdistan Regional Government suspended the operating licence of
a media outlet and closed its offices. The suspension remained in place until
19 December. On 13 December, the Kurdistan Regional Government issued written
warnings to at least three other media outlets, announcing unspecified legal action for
any continued broadcasting of violent images of the demonstrations. According to the
authorities, the broadcast of demonstrations incited violence and disturbed social
cohesion.
46. Violence targeted at protesters continued with no new arrests or prosecutions of
suspects. On 27 and 28 November, in Haboubi Square in Nasiriyah, armed men killed
5 protesters, injured 90 others and burned down 50 tents, according to information
verified by UNAMI. From 28 November to 2 January, UNAMI documented eight
separate attacks with improvised explosive devices targeted at the home s of activists
in Nasiriyah and Basrah, causing material damage. Similarly, in Baghdad,
unidentified gunmen continued to target protesters in various locations, causing
injuries. According to information verified by UNAMI, on 25 November, unidentified
gunmen shot at a vehicle carrying two prominent protesters, injuring one. On
4 December, in Baghdad, unidentified gunmen shot at a vehicle in which four
protesters were being taken from Tahrir Square, injuring two; on 11 December, a
group of masked men attacked protesters near Tahrir Square, stabbing one in the back
multiple times; and on 15 December, unidentified gunmen shot dead a prominent
protester in Baghdad. The Mission also documented disappearances, abductions and
torture of protesters.
47. On 16 November, prison authorities executed 21 male adult prisoners in the
central prison of Nasiriyah. They had been sentenced to death after conviction for
terrorism-related offences. On 21 and 22 December, UNAMI visited the prison the
first time UNAMI had gained full access to the prison in line with its mandate for the
first time. The Mission observed overcrowded cells and noted that inmates had limited
access to health care and communication with their families. The Mission will
continue to work with the Ministry of Justice to address those issues. The prison
authorities confirmed that in 2019 and 2020, 32 death sentences had been carried out.
48. On 22 and 23 November, UNAMI held a two-day online workshop with the
Supreme Judicial Council, attended by 16 Iraqi judges from courts in Baghdad and
international human rights and judicial experts. Participants exchanged views on
ways to strengthen an effective legal defence, on evidentiary standards, on judicial
oversight of detention and on the reasoning of judgments. The workshop was the first
step in a series of discussions with the Supreme Judicial Council to develop guidelines
for the conduct of judicial investigations and trials.
49. Following a review of Iraqi efforts to protect persons from enforced
disappearance at its nineteenth session, held in September the Committee on Enforced
Disappearances issued its Concluding observations on Iraq on 27 November. The
observations contained recommendations for the Government of Iraq and a request
for the submission of up-to-date information on implementation by 25 November
2021.
50. From 7 to 9 December, UNAMI facilitated a workshop on promoting protection
from enforced disappearance in collaboration with the Iraqi High Commission for
Human Rights and the International Commission on Missing Persons, an
intergovernmental organization. The participants discussed strategies, including
10/16

21-01196

S/2021/120

increased engagement of civil society organizations with the relevant United Nations
human rights mechanisms, the role of civil society in resp onding to victims’ needs
and the enactment of legislation on the protection of all persons from enforced
disappearance.
51. To mark Human Rights Day, on 10 December, UNAMI launched three rap
songs, “New world (COVID-19)”, “Together” and “Final advice”, written and
performed by, respectively, Iraqi rappers Golden Nenous, Raz and Mr. Legendary in
Assyrian, Kurdish and Arabic. Human rights and the health of others were front and
centre in the songs. With the support of the organization Imprint of Hope, UNAMI
distributed 10,000 information postcards in three densely populated neighbourhoods
of Baghdad from 4 to 6 December, raising awareness of the human rights impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
52. On 15 and 17 December, UNAMI held two workshops on the preservat ion and
protection of minority languages and protecting minority rights and defending
diversity in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and Ninawa Plains. The workshops were
held in Baghdad and Erbil and brought together senior government officials,
historians, language experts and representatives of minority groups to develop a
strategy to protect and preserve minority languages in Iraq, including through the
implementation of relevant recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination.
53. To mark the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence campaign,
UNAMI, in collaboration with three Iraqi artists, launched a social media campaign
to raise awareness of domestic violence in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic.
Graphic images depicted the stigma faced by female family members when they seek
health care and highlighted the contribution of women health-care workers to the
COVID-19 response. The aim of the images was to promote public dialogue on the
consequences of gender-based violence and to reinforce collective responsibility for
ending violence against women. They were shared widely on social media.
54. Insecurity and violence continued to affect civilians. Between 1 October and
31 December, UNAMI documented 58 incidents resulting in at least 104 civilian
casualties (41 deaths, including 3 children and 3 women, and 63 injured, including
12 children and 7 women). A total of 71 civilian casualties (25 deaths and 46 injuries)
were attributed to ISIL, and 29 civilian casualties (12 deaths and 17 injuries) to
unidentified armed groups. Aerial operations by Turkish forces targeting PKK
locations continued. In the first week of December, three civilian casualties were
attributed to Turkish military airstrikes in the Amedi district of Da huk Governorate.
In a letter dated 13 January addressed to the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Permanent Representative of Turkey referred to the
military operation in the first week of December in Dahuk and noted that Turkey
targeted only “identified PKK elements in the north of Iraq” and that it “displayed
maximum restraint and precision not to cause any civilian loss”. In the same letter, he
expressed “firm rejection of the allegations attributing the death of three c ivilians in
Dohuk” to Turkish military airstrikes.
55. On 10 December, UNAMI, jointly with the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) and Justice Rapid Response, an international non -governmental
organization, concluded a four-month online training programme. The final workshop
in the programme was attended by 24 members (including 11 women) of the country
task force on monitoring and reporting on the six grave violations committed against
children. The aim of the programme was to strengthen capacity to d ocument grave
violations against children and to identify and address challenges in promoting child
protection. The workshop launched a peer network as a platform for continued
exchanges to strengthen the child protection framework in Iraq.
21-01196

11/16

S/2021/120

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
56. The sudden closure of camps for internally displaced persons from mid -October
onwards by the Government of Iraq and the associated challenges constituted a
priority area for United Nations activities in Iraq during the reporting period. By early
December, a total of 17 camps and informal sites had been closed or reclassified,
affecting 34,000 people. A total of 4,735 households (23,158 individuals) were
recorded as arriving at non-camp settings in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Erbil, Karbala,
Kirkuk, Ninawa, and Salah al-Din Governorates. Of the total number of recorded
arrivals, 1,311 households (28 per cent) had not returned to their location of origin
and were considered to be secondarily displaced, while 3,424 households (72 per
cent) had returned to their areas of origin, although not necessarily to their former
homes. According to representative follow-up surveys carried out by humanitarian
partners of the United Nations country team, approximately 20 per cent of those
affected by camp closures returned to houses or apartments that they owned; 35 per
cent were in rented accommodations; 18 per cent were being hosted by family or
friends; and the remainder resided in some kind of critical shelter. The whereabou ts
of the remaining 11,000 individuals who left camps during that period remained
unknown during the reporting period.
57. In the same surveys, 42 per cent of respondents indicated that they could not
return to their areas of origin due to destroyed or damaged housing, homes being
occupied by other people, or the unavailability of basic services, and that they did not
have other options for safe, voluntary and dignified durable settlement. In the surveys,
the top three needs cited by internally displaced p ersons affected by the sudden camp
closures were shelter, livelihoods and food. Women and children made up 78 per cent
of those affected by camp closures.
58. As at 10 December, three formal camps remained open in federal Iraq: Nahiyat
al-Amiriyah camp in Anbar Governorate, and Jad‘ah 5 and Salamiyah camps in
Ninawa Governorate. These camps host approximately 26,000 individuals. The
Government of Iraq has indicated to humanitarian partners that the three camps will
remain open for the time being, but humanitarian partners are preparing for any
eventuality. Many residents are families with perceived ISIL affiliations. An
additional 25 camps for internally displaced persons hosting 182,712 people remained
open under the administration of the Kurdistan Regiona l Government.
59. The United Nations in Iraq continued to advocate for the safe, voluntary,
dignified and sustainable return or settlement of internally displaced persons. A series
of joint and coordinated actions were undertaken to highlight concerns ste mming
from the sudden closure of camps and to seek clarity on developments. United Nations
system agencies and non-governmental organizations have provided life-saving
assistance where necessary to internally displaced persons leaving camps.
60. The COVID-19 pandemic continued to present health-care and other challenges
for Iraq, although the rate of transmission recorded by the Government is steadily
declining. Although the number of cases reported by the Ministry of Health rose to
602, 938 (including 12, 895 deaths, as of 10 January), the recovery rate increased to
more than 92 per cent, while the death rate stayed around 2.1 per cent. According to
the Government of Iraq, the public health authorities increased COVID -19 testing to
between 30,000 and 40,000 daily. The reported daily number of cases peaked and then
declined during the reporting period, indicating a decrease in the transmission rate
(0.86) across Iraq. Compared with early November, there was a 70 and 60 per cent
decline in the weekly number of infections and COVID-19-related deaths,
respectively. The positive test rate fell to 2.3 per cent, suggesting that an adequate

12/16

21-01196

S/2021/120

amount of testing was now being conducted. Nevertheless, COVID -19 continued to
pose a threat to the country’s fragile health-care system.
61. The World Health Organization continued to collaborate with government
ministries and institutions to conduct community awareness-raising campaigns on
COVID-19, reaching millions of Iraqis, including refugees and internally displaced
persons. The International Organization for Migration supported screening and
triaging for COVID-19 at 28 health-care facilities. Fifty-three health-care workers
were trained in infection prevention and control. Training on international health
regulations was provided to public health officials at the border. The International
Organization for Migration supported the hotline of the Iraqi High Commission for
Human Rights in Baghdad by providing psychosocial support for those affected by
the pandemic. Over 500 people have been reached so far.
62. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) provided
support to vulnerable groups in key service domains, including small -scale farmers
and essential workers, through the provision of medical personal protective
equipment and sanitizers. In partnership with the Ministry of Agriculture and other
partners, FAO developed messages, distributed via mobile phone, on symptoms and
preventative measures for workers along the food supply chain. In addition, the
United Nations Population Fund supported the establishment of four isolation units
in maternity hospitals in the north of Iraq to ensure safe deliveries for women who
had tested positive for COVID-19.
63. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
continued to support access to basic hygiene items for families by distributing
sanitary kits and cash assistance to limit the spread of COVID-19 among refugees,
internally displaced persons and returnees across Iraq. From April to December,
35,026 refugee families and 65,309 displaced families (a total of 100,335 families or
565,500 individuals), cashed out their assistance. In addition, UNHCR distributed
more than 77,780 sanitary kits that included hygiene and sanitary items to women and
girls of reproductive age living in camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons.
64. The United Nations country team continued to support essential health-care
services across Iraq. On 29 November, Iraqi public health authorities, in partnership
with the World Health Organization and UNICEF, began a mass polio vaccination
campaign targeting over 1.9 million children under the age of five. On 22 November,
the United Nations Population Fund, together with the Ministry of Health, launched
the national family planning strategy in response to the unmet need for family
planning among women. The strategy is multisectoral and engages all relevant
ministries, religious institutions, media and civil society organizations.
65. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), as part of its
stabilization programme, continued the implementation of critical infrastructure
rehabilitation and livelihood projects. Rehabilitation works were completed at nine
health-care facilities in eight governorates, creating space for 160 isolation rooms,
and work has been ongoing in four health-care facilities in four governorates. The
UNDP Funding Facility for Stabilization in Iraq achieved a critical milestone in
November with the endorsement by the Government of Iraq and international partners
of a three-year extension into 2023, a transition year in which responsibility for
stabilization needs will be handed over to the Government. To date, the Facility has
supported more than 10 million Iraqis in the five liberated governorates (Anbar,
Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa, and Salah al-Din).
66. The United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) continued to
support stabilization and recovery efforts in Iraq. UN -Habitat rehabilitated 86 houses
with structural damage, connected 265 vulnerable houses to improved water networks
21-01196

13/16

S/2021/120

(thus providing a regular water supply to approximately 1,600 internal ly displaced
persons, refugees and conflict-affected community members), created jobs for 200
returnees, issued occupancy certificates to 521 Yazidi households returning to Sinjar
to support their tenure security, and organized a week-long sports festival engaging
youth and children to mark the completion of a football pitch in west Mosul. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization supported
stabilization efforts through the handover of 15 rehabilitated schools in Salah al -Din
Governorate equipped with school furniture in addition to COVID-19 response
materials.
67. The World Food Programme launched rural livelihood projects in Basrah that
prioritized some of the poorest communities. The much-needed projects addressed
access to water and resilience to climate change in places where households were
among those worst affected by changes in temperature and rainfall.
68. The United Nations Mine Action Service cleared more than 135,000 m 2 of land
in agricultural areas of Anbar and Ninawa Governorates that had been contaminated
with explosive ordnance during the ISIL occupation. To support internally displaced
persons facing camp closure, hygiene kits containing explosive ordnance risk
education messages were provided in Salamiyah, Ninawa Governorate. In addition,
the Mine Action Service trained 12 police officers of the Ministry of Interior Police
Department on the disposal of explosive ordnance and improvised explosive devices.

IV. Security and operational issues
A.

Update on security arrangements
69. The Department of Safety and Security monitored developments throughout
Iraq and implemented risk management measures to enable United Nations
operations. Regular security advisories and alerts, including broadcasts related to
COVID-19, continued to be disseminated to keep United Nations personnel informed
of precautionary measures being taken.
70. The Department of Safety and Security supported an average of 31 field
missions per day across the country, with assessed risk levels ran ging from medium
to high. Its close coordination and engagement with the host Government continued
to ensure the proper flow of information and the necessary security support for United
Nations operations, in particular movements and access authorizations to regions still
affected by COVID-19 containment restrictions.

B.

Mission facilities, logistics, aviation, financial and legal issues
71. The Mission continued to implement all necessary measures to prevent the
spread of COVID-19 and mitigate its risks in United Nations compounds and offices.
It enhanced its medical preparedness through on-site COVID-19 testing with
machines newly acquired by the United Nations, contracted a specialized team to
support the operation of isolation and care units, signed agreements with hospitals in
Erbil and Dahuk for the management of moderate to severe cases, and negotiated
arrangements with neighbouring countries for the medical evacuation of United
Nations staff. Confident in its crisis readiness, the Mission was ab le to resume
construction and refurbishment projects in the United Nations compounds and offices
while maintaining strict health and safety protocols.

14/16

21-01196

S/2021/120

72. The Mission continued to provide logistical and administrative support to the
United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the delivery of its mandate.

V. Observations
73. I welcome the finalization of the electoral legislation required to enable
continued preparations for early elections. Important work remains to be done,
including the adoption of the law on the Federal Supreme Court and an agreement on
the Court’s membership, which are necessary for the certification of electoral results.
All Iraqi stakeholders have a responsibility to ensure that preparations, including the
selection of electoral personnel, continue and remain free from political interference
at all stages. Doing so is vital to build trust in the elections and their outcome. All
have a responsibility to assist in promoting a environment conducive to inclusive,
transparent, and credible elections. As UNAMI and UNDP expand their technical
electoral assistance activities, I thank Member States for their generous contributions.
The United Nations remains strongly committed to provide stepped -up electoral
support for the upcoming elections in accordance with Security Council resolution
2522 (2020).
74. The economy of Iraq continues to be affected by the lack of fundamental
reforms, the drop in global oil prices and the COVID -19 pandemic. The economic
reform proposals of the Government of Iraq are an encouraging first step towards
addressing that challenge. Swift implementation of the propose d reforms is essential
and will require broad political consensus to be successful.
75. I call on the federal and Kurdistan Region Governments and the Council of
Representatives to cooperate and to overcome their differences in the interests of all
Iraqi citizens. Sustainable solutions are urgently required.
76. The global health challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic also continue to affect
Iraq. I commend the collective efforts of the country’s health -care workers and
government officials to reduce the transmission rate through life-saving support,
increased testing and other measures. The United Nations will continue to work with
the Government of Iraq and other partners in addressing COVID -19 in the country.
77. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for global solidarity and
greater international cooperation and must be turned into an opportunity for
fundamental change. I am encouraged by the bilateral and multilateral engagement of
the Government of Iraq with international partners, including in the security and
economic fields. Partnership agreements aimed at strengthening relations among
regional and strategic partners should be respected and used as building blocks for
strong alliances against threats to international peace and stability. Tran sboundary
threats and terrorism should be dealt with collectively with respect for the territorial
sovereignty of the States concerned and based on the principle of good -neighbourly
relations.
78. The continued attacks against diplomatic missions and conv oys in Iraq remain
a serious concern. I reiterate my call for further concerted efforts by the Government
of Iraq, working with all influential actors, to ensure the protection of all diplomatic
missions and personnel in Iraq, to deal with security breache s in a firm and swift
manner, and to hold accountable before the law those responsible for those attacks. It
is incumbent upon all security actors to cooperate with the Government of Iraq in its
efforts to strengthen State control.
79. The challenges faced by Iraqis attempting to exercise their rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly remain another serious concern. It is incumbent on
21-01196

15/16

S/2021/120

the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments to protect and respect the freedoms
of expression and peaceful assembly. Respect for fundamental freedoms is integral to
the strengthening of public trust in State institutions.
80. Ongoing impunity, most notably with regard to the abduction, torture and
targeted killing of protesters and activists, remains a concern . I call on the
Government of Iraq to ensure criminal accountability, in addition to determining the
fate and whereabouts of protesters and activists who remain missing.
81. The engagement of the Government of Iraq with the Committee on Enforced
Disappearances is commendable. The recommendations made in the Committee’s
concluding observations offer opportunities for Iraq to take concrete steps to address
the issue of enforced disappearances through effective institutional and legislative
measures. To that effect, the adoption of a draft law on protection from enforced
disappearance compliant with the provisions of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance would be an important step
towards the promotion of accountability and the search for disappeared persons.
82. I share the Government’s goal of ending the displacement crisis in Iraq but
reiterate that a new crisis in the form of secondary displacement should be avoided at
all costs. The return of internally displaced persons must be voluntary, safe, dignified
and informed, with conditions in place to enable reintegration and to ensure
sustainable solutions. The United Nations stands by its commitment to support the
Government of Iraq in achieving a durable solution for all vulnerable displaced
persons and returnees in Iraq, including by supporting social cohesion measures.
83. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Jeanine Hennis Plasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their c ontinued dedication to
implementing the Organization’s mandate during extraordinary times and under
challenging circumstances. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation to my
Deputy Special Representative, Alice Walpole, for her dedicated service sinc e 2017
to the United Nations in Iraq.

16/16

21-01196
