S/2006/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 January 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 5 January 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004) and 1639 (2005)
(see annex), I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 16 December
2005, which I received from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, transmitting the
report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, covering the period from 16 September to 30 November 2005.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-20314 (E) 110106

*0620314*

S/2006/12

Annex
Letter dated 16 December 2005 from the Secretary-General
and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations
In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004)
and 1639 (2005), I attach the fourth three-monthly report on the activities of the EU
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period
from 16 September to 30 November 2005. I would be grateful if you would transmit
this report to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

S/2006/12

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative
of the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European
Union on the activities of the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Introduction
1.

The present report covers the period 16 September to 30 November 2005.

2.
In its resolutions 1575 (2004) and 1639 (2005), the Security Council requests
that Member States, acting through or in cooperation with the EU, report to the
Council on the activity of EUFOR, through the appropriate channels and at least at
three-monthly intervals. This document is the fourth such report to the Council.
Political background
3.
Overall, during the reporting period, the political and military situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained stable. The period was marked by important
progress in relation to the EU stabilization and association process and on
25 November the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina officially launched negotiations
on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement. The speed of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s progress will depend primarily on how quickly it adopts and
implements the necessary reforms. It is Bosnia and Herzegovina’s intention to
conclude the Stabilisation and Association Agreement within one year.
4.
ICTY cooperation improved in 2005. However, five indictees remain at large,
including Karadzic and Mladic. During the reporting period there were no further
arrests or transfers to The Hague.
5.
On 22 November, eight leaders of the major political parties of Bosnia and
Herzegovina signed a declaration in Washington, D.C., committing themselves to
carry out constitutional reforms aimed at establishing a more economical and
effective State government. Although the leaders were not yet able to agree to the
content of such reform, they committed to making the changes by March 2006, i.e.,
in time for the October 2006 National Elections.
EU stabilization and association process
6.
As reported previously, Bosnia and Herzegovina had already made
commendable progress on a number of priority reforms set out in the European
Commission’s Feasibility Study. The last remaining difficult condition — police
restructuring — was resolved on 5 October when the Republika Srpska National
Assembly voted in favour of an Agreement on Police Restructuring that meets the
principles set by the European Commission. The agreement was endorsed by the
Federation Parliament and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers,
thereby paving the way for the European Commission to recommend the opening of
negotiations on a stabilization and association agreement. The Council authorized
the Commission to proceed and the negotiations were officially launched on
25 November 2005 — just in time for the tenth anniversary of the Dayton peace
process.

3

S/2006/12

7.
The pace and conclusion of negotiations will depend in particular on Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s progress in developing its legislative framework and
administrative capacity, the implementation of police reform in compliance with the
Agreement on Police Restructuring of October 2005 and the European
Commission’s principles, the adoption and implementation of all necessary public
broadcasting legislation and full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
8.
Defence reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains on track; the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament endorsed the draft laws on 5 October 2005 and the reforms
will take effect from 1 January 2006.
EUFOR activities
9.
EUFOR’s current strength stands at around 6,200 troops, from 22 EU member
States and 11 third countries,a which are deployed throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina in three multinational task forces. Cyprus and Malta also contribute to
the common costs of this operation.
10. EUFOR continues to conduct operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in line
with its mandate, to provide deterrence, ensure continued compliance in relation to
its responsibility to fulfil the role specified in annexes 1a and 2 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and to contribute to the maintenance of a safe and
secure environment.
11. The multinational task forces have continued to conduct a variety of operations
including: patrolling, to demonstrate EUFOR’s presence, particularly in sensitive
and remote areas; local liaison and observation team activities, which are key to
maintaining “situational awareness”, and promoting cooperation with the local
authorities and specific operations to ensure compliance with the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and prevent anti-Dayton activities. Information
operations complement these other activities.
12. Harvest operations to collect and remove illegally held weapons from the
community have also continued. Between 1 September 2005 and 30 November
2005, almost 650 small arms, over 115,000 rounds of ammunition, and 1,431 hand
grenades and mines have been collected or turned in. The opportunity to detect and
collect weapons exists in almost all EUFOR operations. Specific operations,
however, are conducted, based on sound intelligence, in conjunction with the
appropriate authorities, to either collect voluntarily surrendered arms and
ammunition, under amnesty conditions, or if necessary, to collect weapons and
ammunition in directed operations. Harvest operations are also supported by
information operations.
13. The force level and the tempo of operations have been sufficient to accomplish
the desired effects of reassurance/deterrence/maintaining a safe and secure
environment. Routine liaison has continued to provide support and advice to the
local police and other law enforcement agencies, such as the State Border Service
and the Indirect Taxation Authority.
a

4

Countries contributing to EUFOR: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, The Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Albania, Argentina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Morocco, Norway, New Zealand, Romania, Switzerland and Turkey.

S/2006/12

14. Over this reporting period, EUFOR’s main effort has been to assist the local
authorities in maintaining a safe and secure environment. Several EUFOR
operations have been dedicated towards targeting organized crime and corruption,
with the main effort focused on disrupting and preventing illegal logging and fuel
smuggling. These operations resulted in several potential prosecutions and there are
clear indications that criminal activities in some areas have been reduced.
15. EUFOR has continued to develop its cooperation with local authorities.
Reports from different operations and activities have confirmed that local agencies
and authorities, such as the police and State Border Service, are performing better
with the support and encouragement of EUFOR. EUFOR has been proactive in
conducting a series of well-coordinated operations throughout the theatre. The
operations have been balanced but assertive and have further strengthened EUFOR’s
profile with the Bosnia and Herzegovina population, as well as supporting the
Office of the High Representative’s Mission Implementation Plan.
Outlook
16. On 6 December 2005, the Force Commander, Major General David Leakey
(United Kingdom) will hand over command of EUFOR to Major General Gian
Marco Chiarini (Italy).
17. EUFOR activities will continue in a similar vein to those of the previous
period and valuable information and lessons will continue to be captured and
assimilated for future operations. EUFOR will continue its comprehensive and
inclusive approach as part of the overall EU action in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
implementation of defence reforms from January 2006 and resultant capacitybuilding in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence should allow EUFOR
progressively to hand over its Joint Military Affairs tasks to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Armed Forces during 2006.

5
