Resolutions adopted without referenee to a Main Committee

the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and poses a threat to international peace
and security;
5. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of
the struggle of the colonial peoples and peoples under
alien domination to exercise their right to self-determination and independence by all the necessary means
at their disposal, and notes with satisfaction the
progress made in the colonial Territories by the national
liberation movements, both through their struggle and
through reconstruction programmes;
6. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain
colonial Powers in the Territories under their domination, of imposing non-representative régimes and constitutions, strengthening the position of foreign economic
and other interests, misleading world public opinion
and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign immigrants while evicting, displacing and transferring the
indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and calls upan
those Powers to desist forthwith from such policies;
7. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United N ations system
to provide, in consultation, as appropriate, with the
Organization of African Unity, moral and material
assistance to all peoples struggling for their freedom
and independence in the colonial Territories and, in
particular, to the national liberation movements of the
Territories in southern Africa, and in that connexion
draws the attention of all States to the Assistance
Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism and
Apartheid of the Organization of African Unity; 50
8. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, to withhold
or continue to withhold assistance of any kind from
the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and
from the illegal racist minority régime in Southern
Rhodesia until they renounce their policy of colonial
domination and racial discrimination;
9. Requests the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and
installations from colonial Territories and to refrain
from establishing new ones;
1O. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of General Assembly resolutions 1514
(XV) and 2621 (XXV) in all Territories which have
not yet attained independence and, in particular, to
formulate specific proposals for the elimination of the
remaining manifestations of colonialism and report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
11. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter with regard to developments in colonial Territories which are likely to threaten international peace
and security, and recommends that the Council take
such suggestions fully into consideration;
12. Requests the Special Committee to undertake
a special study on the compliance of Member States
with the Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia
and Southern Rhodesia, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
50 lbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1), chap. V,
annex, appendix V.

17

13. Requests the Special Committee to intensify
its consideration of the small Territories and to recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate
methods and also the steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise fully and
without further delay their right to self-determination
and independence;
14. Endorses the proposal of the Special Committee to take steps, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, to enable representatives of
national liberation movements in the colonial Territories in southern Africa to participate, whenever
necessary and in an appropriate capacity, in its deliberations relating to those Territories;
15. Requests the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Special Committee in the discharge of its
mandate and, in particular, to participate in the work
of the Committee relating to the Territories under
their administration;
16. Calls upan the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee by permitting
the access of visiting groups to the colonial Territories
in arder to secure first-hand information conceming
the Territories and to ascertain the wishes and aspirations of the inhabitants of those Territories under their
administration;
17. Requests the Special Committee to assist the
Economic and Social Council in the study envisaged
in Council resolution 1651 (LI) of 29 October 1971,
bearing in mind the need to enlist the support of
non-govemmental organizations in consultative status
with the Council in the achievement of the objectives
of the Declaration and in the implementation of the
relevant rcsolutions of the United Nations;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and personnel
necessary for the implementation of the present resolution as well as the various resolutions on decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and the Special
Committee.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2879 (XXVI). Dissemination of information on
decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the question of publicity for the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization,~ 1
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Conscious of the urgent need to intensify widespread
and continuous dissemination of information on the
work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, on the situation in the colonial Territories and
on the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
51 /bid., chap. I, paras. 86-101, and chap. V.

18

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

consultations and a systematic exchange of the relevant
information with that organization;
(e) To enlist, from the non-govemmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council and from those non-govemmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, support in the dissemination of the relevant
information;
(d) To continue to publish, in consultation with
the Special Committee, selected issues of the periodical
Objective: Justice and the bulletin "United Nations
and Southern Africa" in other languages besides English
and French;
4. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the discharge of the tasks entrusted to
him under paragraph 3 above;
5. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-govemmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well
as other non-govemmental organizations having a
special interest in the field of decolonization, to undertake, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and
within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred
to in paragraph 2 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to collect and prepare on
a continuous basis for redissemination by the Office
of Public Information, basic material, studies and
articles relating to various aspects of the problems of
decolonization;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Special Committee on the implementation of the present
resolution;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question at its next session and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

by the colonial peoples and the activities of their
national liberation movements,

Taking into account the suggestions of the Special
Committee as well as the views of the Office of Public
Information on the implementation of these suggestions,
as reflected in the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee,
Taking into account the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee112 relating to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the review and reappraisal of United Nations
information policies and activities,113 and noting the
report of the Secretary-General on the joint meeting of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the Special Committee on Apartheid and the
United Nations Council for Namibia, 114
Recognizing the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration and the need for the Office of Public Information to intensify its efforts to acquaint world public
opinion with ali aspects of the problems of decolonization,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Atfirms the vital importance of urgently effecting
the widest possible dissemination of information on
the evils and dangers of colonialism, the continuing
struggle for liberation being waged by the colonial peoples, particularly in southern Africa, and the efforts
being made by the intemational community to eliminate
the remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms and
manifestations;

3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take concrete measures through all the media
at bis disposal, including publications, radio and
television, to give widespread and continuous publicity
to the work of the United Nations in the field of
decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories and to the continuing struggle for liberation
being waged by the colonial peoples and, inter alia:

2903 ,(XXVI). Appointment of the Secretary•
General of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation contained in Security Council resolution 306 (1971) of
21 December 1971, 55
Appoints Mr. Kurt Waldheim Secretary-General of
the United Nations for a tenn of office beginning on
1 January 1972 and ending on 31 December 1976.
2031st plenary meeting,
22 December 1971.

(a) To intensify the activities of the information
centres Iocated in southern Africa, including the establishment of an additional information centre where
appropriate;
( b) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
112 A/C.5/L.1068/Rev.2. For the text of this document, see
Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 76, document A/8531/ Add.1,
para. 137.
ll3 A/C.5/1320/Rev.1 and Add.1.
114 A/8388.

*

55 See Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 18, document A/8496.

*

*
