A/56/PV.110

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

110th plenary meeting
Thursday, 15 August 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

(Republic of Korea)

Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 8 (continued)

Agenda item 21 (continued)

Adoption of the agenda of the fifty-sixth session of
the General Assembly and organization of work:
request for the reopening of the consideration of
agenda item 21 (j)

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity

Note by the Secretary-General (A/56/1024)
The Acting President: I should like to draw the
attention of the General Assembly to a note by the
Secretary-General contained in document A/56/1024.
As indicated in the footnote that document, in order for
the General Assembly to consider the note, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (j) of
agenda item 21, “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
reopen consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, held on 19 September 2001,
the General Assembly decided to consider sub-item (j)
of agenda item 21 directly in plenary meeting. In order
for the General Assembly to take action expeditiously
on the present note, may I further take it that the

Note by the Secretary-General (A/56/1024)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly, having considered the note by the
Secretary-General, decides that the African Union will
assume the rights and responsibilities of the
Organization of African Unity as an observer invited in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2011
(XX) and the cooperation agreement between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In this connection, I
should like to recall that, in the provisional agenda of
the fifty-seventh session (document A/57/150), the title
of the sub-item appears as “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity”.
In view of the decision just taken by the General
Assembly, may I take it that the Assembly wishes to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-52442 (E)

*0252442*

A/56/PV.110

change the title of the sub-item to “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union”?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the African Union.
Mr. Ngugu (African Union) (spoke in French):
Allow me to convey to you, Sir, our great satisfaction
at seeing you preside over the current meeting.
Now that the General Assembly has adopted a
decision on the African Union, I would like, on behalf
of Mr. Amara Essy, Interim Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, to convey our
gratitude to the General Assembly for the support it has
just voiced to our organization. The African Union was
born on 9 July 2002, with the praiseworthy objectives
enshrined in the Constitutive Act. The African Union
will rely on its own potentials to attain those
objectives, and, in particular, on the sincere
cooperation that should exist with its partners. We hope
that cooperation will be very fruitful.
This is an important moment for us. A new, hopefilled era is beginning. We believe that, through the
ambitious programme adopted by the African Union
with the participation of the Members of the United
Nations, we will be able to achieve the hopes of
Africans within the framework of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 22 (continued)
Final review and appraisal of the implementation of
the United Nations New Agenda for the Development
of Africa in the 1990s
Draft resolution (A/56/L.84)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of South Africa to introduce draft
resolution A/56/L.84.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Today is indeed a
historic day for us from the African continent, as the
Organization of African Unity is being replaced in this
Hall by the African Union. I have the pleasure to

2

introduce draft resolution A/56/L.84. I would like to
begin by stating that in addition to the sponsors that
appear on the draft resolution — Azerbaijan, Belgium,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt and
South Africa — this draft resolution is also sponsored
by the following countries: Algeria, Austria, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lesotho, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco, the
Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom.
This draft resolution dates back to resolution
56/218, of 21 December 2001, in which it was decided
that a high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly would be held on 16 September 2002 to
consider how to support the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD). At the time that
resolution was discussed, there was a possibility of our
having two days for this high-level event. But,
following consultations and negotiations, 16 September
is the only day that we have for the high-level event in
support of NEPAD.
Because of the fact that this is to be a one-day
event, we have faced the tremendous challenge of
trying to accommodate all Member States wishing to
participate in the debate that will be held on
16 September 2002. In the end, we have come up with
a draft resolution that we believe enjoys consensus
among many Member States. The draft resolution
would decide to hold a high-level meeting on
16 September 2002 to consider how to support the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development. That session
would consist of two plenary meetings, from 9 a.m. to
1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m. Together with those
two plenary meetings, there would also be a separate
informal panel.
The speakers’ list for the debate in the plenary
meetings shall be organized on a first-come-firstserved basis, and the order of precedence shall be
heads of State or Government, vice-presidents, crown
princes and princesses, deputy prime ministers, the
highest-ranking officials of the Holy See and
Switzerland — in their capacities as observer States —
Palestine — in its capacity as an Observer — ministers,
vice-ministers, chairmen of delegations and everyone
else representing their country. However, because it is
to be a one-day meeting, we decided to adopt a formula
that would ensure that we could take advantage of the
presence of heads of State or Government who will be

A/56/PV.110

here for the fifty-seventh session, as well as of the
ministers expected to attend the session.
In addition, if I may digress for a moment, the
speakers’ list will not be open until 10 September, in
order to be fair to many of our colleagues who are not
here or who are or who are on vacation. That will allow
us to open up the speakers’ list with everyone in town,
so that no one will have an added advantage or
disadvantage.
The draft resolution would also decide that the
informal panel would be held parallel with the
afternoon plenary meeting, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. The
panel’s theme would be “The international
community’s partnership with the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development”. The draft resolution would
further decide that the informal panel would be made
up of five panellists, namely, the heads of State of the
five initiating countries of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: the Presidents of Nigeria, South
Africa, Algeria, Senegal and Egypt. The draft
resolution would further decide that, at the end of the
debate in the plenary meetings, the Head of State of
Nigeria would orally present to the General Assembly a
summary of the discussion in the informal panel.
The formula we have come up with is one that we
believe suits the concerns and needs of many
delegations. We ask the Assembly to endorse it by
consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/56/L.84, entitled
“Organization of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly to consider how to support the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development”.
The following delegations have become
additional sponsors of the draft resolution: the
Bahamas,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
China,
the
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Iceland, Madagascar,
Mongolia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Sierra
Leone, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, Togo and
the United States.

The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that the list of speakers in the debate at the
high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly to
consider how to support the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, to be held on 16 September,
will be opened at the start of the fifty-seventh session.
The General Assembly has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of agenda item 22.
Agenda item 63
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 31 July 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the General Assembly
(A/56/1020)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 3rd plenary meeting, held on 19 September 2001,
the General Assembly included item 63 on the agenda
of the fifty-sixth session. In connection with this item,
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document A/56/1020, which contains the text of a letter
dated 31 July 2002 from the Permanent Representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the General
Assembly, in which it is requested that the item entitled
“Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of
the Congo” be included in the agenda of the fiftyseventh session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item, and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-seventh
session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 63.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.84?
Draft resolution
(resolution 56/511).

A/56/L.84

was

adopted

3
