S/PRST/2003/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 May 2003
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4756th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 May 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns the recent killings, the violence and
other human rights violations and atrocities in Bunia, as well as the attacks
against the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC) and internally displaced persons who have sought
refuge at the MONUC premises, and reiterates that there will be no impunity
for such acts and that the perpetrators will be held accountable. It demands that
all hostilities in Ituri cease immediately. The fighting is unacceptable. It
threatens the stability of the Ituri area and severely undermines the
continuation of the peace process and the establishment of the Transitional
National Government.
“The Security Council fully supports the work initiated by the Ituri
Pacification Commission, established by the Luanda Agreement of 6
September 2002, under which the Ituri interim administration was formed, and
encourages donors to provide additional funding and emphasizes that it is up to
the various Congolese parties in Ituri to pursue an effective inclusive political
and security mechanism in this framework.
“The Security Council welcomes the agreement signed in Dar es Salaam
on 16 May 2003 and calls on the parties to implement it fully and without
delay.
“The Security Council calls on all parties in the region to end all support
to armed groups and refrain from any action that might compromise the return
to peace in Ituri, in particular the work of the Ituri interim administration, and
reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo over all its territory.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Bunia and demands that all parties grant full and
unimpeded access for humanitarian aid and guaranty the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel. It also calls on the donor community to continue to
support the humanitarian organizations.

03-36204 (E)

160503

*0336204*

S/PRST/2003/6

“The Security Council pays tribute to the work that has been achieved by
the staff and contingents of MONUC in Ituri in very difficult conditions, and
fully supports them.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts by the Secretary-General to
address the urgent humanitarian and security situation in Bunia, including
options for sending an emergency international force, and encourages him to
complete consultations to this end as a matter of urgency.
“The Security Council demands that all Congolese parties and regional
States involved in the DRC conflict refrain from any action that could
undermine the possible deployment of an international force, and support it.”

2
