General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

184

Decides that:
(a) The term of office of those members of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law whose term would expire on 31 December 1976
is extended until the last day prior to the beginning of
the regular annual session of the Commission in 1977
and the term of office of those members of the Commission whose term would expire on 31 December
1979 is extended until the last day prior to the beginning of the regular annual session of the Commission
in 1980;
( b) Commencing with the elections to membe~ship
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law at the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly, all States elected to membership shall take
office at the beginning of the first day of the regular
annual session of the Commission immediately following their election and their terms of office shall expire
on the last day prior to the opening. o! the seve1;1th
regular annual session of the Comm1ss10n followmg
their election;
( c) Governments of Member States that are not
members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law are entitled, when they so request, to attend the sessions of the Commission and
its Working Groups as observers;
11. Requests the Secretary~General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the thirty-first
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its ninth session.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

Convinced that international trade is an important
factor in the promotion of friendly relations among
States and that the adoption of a convention on the
carriage of goods by sea which would take into account
the legitimate interests of all States, particularly those
of the developing countries, which would remove such
uncertainties and ambiguities as exist in the rules and
practices relating to bills of lading and which would
establish a balanced allocation of risks between the
cargo owner and the carrier, would contribute to the
harmonious development of international trade,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for the valuable work done in having prepared draft articles for
a convention on the carriage of goods by sea;
2. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries shall be convened in 1978 in New York,
or at any other suitable place for which the SecretaryGeneral may receive an invitation, to consider the
question of the carriage of goods by sea and to embody
the results of its work in an international convention
and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
3. Refers to the conference the draft articles for a
convention on the carriage of goods by sea approved
by the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law, together with draft provisions concerning
implementation, reservations and other final clauses to
be prepared by the Secretary-General;
4. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To circulate the draft Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea,20 together with draft provisions concerning implementation, reservations and
other final clauses to be prepared by the SecretaryGeneral, to Governments and interested international
organizations for comments and proposals;

31/100.

(b) To convene the United Nations Conference on
the Carriage of Goods by Sea for an appropriate
period in 1978 at any of the places referred to in
paragraph 2 above;

10.

United Nations Conference on the Carriage of Goods by Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its ninth session 18 which contains
draft articles for a convention on the carriage of goods
by sea,
Noting that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law considered and adopted the draft
articles taking note of observations and comments submitted by Governments, by the Working Group on International Shipping Legislation of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and by international organizations,
Taking note with appreciation of the comments of the
Trade and Development Board of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development that the revision of the law on carriage of goods by sea involves
consideration not only of legal but also of economic
and shipping trade aspects, and that these aspects should
be given due consideration at an international conference of plenipotentiaries,19
18 Jbid.,

Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17).
annex I.

19 TD/B/C.4/153,

( c) To arrange for the preparation of summary
records of the proceedings of the plenary meetings of
the Conference and of meetings of committees of the
whole which the Conference may wish to establish;
(d) To invite all States to participate in the United
Nations Conference on the Carriage of Goods by Sea;
( e) To invite representatives of organizations that
have received a standing invitation from the General
Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of
all international conferences convened under its auspices, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;

(/) To invite representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of African Unity, in the capacity of observers,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32,80
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(g) To invite the speciaJized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested
organs of the United Nations and interested regional
intergovernmental organizations, to be represented at
the Conference by observers;
2o Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17), chap. IV, sect. C.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(h) To draw the attention of the States and other
participants referred to in subparagraphs (d) to (g)
above to the desirability of appointing as their representatives persons especially competent in the field to be
considered;
(i) To place before the Conference:
(i) All comments and proposals received from
Governments;
(ii) Working and background papers which may
be received from the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other interested international
organizations, taking into consideration the
legal, economic and shipping trade aspects of
the draft Convention;
(iii) Draft provisions concerning implementation,
reservations and other final clauses and all
relevant documentation and recommendations
relating to methods of work and procedure;
(j) To ensure that all relevant documentation for
the Conference will be distributed to all participants in
the Conference at the earliest possible date;
( k) To arrange for adequate. st~ and. facilities required for the Conference, beanng m mmd the fact
that the legal, economic and shipping trade aspects of
the carriage of goods by sea should receive due consideration at the Conference.

99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

31/101.

Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on

Relations with the Host Country, 21
1. Accepts the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 65 of its report;
2. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, with the purpose of examining all matters
falling within its terms of reference and requests the
Secretary-General to provide the Committee with all
necessary assistance;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-second session the item entitled "Report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

31/102.

21 [bid.,

Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the
underlying causes of those forms of
terrorism and acts of violence which lie
in misery, frustration, grievance and
Supplement No. 26 (A/31/26).

185

despair and which cause some people
to sacrifice human lives, including their
own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism

which are occurring with increasin~ frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 22
Noting that the Ad Hoe Committee on International
Terrorism, established under General Assembly resolution 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, has been
obliged to suspend its work,
Deeply convinced of the importance to mankind of
the continuation of the work of the Ad Hoe Committee,
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
international terrorism which endanger or take innocent
human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to continue to seek just and peaceful solutions to the underlying causes which give rise
to such acts of violence;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial and
racist regimes and other forms of alien domination,
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle of national liberation movements,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the continuation of repressive and
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien regimes in
denying peoples their legitimate right to self-determination and independence and other human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Invites States to become parties to the existing
international conventions which relate to various aspects
of the problem of international terrorism;
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures
at the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee on International
Terrorism to continue its work in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 3034 (XXVII);
8. Invites the States which have not yet done so
to submit their observations and concrete proposals
as soon as possible to the Secretary-General so as to
enable the Ad Hoe Committee to carry out its mandate
more efficiently;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Ad Hoe Committee an analytical study of the observations of States submitted under paragraph 8 above;
22 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.
