United Nations

A/53/PV.85

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-third Session

85th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 9 December 1998, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Opertti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Uruguay)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Semakula
Kiwanuka (Uganda), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 100 to 110 and 12.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Mr. Hassan Kassem Najem of Lebanon, to introduce the
reports of the Third Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Najem (Lebanon), Rapporteur of the Third
Committee (interpretation from Arabic): I have the honour
to present the reports of the Third Committee on the agenda
items allocated to it by the General Assembly for
consideration.
On agenda item 12, entitled “Report of the Economic
and Social Council”, the Third Committee recommends in
paragraph 8 of document A/53/614 the adoption of two
draft decisions.
On agenda item 100, entitled “Social development,
including questions related to the world social situation and
to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family”, the
Third Committee recommends in paragraph 7 of document
A/53/615 the adoption of a draft resolution.

98-86656 (E)

On agenda item 101, entitled “Crime prevention and
criminal justice”, the Third Committee recommends in
paragraph 18 of document A/53/616 the adoption of five
draft resolutions.
On agenda item 102, entitled “International drug
control”. the Third Committee recommends in paragraph
7 of document A/53/617 the adoption of a draft
resolution.
On agenda item 103, entitled “Advancement of
women”, the Third Committee recommends in paragraph
18 of document A/53/618 the adoption of four draft
resolutions.
On agenda item 104, entitled “Implementation of the
outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women”,
the Third Committee recommends in paragraph 10 of
document A/53/619 the adoption of a draft resolution.
On agenda item 105, entitled “Report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees: questions
relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions”, the Third Committee
recommends in paragraph 22 of document A/53/620 the
adoption of six draft resolutions.
On agenda item 106, entitled “Promotion and
protection of the rights of children”, the Third Committee
recommends in paragraph 13 of document A/53/621 the
adoption of two draft resolutions and in paragraph 14 the
adoption of one draft decision.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
I should like in this respect to draw the attention of
the Assembly to two corrections to be made to the text of
draft resolution II, entitled “The rights of the child”. In
section IV, the beginning of operative paragraph 15 should
read:
“Underlines the importance that relevant
measures to ensure respect for the rights of the child”.
The rest of the sentence should remain as it is.
Also in section IV, operative paragraph 17, the last
sentence should read:
“which will contribute towards making it possible to
end impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes”.
On agenda item 107, entitled “Programme of activities
of the International Decade of the World's Indigenous
People”, the Third Committee recommends in paragraph 10
of document A/53/622 the adoption of two draft resolutions
and in paragraph 11 the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 108, entitled “Elimination of
racism and racial discrimination”, the Third Committee
recommends, in document A/53/623, paragraph 17, the
adoption of three draft resolutions.
I wish to draw the attention of the Assembly to
paragraph 7 of the report contained in document A/53/624,
which refers to the discussion in the Committee of draft
resolution A/C.3/53/L.17, entitled “Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination”. In
that paragraph, the appearance of Brunei Darussalam among
the list of sponsors is a technical error. Brunei Darussalam
should be deleted from the list of sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 110, entitled “Human rights
questions”, the Third Committee recommends in document
A/53/625, paragraph 4, the adoption of a draft decision.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
rights and fundamental freedoms”, the Third Committee
recommends in document A/53/625/Add.2, paragraph 49,
the adoption of 16 draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 110 (c), entitled “Human rights
questions: Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives”, the Third Committee
recommends in document A/53/625/Add.3, paragraph 55,
the adoption of 10 draft resolutions. In this respect, I
would like to draw the attention of the Assembly to
paragraph 8 of the report, in which the following sentence
should be inserted at the end of the paragraph:
“At the same meeting, it was announced that the
text, as orally revised, would be tabled as a
Chairman's text.”
Under agenda item 110 (d), entitled “Human rights
questions: Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action”,
the Third Committee recommends in document
A/53/625/Add.4, paragraph 7, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 110 (e), entitled “Human rights
questions: Report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights”, the Third
Committee recommends in document A/53/625/Add.5,
paragraph 10, the adoption of one draft resolution.
This year the Third Committee adopted 59 draft
resolutions, only nine of which were adopted by recorded
vote. This means there has been important progress
towards finding understanding and improving coordination
for the adoption by consensus of the majority of draft
resolutions in the future.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Third Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.

Under agenda item 110 (a), entitled “Human rights
questions: Implementation of human rights instruments”, the
Third Committee recommends in document
A/53/625/Add.1, paragraph 21, the adoption of three draft
resolutions.
Under agenda item 110 (b), entitled “Human rights
questions: Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human

2

The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Third Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
It was so decided.
Agenda item 101

“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Third Committee, unless the Secretariat
is notified otherwise in advance.
This means that where the Committee took recorded
votes and separate votes, we will do the same.
I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were adopted
without a vote in the Third Committee.
Agenda item 100
Social development, including questions relating to the
world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled
persons and the family
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/615)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “International Year of Older Persons, 1999”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/616)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 18 of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Preparations for the Tenth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/110).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “Transnational
organized crime”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/111).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Mutual assistance and international cooperation in
criminal matters”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 53/112).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution IV, entitled “United Nations
African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 53/113).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/109).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 100?

The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity”.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution V
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 53/114).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 101?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 102
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/617)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “Traditional or
customary practices affecting the health of women and
girls”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/117).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution III, entitled “Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 53/118).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution IV, entitled “Improvement of the
status of women in the Secretariat”, without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 53/119).

The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “International cooperation against the world drug
problem”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/115).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 102?

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 103?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 104
Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World
Conference on Women

It was so decided.
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/619)
Agenda item 103
Amendment (A/53/L.69)
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/618)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 18 of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Traffic in
women and girls”, which the Third Committee adopted
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/116).

4

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. In this
connection, the General Assembly also has before it an
amendment thereto contained in document A/53/L.69.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the amendment is voted on first. The Assembly will
therefore take a decision first on the amendment
contained in document A/53/L.69. The additional sponsors
of the amendment are Algeria, Bangladesh, Egypt, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Lesotho, Malaysia, Namibia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, South Africa, the Sudan, Swaziland, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the amendment contained in document A/53/L.69?
The amendment was adopted.
The Acting President: The draft resolution, entitled
“Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and
full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action”, was adopted by the Third Committee without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution, as amended?
The draft resolution, as amended, was adopted
(resolution 53/120).
The Acting President: I call on the representative of
the Russian Federation, who wishes to speak in explanation
of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Zmeevski (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation is
compelled to speak on document A/53/L.69, issued today,
which contains an amendment to the draft resolution of the
Third Committee contained in paragraph 10 of document
A/53/619.
While we have no objection to the substantive change
contained in the document, we believe that it is necessary
to discuss and coordinate amendments in advance with all
regional groups, particularly when we are considering the
introduction of changes into a draft resolution that has
already been endorsed by the Third Committee. We hope
that the Bureau and the Secretariat will take the necessary
steps so that in the future we may avoid similar situations,
which do not promote consensus positions.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 104?
It was so decided.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
Agenda item 105
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees: questions relating to refugees, returnees and
displaced persons and humanitarian questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/620)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the six draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 22 of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”, which the Third Committee adopted without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/121).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “Assistance to
unaccompanied refugee minors”, without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/122).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution III, entitled “Follow-up to the
Regional Conference to Address the Problems of
Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary
Displacement and Returnees in the Countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant
Neighbouring States”, without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 53/123).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution IV, entitled “New international
humanitarian order”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 53/124).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution V, entitled “Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

5

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 53/125).
The Acting President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution VI, entitled “Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 53/126).
The Acting President: I call on the representative of
Armenia point of order.
Mr. Abelian (Armenia): I would like to make the
following points in reference to the report contained in
document A/53/620.
On page 2 of the document, the list of documents that
were before the Third Committee for consideration refers,
under sub-item (j), to a letter dated 17 November 1998
from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
contained in document A/C.3/53/16. That letter and its
annex were published in violation of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly and of the provisions of relevant
General Assembly resolutions, particularly those on the
pattern of conferences.
I wish to draw to the attention of the General
Assembly the fact that no undelivered statement can be
published in the six official languages of the General
Assembly. The secretariat of the Third Committee should
at least have consulted the Bureau and elicited a decision of
the General Assembly or the Third Committee. The
provisions for publishing undelivered statements were only
for the Special Political Committee and were discouraged
by General Committee recommendation to the General
Assembly.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 105?

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
Committee in paragraph 13 of the report and one draft
decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 14 of the same report.
I call on the representative of the Russian Federation
on a point of order.
Mr. Zmeevski (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): I would like to express the wish of our
delegation to become a sponsor of draft resolution II,
contained in document A/53/621.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Argentina on a point of order.
Mr. Bocalandro (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): The Argentine Republic cosponsored draft
resolution A/C.3/53/L.15 in the Third Committee, but our
name is not included in the list of sponsors of draft
resolution I, now before the Assembly. I would be most
grateful to have our country’s name included.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Cuba on a point of order.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba)(interpretation from
Spanish): This same problem is going to involve all the
Latin American countries. The Chairman of the regional
group at that time signed the draft resolution on the rights
of the child on behalf of all the countries of the Latin
American Group. Yet Cuba and many other Latin
American countries do not appear as sponsors of the draft
resolution on the rights of the child. The names of all the
members of the Latin American Group should be included
among the sponsors.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of El Salvador on a point of order.
Mr. García González (El Salvador)(interpretation
from Spanish): I wish to support the point made by the
representative of Cuba.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 106
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/621)
The Acting President: The Assembly now has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Third

6

The Acting President: I call on the representative
of the Sudan on a point of order.
Mrs. Ahmed (Sudan)(interpretation from Arabic):
I wish to request that the name of my country be added
to the list of sponsors of draft resolution II, on the rights
of the child.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
The Acting President: The requests of delegations
will be reflected in the record.
The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 13 of
its report (A/53/621) and one draft decision recommended
by the Third Committee in paragraph 14 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, which is entitled
“The girl child”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/127).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“The rights of the child”.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
Third Committee in paragraph 10 of its report and the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 11 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/129).
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations”, without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/130).

The Third Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt draft resolution II, as orally corrected by the
Rapporteur?

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft decision, entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the status of the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations”.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/128).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft decision entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child”.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee?

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 107?

The draft decision was adopted.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 106?

Agenda item 108
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination

It was so decided.
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/623)
Agenda item 107
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/53/727)
Programme of activities of the International Decade of
the World’s Indigenous People
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/622)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 17 of its report.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the

7

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of draft resolution I is contained in
document A/53/727.

The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination”, which the Third Committee
adopted without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/134).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”.

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/131).
A recorded vote has been requested.
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination and the convening of the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 53/132).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Measures to combat contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 53/133).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 108.
Agenda item 109
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/624)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 14 of its report.
We turn first to Draft resolution I, entitled “Universal
realization of the right of peoples to self-determination”.

8

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan,
Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Estonia, France, Greece, Ireland, Israel,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Marshall
Islands, Monaco, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu
Draft resolution II was adopted by 115 votes to 18,
with 35 abstentions (resolution 53/135).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola and Bangladesh
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Malta had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Australia, who wishes to make a statement
in explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Kerr (Australia): Australia is deeply concerned
about the activities of mercenaries and at the potential for
instability brought about by their use. Australia has already
taken steps to legislate against mercenaries in its Crimes,
Foreign Incursions and Recruitment Act, which prohibits
the training, financing and use of mercenaries in Australia.
Given the nature of the problem of mercenaries,
Australia also considers that international cooperation is
required to address this significant global issue. The
Australian Government is therefore taking steps to accede
to the International Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries, and urges
other countries to do likewise. When it enters into force,
the Convention will provide an effective legal regime to
enhance international cooperation for the prevention of
recruitment and use of mercenaries.
Australia therefore supports strongly the call, in
operative paragraph 4 of the resolution, on all States that
have not yet done so to consider taking the necessary action
to become parties to the Convention.
However, Australia is unable to support the resolution
as a whole, because of the language used in other operative
paragraphs, which divert the focus of the resolution from
the use of mercenaries to extraneous issues.
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination”.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:

9

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Fiji, Georgia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Uruguay, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution III was adopted by 162 votes to 2,
with 6 abstentions (resolution 53/136).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 109?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 110

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
Mrs. Ahmed (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes to explain its vote on paragraph 26
of draft resolution II, contained in document
A/53/625/Add.1. My delegation believes that the human
rights treaty bodies have specific legal obligations and a
direct relationship with the parties to them, while the
Commission on Human Rights and its bodies are political
or diplomatic in character, having their own functions in
this respect. Therefore, in order to maintain the special
character of these bodies and to prevent any confusion
about their functions and characters, my delegation will
vote against paragraph 26.
The Acting President: We shall now take action on
draft resolution I, entitled “International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families”.

Human rights questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/625)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 4 of its report.

The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/137).

The draft decision is entitled “Documents considered
by the General Assembly in connection with the question
of human rights”.

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Effective implementation of international instruments on
human rights, including reporting obligations under
international instruments on human rights”.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee?

A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 26 of draft resolution II.

The draft decision was adopted.
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments

I see no objection to that request.
I shall therefore first put to the vote operative
paragraph 26.

Report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.1)
A recorded vote has been requested.
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/53/728)
A recorded vote was taken.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on the three draft resolutions
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 21 of
its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of draft resolution III is contained in
document A/53/728.
I call on the representative of the Sudan, who wishes
to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.

10

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

The Third Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

Against:
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Gabon,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Sudan

Report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.2)

Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Grenada,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar, Niger,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Viet Nam, Yemen
Operative paragraph 26 was retained by 104 votes to
7, with 44 abstentions.

Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 53/139).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms

Amendment (A/53/L.70)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
16 draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 49 of its report and an
amendment to draft resolution XV, contained in document
A/53/L.70.
I now call on the representative of South Africa to
introduce the amendment contained in document
A/53/L.70.
Mr. Mofokeng (South Africa): In addition to
introducing the amendment, I should like to orally revise
the written amendment in accordance with agreement
reached in informal consultations.

[Subsequently, the delegation of Gabon informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]

I invite the attention of the Assembly to the new
paragraph 1 as it appears in document A/53/L.70. The
oral revision is to delete all the words from "Recalls" in
the first line to "and" in the second line, so that the new
paragraph 1 would read:

The Acting President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution II, as a whole, without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

"Welcomes the decision of the Commission to
continue the consideration of this question at its
fifty-fifth session".

Draft resolution II, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 53/138).

The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Egypt, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
before action is taken.

The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution III, entitled “Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment”.

Ms. Mekhemar (Egypt): With regard to draft
resolution V, entitled "Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of

11

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms", under agenda
item 110 (b), we would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to the joint declaration contained in document
A/53/679, which reflects the position of the countries listed
in paragraph 16 of document A/53/625/Add.2 on the draft
resolution and the Declaration annexed to it.

Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe

The Acting President: I shall put the 16 draft
resolutions and the amendment, which has been orally
revised, to the Assembly one by one. After all the decisions
have been taken, representatives will again have the
opportunity to explain their vote.

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled "Elimination
of all forms of religious intolerance".
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/140).
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution II, entitled "Human rights and unilateral coercive
measures".

Abstaining:
Armenia, Cyprus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Nicaragua, Tajikistan, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,

12

Draft resolution II was adopted by 110 votes to 45,
with 10 abstentions (resolution 53/141).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Gabon informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution III, entitled "Strengthening of the rule of law".
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 53/142).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Respect for the right to universal freedom of
travel and the vital importance of family reunification”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe

[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]

Against:
Angola, United States of America

The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 103 votes to 2,
with 66 abstentions (resolution 53/143).

The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution V, entitled, “Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of
Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms”.
Draft resolution V was adopted by the Third
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 53/144).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “Situation of human rights in Cambodia”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution VI
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 53/145).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “Human rights and extreme poverty”.

Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
53/146).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution VIII, entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution VIII
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
53/147).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IX is
entitled “Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution IX
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

13

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution 53/148).
The Acting President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Strengthening of United Nations actions in the human
rights field through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution X
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution 53/149).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances”.
Draft resolution XI was adopted by the Third
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes also to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution 53/150).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XII is entitled
“Follow-up to the United Nations Year for Tolerance”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XII
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XII was adopted (resolution 53/151).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIII is
entitled “The human genome and human rights”.
Draft resolution XIII was adopted by the Third
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution 53/152).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIV is
entitled “United Nations Decade for Human Rights
Education, 1995-2004, and public information activities in
the field of human rights”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XIV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution 53/153).

14

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
The Acting President: The Assembly will now turn
to draft resolution XV, entitled “Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights”,
and to the amendment to that draft resolution contained in
document A/53/L.70, as orally revised.
Under rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the
amendment is voted on first. The Assembly will therefore
take a decision first on the amendment contained in
document A/53/L.70, as orally revised.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the amendment to draft resolution XV contained in
document A/53/L.70, as orally revised?
The amendment, as orally revised, was adopted.
The Acting President: Draft resolution XV was
adopted by the Third Committee without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution XV, as amended, reflecting the oral
revision of the amendment?
Draft resolution XV, as amended, was adopted
(resolution 53/154).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVI is
entitled “Right to development”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution XVI was adopted by 125 votes to 1,
with 42 abstentions (resolution 53/155).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Azerbaijan and Bahrain
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour, and the delegation of the Czech Republic had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote or
position on the resolutions just adopted.
Ms. King (United States of America): In the Third
Committee, the United States delegation voted against draft
resolution XVI, on the right to development, and did so
again here in plenary meeting. We had hoped until the final
stages of consultations before the Committee took action
that we would be able to negotiate compromises that would
have allowed us to join consensus. We believe that the
effort failed because the draft resolution was not circulated
in time for all of the contentious issues to be worked out.
As members know, this draft resolution was the last to be

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
addressed by the Third Committee, and the session was
extended several times because of it.
While there is much in the resolution that we
support, the United States voted against it because of
profound disagreement on the following points. We do
not agree that international macroeconomic policymaking, globalization and debt relief are proper subjects
for consideration in the various United Nations human
rights forums. Other United Nations forums exist with
responsibility for these issues.
We believe it is wrong, and dangerously misleading,
to pin the blame for long-standing problems of food,
health, education and unemployment on the current
international financial difficulties. These problems existed
long before the global financial crisis and will continue
long after the crisis has passed, unless we confront them
squarely, understand their fundamental roots and deal with
them through the fundamental structural measures that we
all know are required.
We do not support a convention on the right to
development. There are many United Nations agencies
devoted to development activities, and we believe that
promotion of development appropriately belongs with
them. By the same token, we do not support adding to the
mandate of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
burdensome new mandates in the field of development,
which are already being pursued by the appropriate
United Nations development agencies. Apart from being
wasteful and duplicative, this will divert scarce resources
from human rights activities for which the High
Commissioner has an exclusive mandate.
We also regret that the resolution fails to note an
essential point agreed upon at the Vienna World
Conference on Human Rights: that the lack of
development cannot be invoked to justify an abridgement
of internationally recognized human rights.
Five years after the first consensus statement in
Vienna on this subject, and after a consensus resolution
at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, we
believed developing and developed countries alike would
be able to proceed another step towards a more complete
understanding of what the right to development means
and how to work together towards its realization. We are
disappointed that consensus was broken. We hope that all
delegations will take time to reflect on how we can retain
the spirit of cooperation that prevails on development

15

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

issues when we return to the Commission on Human Rights
next March in Geneva.

were declared fair and free by hundreds of international
observers.

Mr. Felten (Germany): With regard to resolution
53/152, entitled “The human genome and human rights”, I
would like to draw the attention of the Assembly to the
explanation of vote that the German delegation made on the
occasion of the adoption of this draft resolution in the Third
Committee.

Yemen therefore wishes to stress its commitment to
human rights conventions and instruments. At the same
time, it denounces all violations of human rights
whenever and wherever they occur. However, the Arab
Republic of Yemen has noticed that the issue of human
rights has been treated in a politicized and selective way.
This has compelled my delegation to abstain in the voting
on all draft resolutions on human rights, with the
exception of those adopted by consensus. Accordingly, we
abstained in the voting in the Third Committee on the
draft resolutions contained in document A/53/625/Add.3
for the following reasons.

For the reasons set out in that explanation, Germany
is not yet in a position to decide upon the implementation
of the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and
Human Rights.
The Acting President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it 10
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 55 of its report. I shall put the 10 draft
resolutions to the Assembly one by one. After all the
decisions have been taken, representatives will again have
the opportunity to explain their vote.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
explain their votes or positions before the voting on the 10
draft resolutions contained in document A/53/625/Add.3.
Mr. Al-Ethary (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes to explain its vote on the draft
resolutions before the Assembly.
The democratic process that began in my country after
unification in 1990 has consecrated human rights in Yemen,
constitutionally, legally and in practice. This process has
also been conducive to a widespread climate of political
freedom and freedom of the press — there are more than
100 newspapers and party bulletins and over 17 political
parties and organizations in the country. This democratic
process has been promoted by parliamentary elections that

16

First, we abstained in the voting because of the
politicization of human rights issues and their use as
political tools to pursue economic, commercial and other
interests.
Secondly, we abstained because of the use of human
rights issues as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs
of States in order to impose hegemony or a state of
political dependency on other countries.
We abstained, thirdly, because of double standards
and criteria, fourthly, because of the selective approach in
investigating shortcomings with regards to human rights
and, fifthly, because of the disregard for the right of
development and the underemphasis on its direct impact
on human rights.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to
explain its position on draft resolution X, contained in
document A/53/625/Add.3, entitled “Situation of human
rights in Afghanistan”.
We fully understand that the human rights situation
in various parts of Afghanistan is a cause of international
concern. We are confident that this situation will improve
once peace returns to that war-ravaged country, and we
urge reconciliation within Afghanistan through realistic
compromise and mutual accommodation. We also call for
international engagement and dialogue with Afghanistan
to promote the objectives of humanitarianism, human
rights and peace.
Pakistan fully supports the efforts of the United
Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
for the restoration of durable peace in Afghanistan. We
believe, however, that the cessation of all outside

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
interference inside Afghanistan is a prerequisite for the
realization of this objective. In order to strengthen its role
as an impartial mediator in Afghanistan, the United Nations
needs to adopt the vacant-seat formula for the
representation of Afghanistan, as has been implemented by
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Pakistan strongly condemned the killing of the Iranian
personnel seized in Mazar-e-Sharif. Those responsible for
these outrageous killings must be punished. We are
encouraged that during the recent visit of the SecretaryGeneral's Special Envoy, the authorities in Kabul agreed to
the establishment of commissions of inquiry to investigate
the killing of Iranian personnel in Mazar-e-Sharif — a
crime from which they have already dissociated
themselves — as well as other killings.
The United Nations needs urgently to initiate the
process for establishing these commissions. Besides the
visit of the commissions of inquiry, the return of United
Nations workers to Afghanistan and the stationing of United
Nations monitors in major cities of Afghanistan would help
in preventing the recurrence of such unfortunate incidents
in the future.
In the Third Committee my delegation expressed its
dissatisfaction with the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur on Afghanistan. Paragraph 3 of that interim
report clearly states that the Special Rapporteur was
“unable to travel to Afghanistan and Pakistan” (A/53/539,
para.3) due to security considerations. We are unable to
understand the reference to Pakistan. I myself, at least, am
not aware of any security situation in Pakistan that could
have prevented the Special Rapporteur from undertaking a
visit to Islamabad.
What is clear, however, is that the Special Rapporteur
did not visit Afghanistan. It is obvious, then, that the
interim report was written somewhere else. It therefore
contains merely allegations and counter-allegations, based
on hearsay and bereft of any on-the-spot investigation
whatsoever. Despite this serious flaw, the Special
Rapporteur has regrettably deemed it appropriate to draw
conclusions and to express shock and dismay at the
situation in the country. How has he arrived at these
conclusions, and on the basis of what evidence and what
investigations?
My delegation cannot associate itself with an
unsubstantiated report from a Special Rapporteur who failed
even to appear before the Committee to explain how he had
arrived at his conclusions without any investigation.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
For these reasons, my delegation disassociated itself
from the consideration of the draft resolution on “The
question of human rights in Afghanistan” in the Third
Committee on 20 November 1998. My delegation wishes
to reiterate the same position in the plenary as well.
I would request that this statement be included in the
official proceedings of the General Assembly.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): I should like to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting on draft resolution
IX, entitled “Situation of human rights in Kosovo”.
Albania has for a number of years been the main
author of the resolution entitled “Situation of human
rights in Kosovo”. Since 1992, the General Assembly has
addressed the situation of human rights in Kosovo with
particular concern through its resolutions 47/147, 48/153,
49/204, 50/190, 51/111 and 52/139.
Unfortunately, despite this continuous attention, a
second Bosnia tragedy is in the making in Kosovo, which
the international community has not been able to prevent.
The year 1998 has become the year of the “ethnic
cleansing” of the Kosovo Albanians, and the situation
there has taken on the dimensions of a real threat to
international peace and security, as already defined in
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998)
and 1203 (1998).
Since the beginning of this year, the Serbian military
and police forces have been carrying out military attacks
against the Albanian population in Kosovo. The
consequences of this policy have been appalling. First,
wanton and summary executions have caused the death of
thousands of innocent people, who were massacred,
mutilated and beheaded. Among them were pregnant
women, children, and elderly and sick people.
Secondly, the intentional shelling and burning of
Albanian villages has destroyed one-third of the houses
and forced more than 300,000 people to flee. Thirdly, a
catastrophic humanitarian situation has developed, with
people living in the open, without food, shelter or medical
assistance.
The Albanian delegation would like from the outset
to thank the United States of America for taking the lead
this year and for its great efforts to reach a broad
agreement on this issue. My delegation was actively
involved in the whole process of negotiations and was
prepared and willing to become a co-sponsor of this draft

17

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
resolution, given the fact that Albania has been its main
author for years, the relevance of this issue, and the
situation of 2 million Albanians in Kosovo.
Unfortunately, Albania was not able to co-sponsor the
draft resolution this year. Despite our great and constructive
efforts, the sponsors of this draft could not accommodate
our principled position on a number of issues.
First, the draft resolution took out the reference to the
respect of the will of the inhabitants of Kosovo —
operative paragraph 16 — which has been the core element
of the previous resolutions on the human rights situation in
Kosovo adopted by the General Assembly. The Albanian
delegation is of the opinion that no sustainable solution to
the conflict in Kosovo can be found without respecting the
will of the Kosovar Albanians.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
The Assembly will first turn to draft resolution I,
entitled “Situation of human rights in Rwanda”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 53/156).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Iraq”.
A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraphs 4, 13, 15 and 17 of draft resolution II.
Are there any objections to that request?
There are none.

Secondly, the draft resolution fails to take into
consideration the fact that the Kosovar Albanians have for
nine years organized a peaceful resistance to the Serbian
oppression and State terror. For nine years, the Albanians
did not commit a single act of violence despite persecution,
torture, deprivation, illegal detention and the negation of all
human rights by the Belgrade regime.

I shall now put to the vote operative paragraphs 4,
13, 15 and 17, on which a separate vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

In the face of this year's Serbian military and police
attack, which threatened their basic right to life, the
Kosovar Albanians were obliged to resist through selfdefence. The sixth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 6 and 9 do not reflect the reality on the ground.
If the sixth preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs
6, 9 and 16 were to be put to the vote separately, the
Albanian delegation would vote against them.
Given the importance of the issue and the fact that this
is the only draft resolution of the General Assembly which
addresses the situation of human rights in Kosovo, the
Albanian delegation will vote in its favour.
We would kindly ask the Secretariat that this statement
be placed on record.
The Acting President: The statement by the
representative of Albania will be reflected in the record.
The Assembly has before it 10 draft resolutions
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 55 of
its report. I shall put the 10 draft resolutions to the General
Assembly one by one. After all decisions have been taken,
representatives will again have the opportunity to explain
their votes.

18

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Swaziland, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zambia

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Against:
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Sudan
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia,
Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
Operative paragraphs 4, 13, 15 and 17 of draft
resolution II were retained by 93 votes to 2, with 57
abstentions.
The Acting President: I now put to the vote draft
resolution II as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zambia
Against:
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria, Sudan
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia,
Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India,
Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Niger, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Saint Lucia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution II, as a whole, was adopted by 103
votes to 3, with 56 abstentions (resolution 53/157).
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution III, entitled “Situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of

19

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia
Against:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Brunei Darussalam,
China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Myanmar,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe,
Abstaining:
Albania, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bhutan,
Botswana, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire, Cyprus,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Senegal,
Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
Draft resolution III was adopted by 64 votes to 41,
with 56 abstentions (resolution 53/158).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Haiti”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
Mr. Theuermann (Austria): I have just been
informed that in the French version of the draft resolution
operative paragraph 8 is not properly translated. In the
English version it says “Encourages the Government”,
and so forth. This is not the case in the French version.
We very much hope that this can be corrected. This
is of importance. I hope that this change can be reflected
in the text that is to be adopted without a vote.
The Acting President: The observations of the
representative of Austria will be recorded and reflected.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution V
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 53/160).
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution VI, entitled “Situation of human rights in
Nigeria”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution VI
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 53/161).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution VII, entitled “Situation of human rights in
Myanmar”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution VII
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 53/162).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VIII is
entitled “Situation of human rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)”.

Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 53/159).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”.
I call on the representative of Austria on a point or
order.

20

I have been informed by the Secretariat that no
separate vote has been requested on this draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution VIII.
A recorded vote has been requested.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Belarus, Cameroon, China, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Kenya, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Mali, Namibia, Russian
Federation, United Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 141 votes to
none, with 21 abstentions (resolution 53/163).

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IX is
entitled “Situation of human rights in Kosovo”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu
Against:
Belarus, India, Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Bhutan,
Botswana, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
China, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Jamaica, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Peru, Philippines,

21

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
Singapore, Sri Lanka, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution IX was adopted by 122 votes to 3,
with 34 abstentions (resolution 53/164).
The Acting President: Draft resolution X is entitled
"Situation of human rights in Afghanistan".
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution X
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution 53/165).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote or
position on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Yacoubou (Benin) (interpretation from French):
Following the adoption, with a vote, of resolution 53/158,
on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the delegation of Benin wishes to stress the following
points.
The Republic of Benin remains committed to the
question of democracy and human rights, and we have
made it one of the bases of our foreign policy. In fact,
since the conference of the nation’s active forces in
February of 1990, Benin has constantly taken steps to
promote a democratic culture and respect for human rights.
In this endeavour, we enjoy considerable support from the
international community in general and from our
development partners in particular. It is in this context that
we will be hosting the Fourth International Conference of
New or Restored Democracies in the year 2000 in Cotonou.
According to the resolution on the human rights
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran, there is a real
political will to establish a more tolerant and more peaceful
society in that country. The Iranian Government has
undertaken to promote respect for the rule of law, to
eliminate arbitrary arrests and detentions and to strengthen
the legal and prison systems. All these points are welcomed
in the resolution.
Benin’s modest experience in this field has shown that
the promotion of human rights and democracy is a longterm endeavour that needs to be carried out on the ground
and over time. This is why Benin believes that Iran should
be supported and encouraged to continue the efforts being

22

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
made to establish a state of law. It is for this reason that
we voted against the resolution.
Mr. Xie Bohua (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): I wish to explain our vote on resolution 53/164,
entitled "Situation of human rights in Kosovo".
On the basis of the principle of sovereignty and
territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, an important principle of the
United Nations Charter, the Chinese delegation is not in
favour of considering questions of a certain region in a
territory of a country under the agenda item on the human
rights situation of individual countries. We believe that
Kosovo is a part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
and respect for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference
in its internal affairs under any pretext are in conformity
with the principles of the United Nations Charter. For this
reason, the Chinese delegation could not support the
resolution entitled "Situation of human rights in Kosovo",
which was just adopted. Therefore, we abstained in the
voting.
Mr. Mukhopadhaya (India): My delegation wishes
to explain its vote on resolution 53/164, on the situation
of human rights in Kosovo.
India voted against the resolution on the situation of
human rights in Kosovo, but not because India is
indifferent to the plight of the Albanian minority in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On the contrary, as a
democracy and country of many languages and faiths,
committed to pluralism, India is firmly committed to
human rights and to the promotion and protection of the
rights of all minorities within the framework of the unity
and territorial integrity of Member States.
Rather, we voted against the resolution because it
reflects the inconsistent manner in which human rights
violations in the former Yugoslavia have been treated in
the Third Committee.
On the one hand, we have one resolution —
resolution 53/163 — on the situation of human rights in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) — that is, on three independent, sovereign
countries, in one resolution. On the other hand, we have
another resolution, piloted in the Third Committee by the
same delegation, on a part of one of those three countries

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
as though that part of the country were not an integral part
of the country concerned.
India is also committed to the preservation and
protection of the territorial integrity, national sovereignty
and independence of Member States of the United Nations.
Indeed, Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199
(1998) also reaffirm the commitment of all United Nations
Member States to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Given the existence of
another resolution on the same country, the resolution on
the situation of human rights in Kosovo seems to convey
the presumably unintended signal that we are referring to
the situation of human rights in a separate territory. It could
therefore be seen as inconsistent with Article 2, paragraph
7, of the United Nations Charter.
The right place to have addressed the situation of
human rights in Kosovo would appear to have been in the
context of either the omnibus resolution or a separate
resolution on the situation of human rights in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
For the reasons outlined, we were obliged to vote
against the resolution.
Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): My delegation voted in
favour of resolution 53/158, on the situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran. We did so because
we believe that the resolution highlights the positive
developments and general progress on the situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Among other things, the resolution welcomes the open
debate in the Islamic Republic of Iran on issues of
governance and human rights. It also welcomes the
commitment made by the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to promote respect for the rule of law.
Furthermore, it welcomes a more positive approach by the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran as regards
freedom of assembly.
My delegation appreciates this positive development
and encourages further efforts by the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to improve the situation of human
rights in that country.
Mr. Ravou-Akii (Vanuatu) (interpretation from
French): I have taken the floor to explain my delegation’s
vote on resolution 53/158 on the situation of human rights
in the Islamic Republic of Iran.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
Last year, in the course of the work of the fiftysecond session, my delegation voted in favour of the
resolution on this topic. This year, we abstained in the
voting. The principal reason for our abstention is the fact
that the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran
launched an appeal here in the General Assembly early in
the work of its fifty-third session. We believe that his
appeal represents a significant opening that the
international community must support.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I call on the representative of Afghanistan, who
wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I remind him that statements in exercise of the right
of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second intervention and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan) (interpretation from
French): I am speaking in reply to the statement made by
the Ambassador of Pakistan on the resolution on the
situation of human rights in Afghanistan.
I was truly saddened to hear such an eminent
personality as Professor Paik, a dean of the College of
Law of Seoul National University in Korea, referred to
almost as though he were a dishonest man by the
representative of Pakistan, who threw Professor Paik’s
report into question. People like Mr. Paik are faithful
servants of human society and human rights. He visited
Afghanistan several times, including in May 1998, and his
statements are thus very well founded. For three years, we
have repeatedly endorsed his statements on Afghanistan.
The representative of Pakistan tells us that Mr. Paik
has not been to Afghanistan in recent months. Obviously,
he was unable to enter the country because he was denied
permission to do so and clearly could not run the risk of
suffering the fate of Lieutenant-Colonel Calo, who was
murdered on 21 August by two Pakistanis in Afghanistan.
The Ambassador of Pakistan yet again trotted out the
three-year-old litany about a vacant seat for Afghanistan.
Of course, he cited the instance of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. The Assembly should be aware,
however, that ever since the Conference adopted a
resolution on the Afghanistan seat, the Taliban side has
systematically denied every demand of the Conference.

23

General Assembly
Fifty-third session
The representative of Pakistan obviously intends that
there should be no Afghani voice in this Assembly, because
we denounce Pakistani intervention, particularly military
intervention, in Afghanistan’s affairs and the presence of
35,000 armed Pakistanis in Afghanistan. That paints the
picture clearly. What is also crystal clear is that no country
here, no State represented in this great Hall, supports the
points made by the representative of Pakistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (c) of agenda item 110?

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/167).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 110 as a whole?
It was so decided.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.4)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 7 of its report
(A/53/625/Add.4).
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 53/166).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 110.
(e) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/53/614)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 8 of its report (A/53/614).
We turn first to draft decision I, entitled
“Organization of work of the Third Committee and
biennial programme of work of the Committee for 19992000”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision I, as recommended by the Third
Committee?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
decision II, entitled “Report of the Economic and Social
Council”.

Report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.5)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 10 of its report
(A/53/625/Add.5).
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled "Question of resources for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
human rights activities of the United Nations", without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

24

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision II, as recommended by the Third
Committee?
Draft decision II was adopted.

General Assembly
Fifty-third session

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of the chapters of the report of the Economic and Social
Council allocated to the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Third Committee before it.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

25
