UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1091
26 October 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 13 OCTOBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In paragraphs 22 and 23 of my last report on Guinea-Bissau of
29 September 1999 (S/1999/1015), I indicated that I had dispatched a small
mission to Guinea-Bissau and the neighbouring countries in order to look into
the transitional Government’s request for international military observers to
monitor the situation along the borders with Guinea and Senegal and provide a
measure of confidence among the population during the electoral process. I
further indicated that the mission had submitted its report, which was under
consideration, and that I would revert to the Council on the subject as soon as
possible.
In its report, the mission found that the situation along the borders with
Guinea and Senegal was tenuous and recommended the deployment of approximately
200 military observers. After considering their recommendation, I concluded
that it would be preferable at this juncture to decide on the following interim
measures, while keeping the option of deploying international military observers
under review:
(a) To request that my Representative, Samuel Nana-Sinkam, and his
Military Adviser visit the countries that the mission had consulted, namely
Senegal, Guinea and the Gambia, and visit the secretariat of the Economic
Community of West African States. The purpose of such a visit would be to brief
these parties on the general thrust of the report and to encourage Senegal and
Guinea to set up, with Guinea-Bissau, joint monitoring mechanisms along their
common borders and other confidence-building measures;
(b) To request that the United Nations Peace-Building Support Office
(UNOGBIS) develop a coordinated programme of frequent visits by my
Representative, the United Nations country team and the diplomatic community to
towns and villages throughout Guinea-Bissau during the weeks prior to the
elections;
(c) To actively encourage an early and positive response by those Member
States that have been requested by the interim Government to send electoral
observers.

99-31454 (E)

261099

/...

S/1999/1091
English
Page 2

It is hoped that the enhanced visibility resulting from (b) and (c) above
will provide a measure of confidence among the population during the electoral
process and send an unmistakable signal that the international community will be
closely watching this process.
In the light of the results of these interim measures, I will reassess the
situation and revert to the Council on the issue of international military
observers, should the situation so warrant.
I should be grateful, Mr. President, if you would bring the contents of
this letter to the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
