UNITER NATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING: 19 MARCH 1978
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2074)

,,..,.,,....,..,..,.,,...,,...

Adoption of the agenda . , . , . , . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . 3 . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12607) .

1

SjPV.2074

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2074th

MEETING

Held in New York on Sunday,

19 March 1978, at 11 a,m.
2. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform membersof
the Council that I have received letters from the representativesof Iraq, Mongolia, Pakistan and Qatar in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion,
In accordancewith the usualpractice, I propose,with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representativesto
participate in the discussionwithout the right to vote, in
conformity with rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. AZ-Sahhaf(Iraq),
Mr, Puntsagnorov (Mongolia), Mr. Akhund (Pakistan)and
Mr, Al-Obaidlj (Qatar) took the placesreservedfor them at
the sideof the Councilchamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2074)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12607)

3. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof Lebanonhas
askedto be allowedto speakat the outset of this morning’s
meetingand I therefore call on him.
4. Mr. TUtiN (Lebanon): You have been very patient
with me, Mr. President,but humanlivesare involved and,as
I said yesterday, people still die on Sundays. My newsis
very bad and I wish to urge the Chair and the membersof
the Council to agreethat, if it is not contrary to the rules,
we should proceedimmediately to the vote on the draft
resolution. I plead with memberswho have askedto be
allowed to speakto reservetheir statementsuntil after the
vote, if that is in order, I am doing this becausehumanlives
are involved and becauseoperationson the terrain are still
following a very bad course.So, I requestthat if you agree,
Sir, we should go immediately to the vote so that we can
move towardsimplementation.

7he meeting was culled to order at 11.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
7he agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12607)

5. The PRESIDENT: 1 am afraid I have to inform the
representativeof Lebanonthat this is not a matter for the
Chair to rule upon. At the moment I have a list of 13
speakersbefore the vote. If those 13 delegationswere to
indicate to me that they werepreparedto speak,not before
the vote, but after the vote, we could indeed proceedin
that way, but I havehad no suchindication sofar.

1, The PRESIDENT: I invite those representatives who,
with the consent of the Council, have been participating in
this debate so far to resume the places reserved for them at
the Couriciltable or at the sideof the Councilchamber,

6. Mr. TUl&JI (Lebanon): I should like to ask yau,
Mr, President,to associateyourself with my plea and,if this
is acceptableto those who have askedto be allowed to
speak, I again urge that we should proceed to the vote,
becausehumanlives are involved. I askthat representatives
shouldspeakafter the votea

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Tudni (Lebanon),
Mr* Herzog (Israel) and Mr, Terzi (PalestineLiberation
Organization)took placesat the Security Counciltable and
Mr, Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. Kikhia (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),Mr. Medani (Sudan),
Mr. Al-Hussamy (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Cu Dinh Ba
(Viet Nam) and Mr. Al-Haddad (Yemen) took the places
reserved
for them at the sideof the Council chamber.

7. The PRESIDENT: The Presidentis perfectly prepared
to ask the representativeof the United Kingdom whether
he is prepared to speak after the vote, and the answeris
“Yes”.
1

8. Mr. BISNARA (Kuwait):
I should like to echo the
sentiments of the representative of Lebanon. I am not
really interested in having leisure to speak at the moment,
while blood is being spilled. It is very important for the
Council to take action, and, in the light of the blood-bath
going on in Lebanon, it is imperative for the Council to act
now. Those who wish to explain their votes can do so
before or after the vote, but statements could be made
afterwards, or disposed of.
9. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): My colleague from Kuwait
has already said what I was about to say. I believe that
there would be no harm in consulting members of the
Council and, if those who are inscribed on the list of
speakerswould be willing to postponetheir statementsto a
later time and vote now, I would support that. Perhapswe
could put this to a vote, or consult membersindividually.
10. Mr, FUENTES 1BANEZ (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegationhad its name down to explain its
vote before the vote, but in view of what hasjust been said
we have no objection to speakingafterwards.
Il. The PRESIDENT: It may assist members of the
Council and thoseother delegationswhich are concernedin
this matter to know that I have been told by those sitting
behind me, who know more about thesethings than I, that
there are precedents for representativesinvited under rule
37 to participate in the Council’s deliberations speaking
after the vote as well as before the voting procedure
commences.So, if thosewhosenamesare inscribed on the
list under rule 37 were to take the view that they could
reserve the statementsthey wish to make until after the
vote
hasbeen taken, it would indeed be possiblefor us to
move on to the voting procedurenow. Thoseconcernedare
the Sudan, Mongolia, Pakistan, Qatar, the PalestineLiberation Organization and Israel. Two other membersof the
Council who wish to speakbefore the vote are China and
Czechoslovakia.Again, it is a matter of those countries
indicating to me whether or not they wish to proceed in
this way.
12. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
In view of the appeal made by the representative of
Lebanon,we are preparedto speakafter the vote. However,
I should like to reservemy right to speakalso before the
vote.
13. The PRESIDENT: I think perhapsI should make the
distinction clear. There is a distinction between participating in the debate and participating in the voting procedure.
As far as the voting procedure is concerned, of course
membersof the Council have the right, if they so wish, to
explain their vote immediately before they cast it, just as
they have the right to explain it immediately after they
have cast it. But, as I seeit, the problem is not so much
now with the membersof the Council; the problem is with
the rule 37 participants in the debate who have requested
to take part in the debatebefore we move on to the voting
procedure. As I have said,those are the Sudan, Mongolia,
Pakistan, Qatar, the PalestineLiberation Organization and
Israel. I am told that Pakistan, Qatar and Mongolia have
c%reedto reservetheir right to speakuntil after the vote.

14. I call on the representativeof the PalestineLiberation
Organizationwho hasaskedto be allowed to speak.
15. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization): In
compliance with the wishes of the representative of
Lebanon, we shall reserveour right to make a statement
until after the vote.
16. The PRESIDENT: I believe that the Sudan and Israel
also are now going to speakafter the vote. I think that
leaves only the representative of Czechoslovakia, who
apparentlystill wishesto take part in the debate.
17. Mr. HULINSKY (Czechoslovakia)(interpretationfiom
Russian): In view of the statement made by the representativeof Lebanon,I shallnot insist on speakingbefore
the vote but shallspeakafter, if you wish, Sir.
18. The PRESIDENT: I am much obliged to the members
of the.Council for their co-operation. It would now seem
that no member of the Council and none of those
participating under rule 37 wish to take part in the debate
before the Councilmoveson to the voting procedure. I take
it, therefore, that the Council agreesthat we may now
move on to the voting procedure on the draft resolution
before it contained in document S/12610. A number of
membershave inscribedtheir namesto speakin explanation
of vote before the vote and I shallnow call on them.
19. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegationhas studied the draft resolution
submitted by the United States contained in document
S/12610. We deemit necessaryto point out that in the first
placethe draft fails to condemnthe Israeliarmed aggression
againstLebanon and to support the just struggle of the
Arab and Palestinianpeople, China has always held a
different position in principle on the question of sending
United Nations forces, becausesuch a practice may pave
the way for super-Powerinterference. China therefore
expresses
its reservationand has decidednot to participate
in the voting on the draft.
20. Finally, the Chinese delegation reaffirms that the
ChineseGovernmentand peoplefirmly condemn the Israeli
Zionists for their atrocities of aggressionagainstLebanon
andother Arab countries.Wewill, asalways, firmly support
the Palestinian and Lebanesepeople and the people of
other Arab countries in their struggleto resist aggression,
regaintheir lost territories and restoretheir national rights.
21. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation j?om French):
The present situation in Southern Lebanon is the direct
consequence
of the distressing
problem of the MiddIe East.
It is not my intention to go into the problem as a whole,
but I shouldlike to recall that my delegation believesthat
no lasting settlement can be reached in that part of the
world SO long asthe profound aspirationsof the Palestinian
people, representedby the PalestineLiberation Organization, are not fulfilled. Thoseaspirationsare for recognition
of its inalienableright to self-determination,independence
andnational sovereigntyin a State of its own.
22. My delegation sincerely deplores the bloody events
taking place in Southern Lebanon, events which are

considerably complicating and delaying the search for a
solution of the Middle East problem as a whole and which
might have serious repercussions on all the ongoing efforts
to arrive at a just and lasting settlement of this problem.
Furthermore, these events have led to the occupation of
part of Lebanese territory by Israeli armed forces. That
occupation contravenes the fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and we condemn it.

the principles of the Charter governing the use of United
Nations troops for maintaining peace and international
security.
28. In these circumstances, the Soviet delegation cannot
agree with the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 12610. However, in view of the request made by the
Government of Lebanon in this regard, the Soviet delegation will not impede its adoption and will abstain when it is
put to the vote,

23. For all those reasons, my delegation cannot but
support the Council’s decisions, calling for immediate
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanese soil and leading
to full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon. My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

29. My delegation considers it necessary also to emphasize
that all the expenses arising out of the consequences of
Israel’s aggression against Lebanon, including the expense
of sending United Nations troops to Southern Lebanon,
should be borne by the aggressor itself, that is, Israel.

24. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation jkom Russian): In connexion
with the draft resolution in document S/12610, the Soviet
delegation would like to make the following statement.

30. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) (interpretation fro?71
Spanish): Mr. President, although I had already indicated
that I was prepared to speak later, I shall gladly do so now,
since you have been good enough to call on me,

25. During the discussion in the Council, the representatives of many States both members of the Council and
others who participated in the debate spoke in favour of
the Council’s firmly condemning this open aggression by
Israel against Lebanon as a blatant violation of international
peace and security, This has to be done in order to put an
end to the aggressive policy of Israel towards the neighbouring Arab States. It is a matter which is of fundamental
significance, and yesterday the Soviet delegation, during the
consultations held by the members of the Council, made
certain proposals. However, the sponsor of the draft
resolution stated that he did not consider it possible to
accept them.

31. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution introduced by the delegation of the United
States, contained in document S/12610. My Government’s
decision is based on two fundamental principles: one is
legal and the other of a humanitarian character. The legal
consideration deals with basic implications which my
Government has rejected at all times and in all circumstances. They have to do mainly with the occupation of
territories by force, no matter what the reasons invoked.
The second consideration concerns the need to put an
immediate end to the suffering of the population in the
invaded territories and to respond in this way to the
dramatic call of the Lebanese people who, according to
their representative, only aspire to be left alone to live in
peace.

26. The delegation of the Soviet Union would also like to
state that the sending of United Nations troops to the
territory of Lebanon in accordance with the request made
by the Government of that country should by no means
infringe in any way the sovereign rights of the Government
of Lebanon and should fully take account of the responsibility borne by Israel as the aggressor for the actions
which it has perpetrated. The draft resolution establishing a
United Nations force should contain provisions to the
effect that the task of such troops should be to observe the
cease-fire and the withdrawal
of Israeli troops from
Lebanon and to separate the sides. We cannot agree to the
United Nations troops being given functions that are not
proper to them in regard to the transfer of effective
authority in that region to the Govermnent of Lebanon. We
also consider it extremely important that the text of the
draft resolution should contain provisions limiting the stay
of the United Nations troops in Lebanon to a short period
of time and also indicating that they should be withdrawn
when the Lebanese Government so requests.

32. With regard to the other aspects of the item on the
agenda, “The situation in the Middle East”, my delegation
believes that this is not the most appropriate time to refer
to them, because what we are now trying to do is to put an
end to a situation of utmost gravity which requires
immediate and decisive measures.
33. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): The Council has been
meeting since last Friday to discuss the question of
Lebanon and Israel, or, to use the precise wording of the
item, the situation in the Middle East.
34. Not being a Moslem, I did not have to go to the
mosque on Friday. Not being Jewish, I did not have to go
to the synagogue on Saturday. Not being a Christian, I did
not have to go to church this morning. I do, however, wish
a very happy Palm Sunday to all my Christian friends. I
understand that Soviet people too go to their church-the
Russian word is, I believe, tserkov. I understand they
usually go on Sunday, for mass. I am toId that the Chinese
people go to the pagoda or the shrine whenever they feel
like it.

27. During consultations held with all the members of the
Council as well as with the delegation of the United States,
the sponsor of the draft resolution, the Soviet delegation
proposed certain amendments. Unfortunately, however,
those proposals were not taken into account by the United
States delegation. We consider them, however, to be
essential both in order to protect the interests of the
victims of Israel’s aggression and in order to comply with

35. Being a Brahman, I consider God to be within me, and
I pray wherever and whenever I feel like it-just as my
Chinese colleagues do. I do not have to go to a temple to
3

pray. So let me pray in the Council: 0 Lord, Lebanon is a
crossroads of cultures, and, to use the words of the
representative of Lebanon, Ambassador Tueni, “rarely, if
ever, has such a small country given so much to the world
and to the history of mankind”. And yet Lebanon is today
suffering aggression and is bleeding, through no fault of its
own. Please help Lebanon, 0 Lord.
36. I listened very attentively
speech. It moved me deeply.
condolences,

42. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representativeswho wish to speakin explanation of vote after
the voting.
43. Mr. HULINSKY (Czechoslovakia)(interpretationfrom
Russian): The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic severely
condemned the new premeditated act of aggression
by
Israel againstLebanonand expressedits genuinesympathy
for the Lebaneseand Palestinian people who were its
victims. At the sametime, we supportedthe demandthat
the Security Council shouldcondemnthis act of aggression
and call upon the IsraeliGovernmentto withdraw its armed
units from the territory of Lebanon immediately and
unconditionally.

to Ambassador Tu&‘s
I express to him my

37. I heard the speech of Ambassador Herzog of Israel,
but I experienced some difficulty in listening to him. I
prefer to say that I did not hear him; I did not hear his
insults to the Security Council and to the United Nations as
a whole, I say this particularly because Israel is after all a
child of the United Nations.

44. In defining its position on the draft resolutionwhich
has just been adopted, my delegation stated that it took
very seriously the views of the fraternal country of
Lebanon. The representativeof Lebanonclearly statedthat
his country desiredthe presenceof United Nationstroops
in the territory of Lebanon, and we were sympatheticto
that request. In view, however, of the fact that the
functions of the force in question arenot clearly set out in
the resolutionjust adopted,we had to abstain.

38. I subscribeto the views that have been expressedin
the Council over the past few days by friends and
supportersof and sympathizerswith Lebanon. I and indeed
my country pride ourselves on being on the side of
Lebanon on this issue.In order not to prolong unduly the
consideration of this question, I shallonly associatemyself
with the views expressedby Lebanon’s friends during this
debate.

45. At the same time, we should like decisively to
emphasizethat the responsibilityfor any further deterioration of the political situation in the Middle Eastregionand
for the dangerousconsequences
that could flow from this
latest act of aggression
must be borne by the Government
of Israel. It goes without saying that we also wish to
emphasizeIsrael’smaterial responsibility for the financial
implications of the resolution just adopted, in accordance
with the Charter,

39. It is a credit to you, Mr, President, that you have been
able, with your unique diplomatic talents and through your
indefatigable efforts, to bring the membersof the Council
together in reaching agreement on the draft resolution
contained in document S/12610, which I feel certain will
commandthe support of all delegations.The United States
delegation, led by AmbassadorYoung, deservesa special
tribute for its remarkable efforts that led to unanimous
agreementin such a short time on this draft resolution,
sponsoredby the United States. I cannot rememberthe last
time that such a miracleoccurred.

46. Mr, BISHARA (Kuwait): Kuwait cast an affirmative
vote on the draft resolution sponsoredby the United
States, notwithstanding its reservationson many of the
provisions of that text. The primary goal of Kuwait in
casting that affirmative vote was to secureforthwith the
cessationof military operatipns by Israel inside Lebanon
and the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops from all
Lebaneseterritory,

40. It is without hesitancy that I shall vote in favour of
the draft resolution which the negotiators have put together. Let it not be saidthat the Security Council cannot
act quickly in an emergency. Let the people of Lebanon
live!

47. Kuwait would have liked to see a paragraphin the
resolution strongly condemningIsrael for its heinouscrime
and blatant aggression,
Paragraph1 avoidsmentioningIsrael
by name. Is this a deliberate omissionor is it the best
outcome in the presentcircumstances?Our understanding
is that this paragraphisaddressedsolely to Israel,because
it
is Israel alone that violated the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independenceof Lebanon.Paragraph2
is couched in weak terms,asit merely callson the aggressor
to cease its military action. The Council should have
demandedan unconditional and immediatewithdrawal of
Israelitroops from all Lebaneseterritory.

41. The PRESIDENT: 1 now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/12610.
A vote wastaken by showof hands.
In favour: Bolivia, Canada, France, Gabon, Germany,
Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Statesof America, Venezuela.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Czechoslovakia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,

48. Paragraph3 statesthat the purpose of the establishment of a United Nations force is not merely to confirm
the withdrawal of Israeli forces, but also to assistthe
Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its
effective authority in the area, This is a dangerous
precedent. Aggressorsmust not be allowedto dictate terms
of withdrawal. The choice of the word “interim” is not the

The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions.1
One member(China) did not participate in the voting.
1 See resolution 425 (1978).

4

best. It gives the impression that United Nations forces may
be stationed in Lebanon indefinitely. The presence of
United Nations forces should not detract from Lebanese
sovereignty. It is my delegation’s understanding that I.,ebanon is free to terminate the presence of United Nations
forces on its territory whenever it chooses. It is the only
Power competent to make such a decision. The United
Nations forces’ primary goal is to secure the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Lebanon and to prevent a recurrence of
the encroachment by Israel on the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon.

54. I turn now to the subject of the stationing of a United
Nations force in Southern Lebanon. Yesterday we said that
the French authorities had made their agreement subject to
the agreement of the Lebanese Government. Today we have
that agreement. My Government would, however, remind
the Council that the stationing of a United Nations force in
a given particularly dangerous and threatening situation
must first and foremost contribute to the search for and the
maintenance of peace. Such forces should not be diverted
from their genuine purpose and their presence must not be
used as a pretext for postponing the search for a final
settlement to the crisis that led to their creation. That is
why the mandate of such forces is generally set for a
limited period. In the case of Southern Lebanon, the
resolution we have adopted clearly states that the force will
not be required after the Lebanese Government has
established its effective authority over the area. In passing, I
would point out that the raison d’btre of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) wilI not
thereby be removed.

49. There are also serious implications in the resolution
which make us apprehensive about the prospects for peace
and security in our region. The Council’s response to
Israel’s challenge calls for serious consideration. Shall States
be allowed in the future to occupy neighbouring territories
if they feel that their neighbour’s authority is ineffective?
Should the aggressor refuse to withdraw
unless United
Nations forces are sent to perform duties on terms dictated
by the aggressor? We pose these questions because much
more is involved than the national and human rights of the
Palestinian people or the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.

55. It was in the firm hope that the situation would
develop towards a search for peace in the Middle East by all
the parties concerned that we voted in favour of the draft
resolution today. France is quite prepared to discharge its
full responsibility and to participate directly in the force to
be placed in Southern Lebanon.

50. As the representative of a small country I must say
that the package deal in paragraph 3 of the resolution is
disturbing. There can be no compromise with aggression or
genocide. Those who perpetrate atrocities must reckon with
the authority of the Security Council, which is the supreme
international body for the maintenance of peace and
security,

56. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): I want to
thank all the members of the Council for their co-operation
in making possible such rapid action on the adoption of this
resolution. I especially want to thank you, Mr. President,
for your tireless consultations and negotiations, which
made it possible for us to bring together very quickly a
response to the plea by the representative of Lebanon. I
think the Council demonstrated a kind of political restraint
which produced this result-the result asked for very simply
and powerfully by the representative of Lebanon: “Let my
people live,”

51. In conclusion, we should like to point out that this
resolution will not put an end to the conflict in the Middle
East. How can the suffering of the Palestinians and the
Lebanese be alleviated? Only a comprehensive settlement
based on the United Nations resolutions that call for Israeli
withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories and the
restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian people
will guarantee the termination of the conflict from which
our region has suffered for so long.

57. The current situation in Southern Lebanon, however,
is the result of an unending cycle of violence. The tragic
pattern of action in the Middle East and the reaction to the
conflict have been repeatedly deplored by my Government.
The senseless violence against unarmed civilians, whether in
the name of liberation or security, must be brought to an
end. We must do all in our power to put a stop to the
fighting in Southern Lebanon and once and for all provide
an alternative to this recurrent pattern.

52. Mr.

LEPRETTE
(France)
(interpretation
from
First of all I should like to perform a pleasant
duty which thus far circumstances have prevented me from
performing, I should like to bid welcome to our new
colleague from Venezuela, Ambassador Rub&n Carpio
Castillo. We are sure that his ability and his great experience
wilI
be of valuable assistance to all of us. We have very fine
memories of how Miss Maria Lopez represented her
country in the Council until Ambassador Carpio Castillo
arrived. She did so in a manner that was a credit to
Venezuelan diplomacy.

h?nch):

58. As the representative of Lebanon so eloquently stated,
while the fighting is going on people are dying in Southern
Lebanon. I want to urge the members of the Council to
proceed immediately to further consultations that would
lead to the adoption, if possible this afternoon, of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force. In our view
we should be able to get the first contingents of this force
into place at the earliest possible moment.

53. The French delegation wishes briefly to explain why it
voted in favour of draft resolution S/12610. As we said in
an earlier statement [2072& meeting], we could not fail to
support the request addressed to Israel immediately to
cease its military actions against Lebanon and to withdraw
its forces from the territory of that country without delay.
Only such a step can ensure respect for the essential
provisions of the Charter, which do not tolerate in any
circumstances violations of the territorial integrity or
sovereignty of another State.

59. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (interpretation
from Spanish): The delegation of Venezuela voted in favour
of the draft resolution introduced by the delegation of the
United States because of the humanitarian aspects of the
problem which are occupying the Council’s attention. But
5

ante of the membersof the Council, of thoseparticipating
in the debateand of the United Nations Secretariat.

we did not have enough time to consider the other very
delicate and serious aspects of the problem some of which
are overlooked and some of which are included in the text.

65. I shall now resumemy role as PRESIDENT of the
Council. We have thus concludedthe explanationsof vote
after the vote.

6~). The PRESIDENT: I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as representative of the UNITED
KINGDOM.

66. The Secretary-Generalhas asked to be allowed to
makea statementand I now call on him,

61. Once age the Council is meeting against the backpound of hostilities and human tragedy in the Middle East.
Roth Lebanon and Israel have experienced more than their
fair share of the horrors of war. One cannot but be moved
by the reports coming out of the region Of innocent
families bereaved, of people uprooted from their homes and
forced to flee. It is impossible to justify the atrocious
terrorist attack on the road to Tel Aviv last Saturday. It is
also impossible to accept that any Government has the right
to take the law into its own hands in the way that Israel has
done.

67. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I have noted carefully
the terms of the resolution which the Council has just
adopted and shallbe circulating the report calledfor in that
resolution in a very short time. In fact, my report will be
availableto the Council right after the end of this meeting.
I hope that the Council will be able to consider my
recommendationsat the earliest possibledate so that we
may proceedwithout delay with all the necessaryarrangements for the establishmentof the United Nationsforce in
Lebanon.

62. For a long time now, my Government has expressed
its deep concern at the situation in Southern Lebanon.
Only last September, in a statement to the General
Assembly, the Secretary of State for Foreign and COmmOnwealth Affairs, Mr. Owen, pointed to the fighting there as

68. In order that no time should be lost in implementing
paragraph2 of the resolution, I proposeto instruct MajorGeneral Erskine, the Chief of Staff of UNTSO,to establish
close contact with the parties concerned and to deploy
UNTSO observerswith a view to confirming the cessation
of military action in the area. It is clear that the cessation
of military action on all sidesis a fundamentalprerequisite
for the implementationof the other parts of the resolution.
I therefore appeal to all concerned to take all possible
measuresto put an immediateend to the hostilitiesin the
area and to give the fullest co-operation to United Nations
personnel in the area, and in particular to the unarmed
military observersin SouthernLebanon.

“a sad reminder both of the urgency of finding a solution
to the Middle East conflict as a whole and of the
difficulties which the Lebanese Government faces in
restoring peace and security in that country”.2
Be has regularly emphasized the need for a United Nations
force in the area. The events of the last eight days serve to
underline that view. My Government’s attitude to violence
in the Middle East, from whatever quarter, is clearly on
record. We deplore acts of terror resulting in loss of life and
limb, often to innocent civilians. Nor do we accept that
retaliation in kind provides the solution.

69. My report will, I hope, provide the Council with the
basis for further expeditious action in this very serious
situation.

63. It is particularly regrettable, in my view, that the
events of the last eight days should have taken place at a
time when the region’s most urgent requirement is to
maintain the momentum of the peace talks prompted by
President Sadat’s historic journey to Jerusalem. In the
shorter term a way must be found to enable the Lebanese
Government to re-establish its authority in the south of its
territory. Immediate Israeli withdrawal is, in my Government’s view, a clear prerequisite to progress in this respect.
I was pleased to note the repeated assurances given to the
Council by the representative of Israel that they do intend
to withdraw from Lebanon. We regard those assurances as
serious and binding. The implementation of paragraph 3 of
the resolution which the Council has just adopted and
which we firmly support should lead to a rapid re-establishment of stability in the area.

70. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now resumethe
generaldebate,if I may call it that.
71. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpretation
jfom Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has listened attentively to the
statementsmade by the representativesof Lebanon and
other Arab countries and of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. Wefully supportthe complaintsandcondemnation they have expressedin categoricalterms againstthe
aggressioncommitted by the Israeli Zionists. The irrefutable fact is that, sincemidnight on 14 March, the Israeli
Zionists have dispatchedlargenumbersof aircraft, warships
and armoured vehiclesto effectuate a flagrant invasion of
Southern Lebanon, launchedattacks on the campsof the
Palestinianarmedforces,ravagedvillages,massacred
inhabitants, savagelytrampled upon the sovereignty of Lebanon
and committed a new unforgivable crime, thus arousingthe
indignation of the Lebaneseand Palestinianpeople, the
entire Arab peopleandpeoplesthroughout the world.

64. It is particularly gratifying that the plea so eloquently
voiced by the representative of Lebanon in his first
statement before the Council [2071st
meeting] should have
been answeredso speedilyand efficiently. This has been
due in largemeasureto the forbearance and the persever2 Official

tisif, Plenary

72. The Chinesedelegationexpressesprofound sympathy
and solicitude to the Lebaneseand Palestinianpeople. We
expressour utmost indignationat and strongcondemnation
of the aggression
and brutal crimescommittedby the Israeli
Zionists.

Records of the General Assembly, ThSty-second SesMeetings, 9th meeting,
para.116.
6

73. Over a long period of time, the Israeli authorities have
stubbornly clung to their policy of aggression, arrogantly
refused to recognize the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people and to pull out from the Arab territories
they occupied, and continued to set up illegal settlements.
All this has already met with resolute opposition from the
Arab and Palestinian people, thus plunging Israel into
increasing isolation.

the Arab countries and the Palestinian people, who are
uniting more closely and persevering in struggle.
79. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,
80. Mr. MEDANI (Sudan): Once again the international
community is confronted with a flagrant violation-one of
the most flagrant-of the territorial sovereignty of a
Member State. We are witnessing wide-scale military aggression by Israel against Lebanon in what is a clear attempt to
further its Zionist expansionist policy. It is not my
intention. Mr. President, to tax your patience and that of
Your colleagues by engaging in a lengthy discussion. A
resolution has already been adopted, The Sudan delegation
hopes for its immediate implementation, particularly as
regards the immediate cessation of the military operation
by Israel inside Lebanon, and the complete withdrawal of
the Israeli forces from Lebanese territory, as well as a
halting of the killing of civilians and innocent people.

74. The Israeli Zionists always use the protection of
“Israel’s security” as a pretext for launching aggression and
expansion, The Israeli Defence Minister haughtily declared
that Israel had decided to “clean up once and for all” the
Palestinian armed forces in Southern Lebanon so as to form
a “security belt”. He asserted: “We will control the area as
long as necessary”. These extremely insolent assertions have
laid bare the expansionist nature of Begin and his like who
have committed aggression behind the smokescreen of
“defence” and “security”.
75. The two super-Powers have long been engaging in
overt and covert struggle over the Middle East question
with the same purpose of controlling the Middle East and
impairing the national rights of the Arab and Palestinian
people. Their only difference lies in the fact that while one
super-Power supports Israel openly, the other super-Power
does SO under the cloak of being the “natural ally” of the
Arab people and under the signboard of “supporting
national liberation movements”. It is with the connivance
and support of the two super-Powers that Israel has for
years committed evil acts and run rampant, and time and
again launched wars of aggression against the Arab countries, occupied vast tracts of Arab territories and made large
numbers of Palestinians homeless, thus reducing the situation in the Middle East to a state of prolonged flux and
great tension.

81. However, I must say that this act of open aggression
against Lebanon is no surprise to any of us here. Israeli
aggression has become the rule rather than the exception.
Israel has committed many such acts in large- and small-scale
military incursions, equipped with the most advanced tanks
tild planes. Yet Israel tries to convince world public
opinion that those blatant acts of aggression are justified in
terms of Israel’s rules for the protection of its security. But
peace and security can by no means be brought about by
blind revenge, On the other hand, the escalation of the
already existing tension in the Middle East could inevitably
lead to a larger confrontation and, subsequently, more
bloodshed.
82. The regrettable sharp attack by the representative of
Israel on the members of this august body-part of the very
Organization which created the State of Israel-shows the
fallacy of his argument, as well as his usual disregard and
disdain for any just resolution adopted by the Security
Council in favour of justice. As early as this morning,
Mr. Begin was casting doubt on the validity of any Council
resolution.

76. The Arab and Palestinian people are heroic people.
Confronted with the ferocious enemy, they have been
carrying on courageous and tenacious struggles for the
cause of national liberation. The Israeli Zionists’ intransigence can only run wild for a time, because it is not the
Israeli Zionists and the super-Powers but the hundreds of
millions of Arab people who will eventually determine the
destiny of the Middle East.

83. This open Israeli invasion of Lebanon, a peaceful
country which is precious to the hearts of the whole world,
with the possible exception of Israel, this aggression to
which Lebanon is now being subjected and the cruel
attempt of Israel’s so-called defence army to exterminate
the Palestinian people by killing hundreds of children in the
refugee camps, could never go without being seriously
challenged, as it also sets a most grave and threatening
precedent: for under precisely such masks do other racist
righes--in
South Africa and Rhodesia-launch their flagrant attacks on Zambia and other front-line African States.

77. The Chinese Government and people always stand
four-square behind the people of the Arab countries and
the Palestinian people in their just struggle to recover lost
territories and regain national rights. We are firmly against
Israeli aggression and against the contention between the
two super-Powers in the Middle East.
78, The Chinese delegation still considers that the Security
Council should uphold justice and explicitly adopt a
resolution strongly condemning the Israeli atrocities of
aggression and demanding an immediate end to all Israel’s
acts of aggression and an immediate withdrawal of all its
aggressor troops from Lebanon’s territory. At the same
time, the Council should call on the people of the world to
give firm support to the Government and People of
Lebanon, as well as to the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples, in their just struggle against Israeli aggression. We
are convinced that ultimate victory will go to the People of

84. This Israeli act of terrorism cannot bring that country
peace or security. The Palestinian people are struggling for
their inalienable rights and the restoration of their homeland, as recognized by the whole of the international
commumty, and the denial of these rights bY Israel is the
real cause of the tension in the Middle East. MY delegation
believes that, to reach a just and permanent settlement,
7

--____.----

against the people of Palestine. However, we are Convinced
that those actions of the aggressor will not break theawin of
the Arab people in the struggle for their just cause.

Israel should immediately withdraw from Lebanon and
from all other occupied Arab lands and recognize the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to establish their own State in Palestine.

92. The Mongolian delegation firmly condemns Israel’s
encroachment on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Lebanon and its barbaric actions against
the Palestinian people.
In his St~~emellt
made on 19 March,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Mongolian People’s
Republic said the following with regard to the new
aggression committed by Israel against Lebanon:

85. In his statement on 17 March[2071st meeting], the
Israeli representative also referred to the President of the
Sudan in regard to the tragic incident that took place at
Khartoum in 1973. Without going into detail, I wish to
record here that the statement of the Israeli representative
is absolutely false: the President of the Sudan did not state
that the Chairman of the PLO had given the order to kill.
As a matter of fact, the President of the Sudan was in very
close contact at that time with Yasser Arafat at Beirut
throughout the ordeal, and both were trying to find a
peaceful solution of the difficulties which such cases
usually entail.

“The Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic
and the Mongolian people as a whole, together with all
progressive forces throughout the world, severely con.
demn the new act of aggression committed by Israel
against Lebanon and demand an immediate cessation of
military action and the withdrawal of Israel’s troops from
that territory.

86. I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to
participate in the debate.

“The Mongolian people and its Government would like
to express their full support of and solidarity with the
Arab peoples in their just struggle to eliminate the
consequences of Israeli aggression, establish a lasting
peace in the Middle East and guarantee the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their
right to create their own State.”

87. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
88. Mr. PUNTSAGNOROV
(Mongolia) (interpretation
from Russian): Mr, President, first I should like to express
my appreciation to you and to all the other members of the
Council for having given me the opportunity to speak on
the item now before the Council. Our delegation would like
to congratulate you on your fulfilment of the important
responsibihties of the presidency of the Council for this
month,

93. My delegation hopes that the Security Council will
display a sense of its lofty political responsibility so as to
put an immediate end to Israel’s aggression and ensure
conditions of peace and security in that part of the world.
94. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.

89, The matter which is now being considered by the
Council cannot, by its very nature, fail to disquiet all those
who aspire to peace and security for all peoples. Once again
we have witnessed a sudden deterioration of the situation in
the Middle East, as a result of armed aggression undertaken
by Israel against a Member of our Organization, the State of
Lebanon. As a result of this large-scale military invasion in
which land, air and naval forces were used, the direct
occupation of Southern Lebanon has in effect begun,
During the military operations, hundreds of people have
already perished, primarily Palestinian refugees who, having
been expelled from their native land by Israel, had sought
shelter in neighbouring Lebanon,.

95. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): First of all 1 should like to
observe that, as regards the urgency of the matter before us,
I cannot recall that the representative of Lebanon saw any
urgency in the debate when his country was being ripped
apart by the PLO, when Syria and other Arab States sent in
troops, when the blood of 50,000 Lebanese was being shed,
when up to a hundred thousand people were being
wounded and up to a million Lebanese were being turned
into refugees, and when the whole fabric of life in his
country was being destroyed.
96. In this connexion, I have before me here a sheaf of
telegrams addressed to me by citizens of Lebanon that 1
considered submitting as official documents. The two 1
shall read out reflect their spirit, The first reads:

90. It is quite obvious that the aggression of Israel is aimed
at weakening the national liberation struggle of the Arab
peoples and primarily at striking a blow at the Palestinian
resistance movement headed by the PLO and preventing a
comprehensive political settlement of the Middle East crisis,

“We, the Christian refugees of Damur, Lebanon, who
number 24,000, repudiate the position of the Lebanese
Permanent Representative to the United Nations. We
fully support the policy of Israel,”

9 1. The new act of aggression carried out by Israel against
Lebanon is not only an overt challenge to the provisions of
the Charter and to the elementary rules of international
law, but also represents a direct threat to international
peace and security. Israel’s act of aggression demonstrates
quite clearly that the manoeuvres involving the so-called
separate transactions with Israel not only are hampering a
speedy and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East
problem but aho have resulted in encouraging lsracl’s
WpSSiVe
actions against neighbouring countries and

The second reads as follows:
“Lebanese Christians in Lebanon back Israel’s position
and stand ready to assist the Israeli forces in all ways
against the Palestinian murderers.”
These are just two examples from a number of telegrams
that I have received from citizens of Lebanon.
8

97. In agreeing to defer my statement until after the vote,
I did so, Mr. President, out of deference to you, and I
should like to make that perfectly clear,

of previous one-sided resolutions passed by the Security
Council on Israeli actions in Lebanon, none of which
mentioned the problem of terrorism that gave rise to those
actions. In so doing, I submit that the Egyptian repre.
sentative has done a grave disservice not only to the
hundreds of civilian victims of terrorism but also to those
of his own countrymen who so recently gave their lives in
the struggle against that scourge of mankind. Indeed, by
refusing to address themselves directly to the problem of
terrorism, many representatives here continue to give
implicit approval to the Council’s previous silent sanction
of the terrorism that has afflicted Egypt, the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, Britain, Yugoslavia
and many other countries. This is not the time for a
citation of such one-sided resolutions but rather for a
frontal attack on a problem that both Lebanon and Israel
would like to see resolved, namely, the usurpation of
Lebanese authority by the PLO,

98. It must surely be apparent to all who have listened to
the statements of the leaders and representatives of Israel
and of Lebanon that both countries are demanding the
same thing, namely, the establishment of full Lebanese
authority and sovereignty in Southern Lebanon. What
many representatives here have apparently forgotten, however-as is obvious from their remarks-is that, prior to this
week, the effective authority in the area in Lebanon under
discussion was not, by its own admission, the Lebanese
Government but the terrorist organization called the PLO.
That organization has brutally imposed itself on the
villagers of Southern Lebanon and has used the area for the
specific purpose of launching murderous attacks on Israeli
civilians. It was against the terrorists of that organization
that Israel acted this past week, and it is to prevent their
return that Israel now seeks appropriate arrangements.

103. I shall ignore the usual inevitable and repetitive
diatribe that my delegation is treated to on such occasions
by the Arab delegations and their satellites. It is, after all,
first and foremost a useful device for avoiding the main
issues-that
of restoring Lebanese sovereignty which has
been undermined by the Arab enemies of Lebanon, and
that of the menace of international terror.

99. Two cynical distortions have been perpetrated in the
course of this debate. The first distortion, insinuated by the
Soviet Union and by almost every Arab representative, is
that Israel has territorial designs on Southern Lebanon.
That is a blatant lie. Israel has stated repeatedly, and now
solemnly reaffirms, that it wants not one inch of Lebanese
territory. We did not enter Lebanon with the intention of
staying, and we do not now intend to stay. We entered the
area with one purpose, and one purpose alone: to clear the
region of the murderers who have terrorized both Lebanese
villagers and Israeli civilians for far too long, to destroy
their bases and to ensure that they do not return.

104. But when those who live in glasshouses proceed to
throw stones, I am constrained to reply. The representative
of India did not approve of my characterization of the
United Nations handling, or rather ignoring, of the problem
of terror or of the tragedy of Lebanon and other major
problems in the world, He took exception to my reference
to hyprocrisy. I can appreciate his concern since apparently
the shoe fits. By what right does he lecture us? By right of
the fact that in 1975 his Government’s forces chose to cross
the border of the Kingdom of Sikkim-remember,
Ambassador, we are discussing the sanctity of national sovereignty
here-and annex, no more and no less, that kingdom, and
the Council did not even blink an eyelid? Hypocrisy, Sir,
let me remind you, is the only tribute which vice pays to
virtue.

100. The second lie is an even crueller distortion. To
assert, as some representatives have done, that Israel’s aim is
to annihilate Palestinians is a brutal denial of facts. If that
were Israel’s aim, how is it that the Arab population of
Israel itself has grown and prospered, increasing in numbers
from 150,000 in 1948 to over half a million today? How is
it that, unlike many of our neighbours, Israel has granted
full citizenship to its Palestinian Arab population and not
kept them languishing in refugee camps? How is it that
Israel has offered, within the framework of peace proposals
submitted to Egypt, self-rule to the Palestinian Arabs in the
areas under its control while Jordan and Egypt-let me
remind their representatives-did not see fit even to offer
them that during 19 years of Jordanian and Egyptian
occupation? How is it that the number of Palestinian Arabs
killed over the past few years by Syria and by Jordan far
exceeds the number of PLO terrorists killed in clashes with
Israel?

105. An even more telling illustration of what I had in
mind when I describedthe record of the Organization in
such disparagingterms as to make somemembersuncomfortable was provided by the vicious, unbridled and
obnoxious remarks made by the representative of the
Soviet Union, remarks which betrayed the innate antiSemitic sentimentswhich colour the Soviet attitude to our
people wherever they may be. Has not your Government,
Sir, engagedin sufficient mischiefwithout addinginsult to
very considerableinjury?

101. Israel’s action was most emphatically not directed
against Palestinian Arabs as such but only against terrorists
such as those who staged last Saturday’s barbaric attack
against Israeli civilians, who have assassinated West Bank
Arab leaders, who shot down the editor of Al-Ahram and
who have dispatched their assassins to all parts of the world
to hijack planes, murder women and children and terrorize
innocent people.

106. You talk today about the territories held by Israel
since the 1967 war, while ignoring the fact that the late
President Nasser indicated in his resignation speech on
9 June 1967 that it was Soviet intrigue that had forced
Egypt to move as it did, resultingin a war which brought
Israel to those territories. You have poured billions and
billions of dollars worth of arms into the Middle East,
sparked off a calamitous arms race and been a major
element in fomenting war andtragedy in the Middle East.
In the past few months alone,fearful lest Egypt and Israel

102. On that count, may I express my sorrow that the
representative of Egypt saw fit yesterday to cite a long list
9

112. The resolution calls for confirming the withdrawal of
Israeli forces, but omits to insist on barring the entry to the
area of those terrorist elements which have usurped
effective Lebanese authority in the area and brought this
tragedy on the Lebanese people.

might move towards peace, the Soviet Union undertook
massive infusions of arms and weapons of war into the area,
pa~icularly to Syria and Iraq. Your ally, to whom You
recently shipped in the course of two months 12 shiploads
of arms for the purpose of destroying the Lebanese State,
mounting terrorist attacks against Israel, subverting moderate Arab States and assassinating their leadership, is the
PLO, a terrorist organization that speciahzes in murdering
women and little children.

113. Israel understands the spirit of the resolution as
indicating a clear link between the withdrawal of our troops
and the establishment of an effective deterrent force against
future terrorist attacks. Israel has created conditions in
which the Government of Lebanon can establish full
control and sovereignty over this territory and, in the words
of the Lebanese representative on Friday, enable his people
to live and to reconstruct.

107. You talk of national sovereignty and territorial
integrity, Well You may, since you are SO familiar with the
subject, as in Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Hungary in 1956,
Czechoslovakia in 1968 and the KuriIe Islands. I have a
feeling that my Chinese colleague could elaborate on this
subject. It seems to me that you are the least qualified of all
nations to pontificate on a subject such as respect for
territorial integrity.

114. A large segment of the Lebanese population has
recognized that this possibility now exists for the frst time
in years. and has consequently given open support to our
action. Indeed, the residents of a large number of Southern
Lebanese villages have welcomed the expulsion of the
terrorists who have been using their towns and villages as
bases, and have asked the Israeli Defence Forces for
protection against the PLO. The establishment of effective
Lebanese authority, prepared and able to protect them
from the ravages of the PLO, wilI be further welcomed by
those villagers, as it will by Israel itself.

108. It is noteworthy in this debate how few representatives have seen fit to express concern for the fate of
the villagers in Southern Lebanon. The anti-Israel obsession
of many of those delegations apparently overshadowed
their determination to ensure Lebanese sovereignty. Indeed,
it might be asked how many of those representatives who
have raised their voices in self-righteous indignation over
the past few days even expressed concern about Lebanese
sovereignty when it was consistently violated by the PLO;
and, when that hapless nation was torn apart in a bloody
civil war, how many representatives then raised their voices
in defence of Lebanese sovereignty?

115. In sum, the Council will do the cause of peace no
service unless it ensures that arrangements will be made of
such a nature as to guarantee that after the withdrawal of
Israeli forces the status quo ante will not be restored.
Whatever the arrangements agreed upon, they must not
produce the kind of political and military vacuum that
prevailed before this week and that would constitute an
open invitation to the terrorists to return and resume their
murderous activities. The anarchy of recent years and the
reign of terror inflicted by the PLO on Southern Lebanon
is, we trust, over. Whatever arrangements may be negotiated
and concluded with Israel and Lebanon, they must prevent
renewed strife, vengeance and terrorism once and for all,
either against Israel or against any element of the population in Southern Lebanon.

109. I would remind the Council that Israel’s position on
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon has
been and is a consistent one. We were for a year and a half
the only country in the Organization that consistently
raised its voice in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly on Lebanon’s behalf until the Lebanese representative himself accused the PLO of waging war against his
country. By its services at the “good fence” Israel literally
saved tens of thousands of Lebanese lives. Many of those
countries that today shed crocodile tears over Israel’s
actions were themselves engaged in tearing apart Lebanon
or in financing those forces that were doing so. Israel
wished then, as it wishes now, to see Lebanon united,
independent and sovereign over all its territory, including
the south. That unity, independence and sovereignty have
been threatened and undermined by the PLO since 1970,
and they cannot be restored unless the terrorists are
removed from the border region.

116. To thls end, Israel is prepared to begin immediate
discussions to achieve appropriate arrangements for the
return of the area at present under our control to full
Lebanese sovereignty and effective control.
117. In conclusion, we wish no more of Lebanon than
that we should return to being as we were for over 20 years,
until the advent of the terrorists: peaceful neighbours along
a common border, farming side by side and living in
harmony. We wish the Lebanese peace and a chance to
rebuild their beautiful country after the ravages of an
inter-Arab war, free from foreign domination, Arab or
otherwise, and free from the ominous shadows of terror
and fear. We trust that our action this week will enable the
Government of Lebanon to assert effective authority and
control in the region and to maintain peace and tranquillity
for the benefit of all the inhabitants of Southern Lebanon.

IlO. In our view, the resolution just adopted is inadequate
and sorely lacking. In keeping with the time-honoured
tradition of the Organization, there is not one word of
condemnation of terrorism and the horrible terrorist
outrages committed against Israel. There is not one word of
condemnation of the terrorist forces that usurped Lebanese
authority in Southern Lebanon and brought death, chaos
and anarchy to Lebanon: not one word,

118. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

Ill.
Truth is violated by falsehood, but it is outraged by
silence.
10

119. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, I should like
to express to you my admiration for the distinction with
which you have presided over the difficult debates in the
Council this month. I should also like to express my
delegation’s thanks to the members of the Council for
enabling it to participate in this debate on a question in
which my country is interested by virtue of its proximity to
the region, the affinities and sympathies which we have for
the people of Lebanon and the Middle East and, above all,
the principles which are at stake.

126. The security of Israel does not lie in denying the
Palestinian people--who number in the millions-the right
to exist as a nation or in the occupation of the territory of
its neighbours by force. It does not lie in the assumption
that the force of arms will forever give Israel the upper
hand over its neighbours. The security of Israel lies in a
comprehensive settlement honourably
arrived at and
acceptable to all the parties. These include the recognized
representatives of the Palestinian people, who are with us
today at this table.

120. The Council is witness once again to a familiar
pattern-a massive assault by Israel’s armed forces equipped
with modern machines of war on the territory of one of its
neighbours. Once again we witness indiscriminate bombardment of civilians in towns and villages and of refugees of
previous acts of aggression in their camps. Once again this
bIatant act of official terror is eulogized as a heroic feat of
Israeli arms and the destruction, killing, maiming and
uprooting of people and occupation of territory declared
necessary to ensure the security of Israel.

127. The representative of Israel spoke with much eloquence here of the peace initiative launched by President
Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem. Four months have gone by since
then, and the Israeli Government has done little or nothing
in this period to seize the chance for peace but has
appeared, instead, to do everything to obstruct and
undermine it. The opportunity to reach a just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict exists today. The
Israeli Government must realize that peace and security
cannot be obtained by attempts to annihilate the rights and
identity of the Palestinian people nor by the occupation or
annexation of territory on any pretext whatsoever, nor by
reliance on a policy of the mailed fist. In Israel itself the
more far-sighted people appear to have come to this
realization.

121, The truth is, as the representative of Lebanon told
us, that his country is the victim of an act of aggression at
the hands of a country and neighbour to which it has done
no ill. Israel has seized .the pretext of an attack on a civilian
bus near Tel Aviv to occupy a large area of Southern
Lebanon and to unleash terror against the Palestinian
refugees and other civilians residing there and is continuing
these attacks.

128. The international community must not be distracted
by the tragic events that we have witnessed in the last days,
and all concerned must make a concerted effort to use all
the means at their disposal and effectively bring about a
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.

122. The territorial integrity and political independence of
all States is one of the most important principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. Its violation cannot
be condoned in any circumstances. Article 51 of the
Charter was not designed to give licence to any State to
violate the territorial integrity of its neighbours. Any other
interpretation of these principles is a perversion and would
seriously undermine the whole system of security which the
United Nations and the Charter are seeking to establish.

129. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Qatar. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
130. Mr. ALOBAIDLY
(Qatar): Once again Lebanon, a
sovereign State Member of the United Nations, is being
subjected to naked barbaric Israeli military aggression by
air, sea and land. By committing such savage and vicious
acts, Israel is violating the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon, In the last few days the whole world
has been witnessing a series of air and sea attacks at various
Lebanese towns and cities, resulting in the death of
hundreds of Lebanese and Palestinian children, women and
elderly persons, in addition to an overland invasion by tens
of thousands of troops and hundreds of tanks and
armoured vehicles in Southern Lebanon and the occupation
of more than one fourth of all Lebanese territory.

123. In the circumstances, the Security Council has done
the right thing in calling for an end to the aggression and
violence in Lebanon and for the withdrawal of all Israeli
forces from all of the territory they have occupied there.
124. The measures just decided on need to be enforced
unconditionally and implemented without delay. In the
situation which prevails, Lebanon will remain vulnerable to
aggression and violence. We support, therefore, the induction of a United Nations force in Southern Lebanon to
assist the Government in preventing the recurrence of
attacks and protecting the territorial integrity of the
country.

131. We are all aware that this is not the first time that
Lebanon has become the target of Israeli wrath and
frustration
at the innocent Lebanese and Palestinian
peoples. We had not yet had time to forget about the air
strikes of 9 November 1977, when American-made Israeli
bombers raided peaceful farm villages in Southern Lebanon
and killed over 100 of their civilian occupants. A reporter
of i%e Washington Post who visited the village of Izzeyeh,
one of the villages that were levelled, reported that the
destruction of the village had been so complete that he had
not been able to count how many houses had been left
standing. He also added that the attack on that peaceful
village had been so unexpected that the 100 or so innocent

125. The overriding objective of the Security Council
remains the achievement of a just and lasting settlement of
the central issues which have been the cause of the conflict
and so much suffering in the Middle East. At the heart of
the conflict is the persistent violation by Israel of the basic
principles of the Charter and its defiance of the decisions of
the United Nations and, specifically, its effort to deny the
legitimate rights of the disinherited people of Palestine.
11

villagers had been buried under
destroyed houses.

the rubble

of their

the continuous Israeli attempts to attack the Palestinian
revolution, which acts only in self-defence and for the
restoration of the Palestinians’ usurped homeland. The
Government and people of the State of Qatar stand firmly,
with all their capabilities, in defence of the people of
Lebanon and Palestine-both of them our brothers.

132. That is but one incident in the long list of had’s
brutal acts of aggression against Lebanon, the Palestinian
people, Syria, Jordan and Egypt. The present aggression
constitutes a new escalation in a series of aggressive acts
continuously being committed by Israel, which fails to pay
attention to the sovereignty of the Arab nations and takes
no account of the moral or humanitarian rules of law. Israel
is ignoring
the unanimity of the whole world family, which
is asking it to put an end to its irresponsible enmity against
the dignity
of the world community and which has chosen
the Charter of the United Nations as the international
instrument for the gdkmce of nations in the realization of
its aim, namely, the establishment of international peace
and security,

139. We also urge all peace-loving nations to Conctcnin
unanimously the Israeli adventure in Lebanon and to take
concrete measures and necessary steps to bring about an
immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of the
Israeli invasion forces from Southern Lebanon. International public opinion and the imperatives of international
peace and justice demand a unanimous and strong condemnation of Israeli barbarous attacks on Lebanon, and
immediate and unconditional withdrawal from the southern
part of that country.

133, I should like to take this opportunity to impress
upon the Security Council, on behalf of the State of Qatar
and its Amir, Government and people, the responsibility
that falls on the Council for defending the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon and stopping the wanton
Zionist genocide against the uprooted Palestinian people.

140. My delegation is confident that the resolution just
adopted by the Council will be implemented immediately,
without any delay.
141, I should like to close my statement with a plea to all
members, especially the permanent members, to take the
courageous actions needed to fulfil the international hopes
placed in the Council and to cast away indecision which
might erode the confidence placed in our international
Organization.

134. The Government of the State of Qatar hereby
declares that it is high time that the Security Councilespecially the permanent members-shouldered
its responsibilities and had the moral courage to enforce the Charter
and condemn the brutal and destructive Israeli aggression
on Lebanese and Palestinian people.

142. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

135. Since Israel tried to distort the truth about the
Middle East situation and placed the blame for its invasion
of Lebanon on the Palestinian freedom fighters, it is
incumbent on the Council to clarify the facts: that
Palestinian acts of resistance are the result of the Zionist
occupation of the Palestinians’ home-Palestine-and
the
repression, injustice and racism that they are subjected to in
their own country by the Israeli occupation forces. Even
the Palestinians who are living in Lebanon are not there by
their own wish, but because they were uprooted from their
homeland to make room for the European minorities who
coveted their lands and possessions. Their struggle to
liberate their homeland is a just struggle carried out in
self-defence and to reclaim their usurped homeland.

143. Mr. AL-SAHHAF
(Iraq): The Security Council is
seized of a barbaric act of aggression designed and
deliberately executed by the Zionist entity against the very
existence of the Palestinian people.
144. What we are witnessing in Southern Lebanon is a part
of the Zionist plan towards the fulfilment of their evif and
destructive dreams of expansion at the expense of the Arab
nation. Under the pretext of self-defence, the Zionists have
been carrying out a massive armed attack by air, land and
sea, causing great loss of life and damage to the property of
innocent people in the area, Many of the victims were
finding shelter in Lebanon after having been driven out of
their own land by these same Zionist aggressors.

136. The increasing and widening international support
for the struggle of the Palestinian people is of great
significance to all other peoples that are oppressed by
colonialism and racism,

145. Ironically, the United States, which claims that it is
the champion of human rights, is the chief backer and
supporter and even instigator of the continuous Zionist acts
of aggression. The recent statements by American officials
and the wide coverage by the mass media are but clear
proof of the hostile attitude towards the Arab nation at
large, and the Palestinian in particular.

137. The United Nations, through various resolutions and
actions, has recognized that the essence of the Middle East
problem is the dispossession and exile of the Palestinian
People from their homeland. Since then, Israel has been
following a policy of genocide against the PaIestinian
nation, and one of Israel’s main stated pretexts for the
invasion and occupation of Southern Lebanon is the
continuous Israeli effort to annihilate the Palestinian
people, wherever they are.

146. In a futile attempt to evade the subject under
discussion, the Zionist representative arrogantly and repeatedly insulted the intelligence of the Security Council by
trying to lecture it about terrorism. Let me remind him that
his entity was planted in the heart of our land solely
through systematic acts of terrorism committed by the
Zionist gangs led by notorious terrorists, among them the
current Prime Minister, Begin.

138. The State of Qatar condemns strongly and firmly the
brutal Israeli aggression on Lebanon and equally condemns
12

147. Members of the United Nations are aware of who
blocked the work of the Ad Hoc Committee on Intemational Terrorism, and their rejection of the idea of defining
international terrorism and discussing the underlying causes
and the concept of State terrorism.

United Nations in a number of resolutions. lt is sad that the
Council should have addressed itself to a derivative and not
to endeavouring to seek a solution dealing with the root
and heart of the tragedy in the Middle East-namely, the
qUeStiOn of Palestine and the denial of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people.

148. To cite but a few examples of the institutionalized
terrorism of the Zionist entity, one can recall the tragedy of
the Libyan civil airliner which was shot down by Zionist
military fighters over the Sinai in 1973, killing over 100
innocent women, men and children, the hijacking of an Iraqi
civil airliner flying from Beirut to Baghdad, forcing it to
land at a military base, the destruction of Beirut Intemational Airport and the assassinations of Palestinians in
European capitals, at the hands of the “Mosad”.

155. The Council has just considered yet another case of
aggression-that constant in the Zionist and Israeli racist
and expansionist policy. The Council even does not
consider it fit to condemn the invasion of the territory of a
Member State and the vindictive and indiscriminate killing
of hundreds of innocent civilians and the uprooting of
scores of thousands yet another time,
156. The Council listened to a diatribe about antiSemitism. Who is anti-Semitic? Is it the Council? Is it the
United Nations? Or is it the organization that was
represented here, an organization that considers assimilation the greatest threat to its being?

149, My country expected that, in accordance with the
Charter, the Security Council would be duty bound to
discharge its responsibilities by ordering the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal
of the invasion forces. The
aggressor should not in any way benefit from its aggression
against Lebanon.

157. A lot has been said about terror. But I have only one
thing to cite about terror: the sinking by the Zionist
movement of a ship, the Pntria, carrying hundreds of
refugees from the Nazi concentration camps was a climax
of terror.

150. We should like to reiterate the Iraqi people’s and
Government’s full support for and commitment to the just
cause of the Palestinian people and its heroic struggle to
regain its land. Time and events have proved that the
Palestinian question is the essence of the conflict in the
Middle East. There will be no durable solution to the crisis
in the region unless the Palestinian people fully achieve
their inalienable rights. Therefore, the people and Government of Iraq will do their utmost towards the fulfilment of
that aim.

1.58. The PRESIDENT: A number of delegations wish to
speak in exercise of the right of reply. I shall now call upon
them.
159. Mr. JAIPAL (India): My delegation voted for the
IJnitcd States draft resolution even though it did not fully
meet our requirements and concerns.

151. Examining the draft resolution submitted by the
United States delegation and adopted by the Council, we
see that, instead of condemning the Israeli aggressors and
asking for their immediate and unconditional withdrawal,
the resolution in fact will create a new situation and a new
problem in the area by providing for the dispatch of a
United Nations force to that area for an unlimited period,
thus providing the aggressor with the opportunity to obtain
the benefit he was seeking and to impose his terms as a
result of his aggression, For those reasons we cannot but
disagree with this resolution and its consequences.

160. I understand that the representative of Israel referred
to the crossing over of Indian troops into Sikkim in 1975.
He was quite wrong, as usual, in regard to his facts. What
happened in 1975 was that Sikkim, through an act of
self-determination by its people, became an integral part of
India. When the British were in India, Sikkim was a
protectorate of British India by a treaty arrangement, and
later, when India attained its independence from British
rule, India continued the treaty arrangement whereby
Sikkim became an Indian protectorate. It was because
Sikkim was our protectorate that Indian defence forces
entered Sikkim in 1948, and not, as Ambassador Herzog
said, in 1975. He is only 27 years out of date in this regard.
But of course he is much more out of date still if we reckon
his antiquated attitude by his pathetic reliance on only the
Old Testament, without the slightest awareness that nowadays there is such a thing as the Charter of the United
Nations.

152. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I
now call,
153. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization): This
is Palm Sunday, on which is celebrated the victorious entry
of Our Lord into Jerusalem. If I feel emotional it is because
I come from Jerusalem and I used to participate in the Palm
Sunday procession from Bethpage to Jerusalem, chanting
huda Jerusalem Dorninunz. That is a religious right I can
no longer exercise, I am denied that right.

161. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): It is a new height in
impudence for the representative of Israel to dispute the
legitimacy of the Ambassador of Lebanon, my colleague
Mr. Tueni and thus by corollary to question the legality of
the State and Government of Lebanon under the presidency of Mr. Elias Sarkis. Even though barbaric forces have
massively invaded Lebanon and continue until this moment
to revel in a bloodbath killing innocent women and
children, Ambassador Herzog has no right to tamper with
the credentials of that sovereign State. Such questioning is
the right and prerogative of the Secretary-General.

154. Palm Sunday marks the beginning of Passion Week
that culminates in the Resurrection and redemption. After
more than 30 years of passion and agony, the Palestinian
people has every right to look for its redemption and the
restoration of its inalienable rights in Palestine, particularly
those rights that have been defined and reaffirmed by the
13

inhabitants. What lands are left for the West Bank Palestinians to live in, let alone the 2 million refugees who are
living in the wilderness of nowhere?

162. Furthermore,
Ambassador Herzog has repeated the
now worn-out distortion about Jordan and the unity of the
East Bank and the West Bank. That unity was actually
requested and initiated by West Bank inhabitants after
Israeli terrorism had terrorized, devoured and truncated the
larger part of the territory of Palestine before the end of
the Mandate-territory
earmarked by the United Nations
for a Palestinian Arab State. This all happened before a
single Arab regular soldier had entered the territory of
Palestine and they only entered that territory after 15 May
to salvage and save the rest of the Palestinians from total
massacre.

168. Arab Jerusalem is a small and truncated part of what
in 1948 was Arab Jerusalem that included two thirds of
new Jerusalem, which Israel has usurped and claimed for
itself and has already expanded fifteenfold.
169. I could go on and on speaking about this contemptible Begin plan which he is proposing as a substitute for
United Nations decisions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and General Assembly resolution 181 (II) concerning the refugees. In fact, the
whole purpose of the plan is to perpetuate the Israeli
occupation and to replace the illegality of occupation by a
facade of “legal” occupation.

163. The unity of the East Bank and the West Bank was
the unity of one family, of brethren. The Act of Parliament
of 1950, which enacted that unity, clearly and categorically
stated that the people of both Banks would work hand in
hand towards restoring the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and that there was nothing in the Act of
Unity that would jeopardize or prejudice the final achievement of that goal of salvation and self-determination for
the Palestinians.

170. Mr. TUBNI (Lebanon): This is not exactly a reply,
because I am not interested in polemics. I think this has
been a very, very important day in our history-the history
of my country and that of this institution to which we are
committed and which we very highly respect. Therefore my
remarks will be very brief and I am concerned that they
should be positive as the spirit of this day has been.

164. His Majesty King Hussein has repeated this on more
occasions than I can remember. As a matter of fact, the
Palestinian inhabitants of the West Bank constituted at least
half the cabinet of the Jordan Government, almost half the
army, half the civil service, half the governors. They were
brethren who ruled themselves and ruled a unified State.

171, First, I address my thanks to the President for the
superb and very human manner in which he has conducted
the debates. I also want to thank each and all the members
who have addressed themselves to the fate of my country,
but I cannot name them all. I would, however, want to
address myself in particular to the delegation of the United
States as sponsor of the resolution just adopted and to
express my special thanks for and take note of the spirit
and the reservations expressed by Ambassador Young
concerning the possible interpretations that have been the
subject of some commentary here.

165. At present, as they have done for 11 years of Israeli
occupation, Israeli soldiers or sergeants trample on anybody, including those distinguished leaders, with total
impunity.
166. Ambassador Herzog referred to the tragic events of
1970. Let me assure the Council that those events were a
purely internal family quarrel-which
happens in almost
every country-and
that the division did not take a
Palestinian or Jordanian line. There were Palestinians
fighting in the reguIar Jordanian Army and there were
Jordanians fighting with the resistance movement. It was a
family quarrel concerning the management of the Government and internal security. There is no resemblance
whatsoever to the case of a foreign Power occupying and
invading the territorial integrity and sovereignty of a
neighbouring independent State, that is, the State of
Lebanon.

172. Then I should like to address myself to the representative of the USSR, I want to thank him and to say that I
do so particularly for his concern for the exercise of the
sovereign rights of my Government-which
I take very
seriously indeed. And I take note, as the Council has, that
that concern is indeed almost to the letter what had been
expressed by the representative of the United States.
173. As for the very distinguished representative of Israel,
I do not have his eloquence, I am not a diplomat, I am not
a man of laws; I am only a working journalist, and I do not
have his means of communication whereby I can obtain in a
matter of hours 24,000 signatures from a town very dear to
my heart and person which numbers only 20,000 inhabitants.

167. Ambassador Herzog referred to the so-caIled Begin
plan of self-rule in the West Bank. What is that Begin plan
of self-rule? It is a perpetuation of Israeli occupation of the
occupied West Bank. It is so wicked that the only
description that I can give of it is “contemptible”.
Under
the plan, Israel would replace legal occupation-which
at
least theoretically gives some protection under the Geneva
Conventions to the people under occupation-by
a de facto
occupation. It is retrogression rather than one iota of
progress. Under the plan, Israel would be responsibIe not
only for external security but also for internal security.
Under the plan, it would have the right to continue
devouring Palestinian lands, whether or not the Palestinians
liked it. To date, no less than one third of the West Bank
has already been colonized, sequestrated from its lawful

174. I read newspapers and I am sure that the representatives here read newspapers. I have nothing to add to the
file and, as I said, I am not interested in polemics, but I am
sure that pictures reproduced this morning in ne New
York Times, which can hardly be accused of being an
instrument of Arab propaganda, are very eloquent. There is
a picture of a Lebanese woman and her daughter running
for cover during an Israeli air strike in the town of Nabatiye
yesterday. It is a picture taken by an American photog
rapher of the Associated Press. There is another picture,
14

177. Mr. TUfiNI
Mr. President.

however, one of Israeli soldiers dancing in the destroyed
village of Merj’Uyun, a village where I happen to have
relatives and friends.

(Lebanon):

I withdraw

my request,

178. The PRESIDENT: 1 am very grateful for the co-operation extended to me as President during the course of the
consultations leading up to this morning’s debate, and
indeed during the course of the debate itself. It certainly
made the work of the Council easier.

17.5. I do not want to put the Council’s patience to any
more trial. I do want to say, in conclusion, that I think this
august body has taken very seriously the commitments of
the Israeli representative; I hope they have. I would have
wanted the President to address a direct question to the
Israeli representative: whether he understands “immediate
withdrawal” in the only sense it can bear in English, that is,
immediate cessation of hostilities, immediate withdrawal
operations and immediate liberation from destruction.

179. I should like to inform members of the Council that
it is my intention to hold consultations this afternoon at
4 o’clock to consider the report of the Secretary-General
and decide precisely when and how we can proceed with
the next stage. I should say it is also my hope and intention
that, if at all possible, the Council should meet later on
today in open session and should proceed to pass the
second-stage resolution as it is necessary for us to do in
view of the terms of the first.

176. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Lebanon for the kind words he addressed to me personally.
As to his invitation to me to put specific questions to the
Israeli delegation, it would seem to me to be somewhat
inappropriate for me to do so at this stage. I do not think
that that is a function of the presidency at this moment.

The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
dapositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
ou adressex-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
KAK.

IIOJIY’iHTb

COMO

Lltho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

HSAAHHR

OPI-AHN

PUBLICACIONES

3AlJHM

DE LAS

OlJ%EAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAI&HR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S. 1.00

(or equivelent

currencies)

78.70005-February

1980-2,200
