Resolutiom adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
11
- - - - - - - - - - - - ----·----------------------------

1. Notes with appreciation the activities of the
Secretary-General under the United Nations regular
programme of technical assistance ;
2. Notes also the measures taken by the SecretaryGeneral and announced on his behalf by the Commissioner for Technical Assistance with a view to facilitating the consideration of the regular programme by
the Economic and Social Council and its Technical
Assistance Committee.
841st plenarv meeting,
20 Nm,ember 1959.
1385 (XIV). United Nations usistance in public
administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1256 (XIII) of 14 November
1958,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 739 (XXVIII) of 30 July 1959,
Recognizing that the time that has elapsed since the
establishment of the experiment for. the provision of
operational, executive and administrative personnel to
Governments requesti.ng assistance in this form has been
too brief, and that, for this reason, the range of the
experiment has been too narrow to justify drawing final
conclusions,
Recalling that several Member States have centres
and institutes for training in public administration, some
of which have been created or expanded with the technical assistance of the United Nations,
I. Resolves that the experimental programme started
in 1959 should be continued in 1960 on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 1256 (XIII), and that
the Secretary-General should be allowed adequate scope
in the carrying out of the experiment within the limits
of the resources to be made available for 1960;
2. Recommends that, in suggesting to recipient Governments the appointments of qualified officials under
the programme, the Secretary-General should make use
of all available resources and, as much as possible, of the
experts who have been trained in the above-mentioned
centres and institutes for public administration;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
Economic and Social Council at its thirtieth session and
to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session a report
analysing in detail the progress and results of the experiment, including whatever comments the recipient
Governments ·may wish to make, and in particular the
degree of success achieved in the training of nationals
to assume as early as possible the responsibilities temporarily assigned to the internationally recruikd staff,
together with recommendations based on this report.
841 st plenary mectinr,,
20 N 01 1cmber 1959.
1420 (XIV). International Development
Association
The General, Assembly,
Mindful of the determination of the United Nations,
as expressed in its Charter, to promote social progress
and better standards of life in larger freedom and, for
these ends, to employ international machinery for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of
all peoples,

Recalling the General Assembly's interest in new
forms of international financing for the purpose of
accelerating the economic development of underdeveloped countries,
Welcoming the decision in principle taken at the
recent annual meeting of the Board of Governors of
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to establish an International Development Association as an affiliate of the Bank,
1 Expresses the belief that the new affiliate of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development will provide under-developed countries with types
of financing which have not hitherto been available from
multilateral agencies and which, while stimulating economic development, would tend to ease their balance
of payments position ;
2. Expresses the hope that adequate provisions will
be made and appropriate procedures adopted for a close
working relationship and effective co-ordination and
consultation between the International Development
Association and the United Nations;
3. Calls attention to the desirability of appropriate
relations between the International Development Association and the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as suitable;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to trammit to the
President of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, for communication to the Executive
Directors of the Bank, the records of the debates of the
General Assembly on this subject at its present session.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December !959.
1421 (XIV). Strengthening and development of
the world market and improvement of the
trade conditions of the economically less
developed countries
The General, Assembly,
Guided by the principles set forth in the Charter of
the United K ations and wishing to extend international
economic co-operation, to bring about full employment
and to foster economic and social progress and development,
Considerin_<7 that world trade is a natural and reliable
factor in the development of peaceful relations between
Stall'.,,
l >csiring to promote the development and extension
of trade, to ease the exchange of goods and to create
the ,tabilitv and welfare essential for peaceful anti
friendly relations between nations,

I
1. Recommends that all '.\kmber States should, individually and jointlv, continue their efforts to prnmotl'
and extrnd mutually beneficial trade between all States,
regardles.s of their economic systems:
2. Reaffirms its belief that international organizations
concerned with the regulation and development of
international trade should rontinue to ,qntrilmtc to the
extension of multilateral world commerce and should
facilitate the expansion of trade between States regardless of their •economic systems;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, taking- fully into
consideration all the views expressed and proposals
submitted on this subject at the present session of the:
