Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

cialized agencies to the desirab~lity of appointing qu~lified women to bodies responsible for the preparation
of national development plans;
2. Further calls the attention of the Governments of
such States to the importance of training women so as
to enable them to participate fully in all phases of the
planning and execution of national development programmes and to the contribution which non-govern-mental organizations can make in this respect;
3. Invites Governments of States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations within those States
to collaborate in making full use of the services available
under the various technical assistance and advisory
services programmes in order to 1;romote the fu~l participation of women in the planning and execution of
national development programmes ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board, the Managing Director of the Special Fund,
the directors-general of the specialized agencies concerned and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, to study the possibilities, under the
United Nations technical co-operation programmes, of
making available to the developing countries the assistance required for the establishment and developm~nt
of social or other centres where women can receive
the requisite training _to enable ~hem to participate eff~tivcly in the economic and social development of their
countries.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1921 (XVIII). Draft declaration on the elimination
of discrimination against women
The General Assembly,
Desirous of implementing the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in which
are affirmed the equal rights of all human beings regardless of sex,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing p_art played
by women in society and the progress made m the field
of equal rights,
Noting also U;rith satisfaction th~ ~fforts ma?e ~y
the United N at10ns and the speciahzed agencies m
achieving that progress,
Noting however that in various fields there stilt remains, in fact if not in law, considerable discrimination
against women,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on the Status of Women to
prepare a draft declaration on the elimination ot discrimination against women, with a view to its consideration by the General Assembly, if possible at its twentieth
session;
2. Invites Governments of Member States, the specialized agencies and appropriate non-governmen~l
organizations to send to the Secretary-General their
comments and proposals relating to the principles that
might be inc~rpor~ted in the draft declara~ion, with
a view to their bemg brought to the attention of the
Commission on the Status of Women.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

41

1922 (XVIII). SeHions of the CommiHion
on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1776 (XVII) of 7 December
1962 on the further promotion and encouragement of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and resolution 8 (XIX) of 3 April 1963 of the Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling that the Third Committee has, from the
outset, depended to a large extent upon the Commission
on Human Rights for the preparation of studies on
certain items submitted to it as well as for the elaboration of draft :ieclarations and conventions in the field
of human rights,
Takinq into account that, without the co-operation
of the Commission on Human Rights, the work of the
Third Committee would be greatly hindered since it
could not depend on a previous and specialized study
of the items allocated to it, particularly the drafting
of texts,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-sixth session decided that owing to problems
caused by the work of alteration at United Nations
Headquarters, the Commission on Human Rights could
not meet in 1964,
Noting with concern that there is a tendency to consider that biennial meetings of the Commission on
Human Rights would be sufficient,
l. Declares that in the interest of the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
the Commission on Human Rights should continue to
meet annually as heretofore ;
2. Urges the Economic and Social Council to reconsider the above-mentioned decision, so that the Commission on Human Rights may continue to meet
annually;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as soon as the
Economic and Social Council has agreed that the Commission on Human Rights should meet in 1964, to make
special provisions for the Commission to meet at United
Nations Headquarters and conclude its session before
15 March.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

1923 (XVIII). Equitable geographical represent&•
tion on the Commission on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
845 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 by which the Council,
while noting that there has been a considerable increase
in the membership of the United Nations since the
establishment of the functional commissions of the
Council and believing in the importance of ensuring
an equitable geographical distribution in the membership
of the functional commissions, decided to increase the
membership of the Commission on Human Rights to
twenty-one members,
Taking into account that the Third Committee depends to a large extent on the work of the Commission
on Human Rights in preparing draft declarations, draft
conventions and draft resolutions concerning the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and that, consequently, an equitable geographical representation on the Commission would immensely
facilitate the work of the Third Committee,

42

General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

Bearing in mind that, while an equitable geographical
distribution has to a large extent been attained in the
membership of other commissions, Africa remains unduly under-represented on the Commission on Human
Rights,
Calls upon the Economic and Social Council, in the
elections to membership in the Commission on Human
Rights, to bear in mind the principle of equitable geographical distribution and, in particular, the necessity
of having Africa equitably represented.
1274th plenary meeting,
S December 1963.

1958 (XVIll). Membership of ihe Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme
The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 965 B (XXXVI) of 25 July 1963,
Recalling its resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November
1957, which provided for the establishment of an
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme to consist of representatives of from twenty
to twenty-five States Members of the United Nations
or members of any of the specialized agencies, to be
elected by the Economic and Social Council on the
widest possible geographical basis from those States
with a demonstrated interest in, and devotion to, the
solution of the refugee problem,
Recalling its resolution 1783 (XVII) of 7 December
1962 relating to the continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Noting that the Executive Committee has at present
a membership of twenty-five,
Bearing in mind the continued interest of Member
States in the work of the Office of the High Commissioner and the increase in the membership of the
United Nations,
1. Decides to enlarge the Executive Committee of
the High Commissioner's Programme to thirty members so as to achieve the widest possible geographical
representation ;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
elect the five additional members of the Executive Com. mittee during its resumed thirty-sixth session.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.

1959 (XVID). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 8 and having heard his
statement, 9
Taking note of the progress achieved in the international protection of refugees and in the search for permanent solutions to refugee problems through voluntary repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or
resettlement in other countries,
8 Official Records of the General Assembl3•, Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/5511/Rev.l) and Supplement
No. 11 A (A/5511/Rev.1/Add.1).
9 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Third Committee, 1270th meeting.

Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the High
Commissioner, in his various fields of activity, for
groups of refugees for whom he lends his good offices,
Recognizing the importance of an adequate assistance
programme for the over-all effectiveness of the work
of the High Commissioner,
Commending the non-governmental organizations
working for refugees for their untiring activity on behalf
of refugees throughout the world,
Noting with appreciation that since the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly six more States have
adhered to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees, 10 bringing to forty-two the number of
States parties to the Convention ;
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to afford international protection to refugees and to pursue his efforts on behalf
of the refugees within his mandate and of those to whom
he extends his good offices, by giving particular attention
to new refugee groups, in conformity with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the directives
of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to continue to lend
their support to the alleviation of refugee problems:
(a) By facilitating the voluntary repatriation, resettlement or local integration of refugees;
( b) By improving the legal status of refugees residing in their territory, particularly in new refugee
situations, inter alia, by acceding as appropriate to the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
by treating new refugee problems in accordance with
the principles and the spirit of the Convention;
( c) By providing the High Commissioner with the
necessary financial means for the accomplishment of the
tasks incumbent upon him and, in particular, by enabling
him to reach the financial targets established with the
approval of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.

1960 (XVIll). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1843 B and C (XVII) of
19 December 1962,
H avinq dfvoted its attention once again to the draft
Internation::il Covenants on Human Rights and, in
particular, to the issues connected with the measures
of implementation. which are vital for the adoption and
effectiveness of the Covenants,
!Ja~...·ng rr_(Jard to the presence of many new Member
States. which have not had an opportunity to express
thei,: views on me:-isures of implementation owing, in
rmrt1cubr; t0 the cbte 011 which the Commission on
Human Rights apnroved the draft International Covenants on I-I un:an Rights,
. Considrring also the many different views expressed
m the dektte on measures of implementation,
I. Reaffirms its belief that final adoption of the draft
International Covenants on Human Rights is urgent
10 United

'.\atirns, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), '.\o. 2545.
