20

General Assernhly-Thirtietli Session

Noting that drafts of a convention on the prohibition
of the development, prcxluction and stockpiling of
chemical weapons and on their destruction,2 4 as well
as other working documents, proposals and suggestions,
have been submitted to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, and constitute valuable contributions to the negotiation of an appropriate agreement,
Expressing concern over the lack of progress in negotiations in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament on the prohibition of chemical weapons and
on their elimination from the arsenals of all States,
Desiring to contribute to a successful conclusion of
the negotiations on effective and strict measures for the
complete prohibition of the development, prcxluction
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and for their
destruction,
1. Reaffirms the objective of reaching early agreement on the effective prohibition of the development,
prcxluction and stockpiling of all chemical weapons
and on their elimination from the arsenals of ali States;
2. Urges again all States to make every effort to
facilitate early agreement on the effective prohibition
of the development, prcxluction and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their destruction;
3. Requests the Conference of the Cornmittee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations as a matter of
high priority, taking into account the existing proposals,
with a view to reaching early agreement on effective
measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
for their destruction;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Prcxluction and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction;
5. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to or ratify the Protocol for the Prohibition of
the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other
Gases, and of Bacteriological Methcxls of Warfare,
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, and calls again for
strict observance by all States of the principies and
objectives of that Protocol;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament ali
documents of the First Committee relating to chemical
weapons and chemical means of warfare;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3466 (XXX). Urgent need for cessation <>Í nuclear and thermonuclear tests and conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test han

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that a number of States have engaged in underground nuclear weapon testing since
the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
24 See Official Records of the Disarmament Commlssion,
Supplement for 1972, document DC/235, annex B, document
CCD/361; Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/9627), aooex 11, document CCD/420; and ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27
(A/10027), annex 11, document CCD/452.

while welcoming the fact that there have been no
atmospheric nuclear weapon tests in the same pericxl,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, the
most recent being resolution 3257 (XXIX) of 9 December 19 74,
Recalling the stated aim of the parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water211 to seek to achieve the
discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for ali time,
Noting that:
(a) The Final Declaration of the Review Conference of ,the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 26 adopted by consensus on
30 May 1975:
(i) Expressed the view that the conclusion of a
treaty banning ali nuclear weapons tes,ts is one
of the most important measures to halt the
nuclear arms race,
(ii) Expressed the hope that the nuclear-weapon
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will take the
lead in reaching an early solution to the technical and political difficulties on this issue,
(iii) Appealed to these States to make every effort
to reach agreement on the conclusion of an
effective comprehensive test ban,
( b) Toe final documentation of the Conference included a draft resolution and a draft additional protocol to the Treaty, 27 submitted by a considerable number of States which attended the Conference, concerning
nuclear weapon tests, whereby the nuclear-weapon
States depositarles of the Treaty would agree on a
moratorium, which could in due course become a comprehensive test han embracing ali nuclear-weapon States,
(e) The desire was expressed by a considerable number of delegations at the Conference that the nuclearweapon States parties to the Treaty should, as soon as
possible, enter into an agreement, open to ali States
and containing appropriate provisions to ensure its
effectiveness, to halt all nuclear weapon tests of adhering States for a specified time, whereupon the terms of
such an agreement would be reviewed in the light of
the opportunity at that time to achieve a universal and
permanent cessation of all nuclear weapon tests,
Taking note of the section of the report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament relating to
the question of a comprehensive test ban agreement, 28
Reaffirming its conviction that the cessation of nuclear
weapon testing would be in the supreme interest of
mankind, both as a major step towards controlling the
development and proliferation of nuclear weapons and
to relieve the deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences of radio-active contamination for the
health of present and future generations,
,
1. Condemns ali nuclear weapon tests, in whatever
environment they may be conducted;
2. Deplores the continued lack of progress towards
a comprehensive test ban agreement;
211 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.
26 A/C.1/1068, annex l.
27 See Otficial Records of the General A.ssembly, Thirtieth

Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/10027), annex Il, document
CCD/464.
2s !bid., Supplement No. 27 (A/10027), sect. ID.

21

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Emphasizes the urgency of reaching agreement
on the conclusion of an effective comprehensive test
ban;
4. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to bring to
a halt all nuclear weapon tests through an agreed suspension subject to review after a specified period, as an
interim step towards the conclusion of a formal and
comprehensive test han agreement;
5. Emphasizes in this regard the particular responsibility of the nuclear-weapon States which are parties
to international agreements in which they have declared
their intention to achieve at the earliest possible date
the cessation of the nuclear arms race;
6. Calls upon ali States not yet parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water to adhere to it forthwith;
1. Urges the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to give the highest priority to the conclusion
of a comprehensive test han agreement and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty..first session on
the progress achieved;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Urgent need
for cessation of nuclear and thermonuclear tests and
conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3467 (XXX). Implementation of General Assemhly resolution 3258 (XXIX) concerning the
signature and ratifieation of Additional Pro•
tocol D of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972. 3079
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973 and 3258 {XXIX) of
9 December 1974, seven of which contain appeals to
the nuclear-weapon States regarding the signature and
ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco), 29
Reiterating its firm conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclear-weapon
States is necessary and that such co-operation should
take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in
a formal intemational instrument which is legally
binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
Recalling with particular satisfaction that the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem lreland, the
United States of America, France and the People's Republic of China are already parties to Additional Protocol II of the Treaty far the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latín America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),
l. Again urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco);
29 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.

2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty~first session an itero entitled "Implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3467 (XXX) conceming the signature and raüfication of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty far the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)".

2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3468 (XXX). lmplementation of the Declaration
of the lndian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolutions
2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3080 (XXVIII)
of 6 December 1973 and 3259 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Reaffirming its conviction that action in furtherance
of the objectives of the Declaration would be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of intemational peace and security,
Calling attention to the provisions of resolution
3259 A (XXIX), especially paragraph 4, in which
the General Assembly requested the littoral and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean to enter, as soon as
possible, into consultations with a view to convening a
conference on the Indian Ocean,
l. Notes the report of the Ad Hoc Comrnittee on
the Indian Ocean, 30 in particular section II thereof
conceming the consultations entered into by the Jittoral
and hinterland States of the lndian Ocean in pursuance
of paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 3259 A
(XXIX);

2. Notes further that, as a result of these consultations, an agreement in principle on the convening of a
conference on the Indian Ocean has emerged among
the littoral and. hinterland States of the Indian Ocean;
3. Requests the littoral and hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean to continue their consultations on the
convening of a conference on the Indian Ocean, with
particular attention to the following six points:
(a) Purposes of the conference;
( b) Date and duration;
(e) Venue;
(d) Provisional agenda;
(e) Participation;
(/) Level of participation;
4. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to continue its
work and consultations in accordance with its mandate
and to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session a report on its work, including the results
of the consultations referred to in paragraph 3 above;
5. Invites all States, in particular the great Powers
and the majar maritime users of the Indian Ocean, to
co-operate in a practica! manner with the Ad Hoc
Committee in the discharge of its functions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render ali necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the preparartion of summary records.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
30 Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/10029).
