170

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to the front-line States;
2. Strongly urges the international community to continue to provide in a timely and effective manner the financia!, material and technical assistance necessary to enhance the individual and collective capacity of the frontline States and other bordering States to withstand the effects of economic measures taken by South Africa, or by
the international community against South Africa, in accordance with their national and regional plans and strategies;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue mobilizing organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system so that they may respond to such requests for
assistance as might be forthcoming from individual States
or the appropriate subregional organization, and further
urges ali States to respond favourably to such requests;
4. Appeals to ali States and appropriate intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support
the national and collective emergency programmes prepared by the front-line States and other bordering States to
overcome the critica) problems arising from the situation
in South Africa;
5. Notes with appreciation the assistance being rendered to the front-line States by donor countries and intergovernmental organizations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/202.

Special assistance to Maldives for disaster relief and the strengthening of its coastal defences

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned by the damage caused to the archipelago of Maldives by unexpected tidal waves in April,
June and September 1987,
Acutely aware of the threats posed by such tidal action to
the low-lying islands of Maldives and to their inhabitants,
Mindful of the need to commence urgent protective
measures to minimize the hazards of such tragic events,
Noting that Maldives is one of the least developed countries, with severely limited natural endowments and a narrow-based economic backbone,
Recognizing the efforts of the Government and the people of Maldives to improve and accelerate the socioeconomic development of their country,
Taking note of the emergency relief operations undertaken by the Government of Maldives to assist those affected in the episodes of April, June and September 1987,
and of its determination to strengthen its defences against
such disasters in the future,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative,
l. Expresses its gratitude to those States and organizations which rendered support and assistance to the Government of Maldives in its relief and subsequent rehabilitation work;
2. Draws the attention of the international community
to the fact that additional resources are required to carry
out the envisaged plan for preventive action, and that the
assistance already provided or pledged falls short ofthe requirements;

3. Requests agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system to contribute to the formulation and implementation of a planned programme of action;
4. Strongly appeals to the international community to
contribute generously to that goal;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 41/192 of
8 December 1986, to mobilize international support and
assistance in favour of the efforts of the Government of
Maldives to implement the plan of action;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/203.

Assistance to El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 41/2 of 14 October 1986,
concerning emergency assistance to El Salvador, and
41/194 of 8 December 1986, in which it appealed to ali
States and appropriate organizations of the United Nations system to contribute to the reconstruction and development of El Salvador,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/16 of 26 May 1987, in which the Council urged
Governments, organizations ofthe United Nations system
and governmental and non-governmental organizations to
continue to contribute generously to the reconstruction of
El Salvador,
Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral on international humanitarian assistance activities for El Salvador,98
Con cerned that the serious effects of the earthquake that
occurred on 10 October 1986 have not been overcome despite the efforts ofthe Government and people ofEI Salvador and the international assistance received,
Concerned also that the efforts made by the Govemment
of El Salvador have been restricted and hindered by the
existence of serious economic and financia! problems that
have increased as a result of a substantial fati in agricultura! export production and unfavourable conditions in
international markets,
Convinced of the outstanding importance of intemational assistance and co-operation in the processes of national reconstruction following the damage caused by
natural disasters,
Reiterating the continuing need for the intemational
community to adopt suitable measures for effective assistance and co-operation to promote the rehabilitation,
recovery and development of Member States that have
suffered natural disasters,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General for
the efforts and measures undertaken to provide intemational assistance to El Salvador;
2. A/so expresses its gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Intemational Relief
Activities in El Salvador and bis team for the work done
and activities conducted in connection with assistance to
El Salvador;

98 See A/42/442, sect. V.B.
